(...) OR, CHRIST OUR Sanctification: Faithfully Explained, fully Confirmed,
and Practically Applied, for the special Benefit and Consolation of the truly
sanctified, as also for the discovery of the Formalist, or Hypocrite; And for
the awakening of the secure Sinner, who makes a mock at sin, and either scorns
or slights Holiness, Being the substance of several Lectures, or Meditations.

By Tho. Pichard, Preacher of the Gospel.

Heb. 13.12. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his
own Blood, suffered without the Gate.

John 37.19. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be
sanctified through the Truth.

Hebs 12.14. Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which ((...)
that is, without which Holiness) no man shall see the Lord.

Deu. dedit filium omnium Bonorum fontem; Quidni cum eo omnia alia darer? huc
recurrendum est, si desertio divina, si Egestas, inopia solicitet. Pareus.

Fidelis non minus apprehendit Regenerationem in Christo quam Peccatorum
veniam. Calvin.

London, Printed for Tho. Passinger at the (...) upon London Bridge. (...)

To all that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, especially to my Christian Friends
and Acquaintance in and near London. The Author wishes all prosperity and
true felicity; the progress of Sanctification in this world, with the
perfection thereof in Glory.
Worthy, and good Friends,
BY the wonderful overruling, and sole-disposing hand of Providence, (which
some call the Queen of the World), Providentia Dei Regina mundi.
I had the honor and the happiness to be cast into your Acquaintance; with
whom (at a leastwise with many of you) I have had for years (through mercy)
comfortable and sweet society in the things of God: and from whom I have
received so many real, and ample manifestations of cordial respect, and
kindness for my support and succor, in the crisis of my extremity: For all
which (according to my bounden duty) in all humility, and sincerity, I desire
to bless and Magnify the Possessor of Heaven and Earth, as also to thank you;
Begging the Father of mercies to reward your labor of love an hundred fold;
And to enrich you with the fullness of the Blessings of the Gospel of Christ.
It Is I confess, Romans 15.29.
a duty incumbent on me, To render ye a due acknowledgment of hearty thanks,
for you^ kindness to me (not long since a perfect stranger to all your faces)
least otherwise I should c^^tract the stain, Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dixeris.
and O^^um of that monstrous and multipli^a sin Ingratitude* debating in my
thoughts not how to make Compensation, or requital; (for that as the case
stand^ with me is impossible) but how (at most) to make some small
Testification of the unfeig^^d honor, and l^^e I bear you not only for your
Goo^nesse to me, but primar^^y, and princip^lly for the spiri ual worth and
goodness, the God of all Grace according to the riches of of his Grace, has
(I trust) conferred upon ye, and infu^ed into ye; I knew no better expedient
than the dedication of this ensuing Treatise; which is not presented to ye, or
any mortals for Patronage or pro ection, but for Acceptance, and perusal, at
your most serious hours. I never loved to dawb with untempered mortar, nor to
sew Pillows under men's elbows, since I knew any thing of the mind of God in
truth. If this small piece, does not, cannot spea^ for it sel^, (though in
weakness) I will not speak a word for it, neither do I desire, Veritas non
quaerit angulos. V^^tas stat in aperto Campo.
that any should. It Is an old and true Maxim, Truth needs to Patronage, and
Error (I am sure) deserves none. What by the Word and rule of truth, ye find
consonant, and conse^taneous to the mind and will of God, (the prime Truth)
that call God's and Christ's, and therefore prize and practice it. But
whatsoever you find of error, obliquity and deflexion from the Rule, that
call man's, and mine, and carefully eschew it, imputing to it humane frailty and
weakness: for humanum est errare.

I remember I have read of Artaxerxes a most noble, and munificent King of
Persia, Plutarch, in the life of Artaxerxes.
that such was the Princely condescension and sweetness of his disposition, as
not only to give great Gifts, unto his Friends, and Favorites, but also
kindly to accept of mean Presents from mean persons: so hoping with the like
candor, you will please to receive this small Tract; I have presumed to
dedicate, and commend it to your Christian consideration. I modestly confess I
have been solicited, to print some of my former Meditations, (though I know
Apologi s of this nature are little credited) yet through sense of my own
weakness, I ^ave forborne; as judging none of my Grapes worth the Press;
(Besides the great numbers of profitable and practical Books of many famous men
already extant): But at length, at the friendly desire of some sober Persons,
willing me to leave some Manifesto of my love, or Legacies in their hands, (as
they pleased to term it): I have Adventured to make these Labors public,
which (I trust) will not seem nauseous or unpleasant to a spirit truly
sanctified. I have long since thought, that every faithful labourer in the
Lords Vineyard, had principally a double work to do: (both tending unto, and
terminating themselves in holiness), viz.

1. To convert Sinners. 2. To confirm Saints.
1. By the Spirit of Grace, and word of Truth to beget holiness in unholy
souls: to bring in them that are without, Jam. 1.18.
who belong to the election of Grace.

2. By the same effectual means (the Word and Spirit) to nourish and nurse up
the new Man begotten: 1 Pet. 2.2.
to breed up those that are within. I hope (through grace) this holy and
blessed work, has been the white, the mark, I have aimed at in the series of
my Employment; and particularly in this undertaking of Sanctification, here
offered to your Judgments; which is a Doctrine most Necessary, most Excellent,
most Comfortable.

1. It Is a Doctrine most needful for the sons of men to learn and practice;
it is the one thing needful, it is the principal thing, there is no seeing the
face of God without it: Luke 10.42. Pro. 4.7. Heb. 12.14.
for, without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Consider the Decree of the
Father, the Mission of the Son, the Office of the holy Spirit, the publication
of the Gospel, the Jewels of the Covenant, the nature of the great and precious
Promises, the Tendency of all Gods Dispensations. Whether smiles or frowns,
mercies or afflictions, do they not all respectively speak the same thing, and
mutually conspire, yea, meet and center in the same end, (viz.) to make ye
partakers of his Holiness? nay, Heb. 12.10.
they all tell ye in plain terms, ye must be holy. God will not alter his
Decree for you, nor send another Savior, nor chalk out another new way to
Heaven, nor proclaim another Gospel for you, nor for any Creatures breathing.
If Christ be not your sanctification (as is held forth in this Treatise) sin
will be your condemnation; you will perish and die eternally, if there be a
necessity of your salvation, there is as absolute a necessity of your
sanctification. If the Lord has reve^viled Christ to ye, as the Lord your
Righteousness, he has also revealed Christ to ye, and i^ in ye as the
Principle and Prince of your Life, as the High Priest, your holiness; and ye
must look up daily to Jesus Christ for both, and receive of his fullness. John
1.16.
You see there is an indispensible need of Holiness, and whence, and in whom
all your springs and supplies are, against the guilt, punishment, dominion, and
filth of sin, (viz.) in your Mediator Christ Jesus.

2. Holiness is most excellent, Col. 1.19.
most excellent in 1. Its Author. 2. Its Nature. 3. Its End.


1. It Is excellent in its Author, it has a divine Origination: Isa. 57.15.
Ephesians. 2.10.
The High and lofty One that inhabiteth Eternity, his Name is Holy; he that is
the Creator, and former of all things, is the former and Creator of the new
Birth.

2. It Is excellent in its Nature: more precious than Rubies than the Topaz of
Ae^^opia, than the Treasures of the Indies, or any sublunary excellency
whatsoever; it has the Image and Life of the Author in it; it has the Name
and Glory of God upon it, it is divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1.4.
Therefore most excellent, because divinely Excellent.

3. It Is excellent in its end, salvation. 1 Pet 1.9. Finis Coronat opus.
We use to say, that is well, which ends well, for the end Crowns the work. If
Holiness be implanted in ye, it will not only march about the world with ye in
all conditions and estates of Life, and be your Companion in labors, but it
will also follow ye; yea, go along out of the World with ye, and be your
Companion in Glory, Revel. 14.13. 1 Samuel 16.13.
as Samuel anointed Saul aforehand for the Kingdom; so the Holy Oil of Grace
sets ye apart aforehand, for the fruition of Glory; it never leaves ye, till it
has placed ye on Thrones, arrayed ye with Robes, put Palms into your hands,
and incircled your heads with a Crown of Life, and immortality, The perfection
of Grace is Glory.

3. The Doctrine of Sanctification (or Holiness) is very Comfortable. There are
two Rivers of joy springing, or having their Wellhead, in the precious side
and heart of Christ: 1. The Blood for Justification. 2. The Water for
Sanctification.


Both streaming from one Fountain equally cheering, Psalm 46.
refreshing and making glad the City of God, and nourishing up the Believer to
eternal life.

Amongst my Acquaintance, I have observed two sorts of dejected souls, as also
two sorts of Causes of their dejection, and two sorts of means, or helps for
their Cure and recovery.

1. Some trembling hearts do much despond, and droop, for want of the sense of
pardon; their justification is dark unto them, they know not whether God has
pardoned them; The children of Light may sometime walk in darkness. And then
they would give millions of worlds (did they possess them) for God the fathers
face to shine upon them, Isa. 50.10.
and for the holy Spirit the Comforter, to pronounce peace, and proclaim pardon
to them.

2. Other deserted souls, mourn sore like Doves for want of holiness:
Comparing their hearts wih the perfect nature of God, and their lives with the
pure shining Law of God, they are always complaining for their defects and
decays of Grace, for the strength and prevalence of corruption, and for the
manifold spots and stains of their conversations. Wherefore they are afraid,
their spot is not the spot of Gods Children, Deu^ 32.5.
and that such deadness, dullness, vanity of thoughts, and disorders of spirit
and life, cannot be consistent with saving grace. And hereupon they wander in
Meanders of perplexities and disquietments: The Indies (if they had them) they
would freely part with, for the plentiful effusion and influence of Christ's
Unction, and to see him clearly to be made of God sanctification to them. But O
ye Bruised reeds, and smoking flax, the Captain of your Salvation will bring
forth judgment unto Victory, and perfect your Grace in Glory. There is Balm in
Gilead, there is a Physician there. Christ is a Savior, and a Sanctifier to
the uttermost; Heb. 7.25.
The Plaster is as bread as the soar, the blood of Christ is both (...), the
price of our Redemption, and (...), the Laver of Regeneration also.

1. Let the first sort, Trust in the Name of the Lord; and stay themse ves upon
their God. Isa. 50.10. See Dr. Goodwins Child of Light,
Trust in the name of the Lord, that is the infinite mercy of God, through the
merit of Christ. God is rich in Mercy, P^e^^ous in Redemption, abundan ^^
goodness and Truth; the mercy of God is the Name of God; yea, the very first
letter of his Name: Exodus 34.6
Mercy leads the chorum in that Catalogue of the Divine Attributes. Exo. 34.6.


2. Trust in the infinite Merit and Righteousness of Jesus Christ; for this is
his Name, the Lord our Righteousness. Jer. 23.6.
Let Faith drive thee quite out of self, and thy own righteousness, and lay
fast hold on Christ's Righteousness. Know, that Christ is the end of the Law
for righteousness to every one that believes. Phil. 3.8, 9
Consider him that has satisfied Justice, Romans 10.4.
fulfilled all righteousness in his own Person, and brought in everlasting
righteousness for thee; who loved thee, and gave himself for thee: Dan. 9.24.
And so let faith grow up unto Assurance, Gal. 2.20.
for this Righteousness is revealed from Faith to Faith, called the
Righteousness of God, Romans 1.17.
because it is the righteousness of God, as well as man, and which God
appoints and accepts for thy justification. This divine Righteousness thou
must live upon, as thy daily food, and bread of life.

2. Let the second sort of disconsolate souls, consider these Particulars.

1. That an enlightened soul that communes with his own heart, sees more
vileness, filthiness, and contrariety in himself to the holy nature and Law of
God, than such as are in a state of gross darkness, who are strangers to God,
and (in this sense) perfect strangers to their own hearts.

2. Let such consider, a Christian state in this world is militant there must
be warring and wrestling, Ephesians. 6.12.
not only with flesh and blood, but also with Principalities and Powers, (i. e.
with the Devils of hell) and the corruptions of the world every day. Shall any
say, because I fight I am a Coward? because I f^de a law in my members, warring
against the law of my mind,; a double interest, flesh and spirit lusting in
the same soul, yea, Luke 11.21.
in the self-same faculty, therefore I am no Christian? this very warring
evinceth the clean contrary, for when the strong man armed keeps the house, all
things are in peace; thy very sensibility of sin, Gal. 5.17.
and groaning under the burden and bondage of it, thy struggling with it, and
sincere endeavors to subdue it, are evident signs of sanctification begun in
thee.

3. Consider Grace begun, destroys not sin utterly, nor carries away a
complete Victory presently; thou must be trained and exercised a long time in
Christ's School, and endure hardness like a good Soldier of Christ Jesus,
before thou do rout the enemy totally, and come off with a final Conquest.
Thou must strive long, 2 Timothy 2.^. Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit
oderem, Testa diu, etc,
and strive lawfully too, before thou art crowned. Grace by the supplies of the
Spirit is daily working out corruption, and cleansing the soul of filthiness,
but the Vessel (thy heart) is so deeply tainted, that it cannot be perfectly
cleansed presently. Sanctification in the power of it, brings down the dominion
of sin, dethrones it, casts it down, though not quite cast it out; Grace
weakens the power of sin, 1 Cor. 15.53.
but not dissolves the being of it, till mortal shall put on immortality.

4. Consider the Cloud of Witnesses: The most, and the best of Saints have had
the stain of sin, as well as the stamp of Grace; there have been Ecclipticks in
their Zodiacks, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Aaron, Job, David, Solomon,
Peter, Paul, etc. retain blots in their Escutcheons to this day, not to
encourage sinners, (that is a devilish use) but to comfort Saints, and keep
them from despairing, when they find themselves overtaken with infirmities:
The 7th. to the Romans is little other than a doleful Elegy of the in-being,
concupiscence, and motions of sin in holy Paul, (as a Pattern of all other
Christians) who was a man of as high Seize, 1 Cor. 12.
Revelations, and Communion with God, as any other. This may a little comfort
thee, that such Temptations, such corruptions as thou do feel, the most
eminent Saints have felt, the same afflictions are accomplished in your
Brethren. 1 Pet. 5.9.


5. Look up to Jesus Christ for sanctification, (as well as for Righteousness)
He is thy Redemption, as thy King, but he is thy Righteousness and Holiness as
thy Priest, which is more fully handled in the ensuing Treatise; Oh that the
eye of thy faith might see him in all his Excellencies* and the hand of thy
faith might receive him in all his Offices; who is made of God to be thy
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption; Some poor souls look on
Christ to be their Righteousness, but are dark in respect of Holiness; this
makes them wander in melancholy shades, Col. 2.10.
and desert paths, but the Scripture tells us we are complete in Christ the
Head (an Head of Influence as well as Eminence) and that he of God is made unto
us sanctification, 1 Cor. 1.30. John 17.19.
as well as Righteousness and that for our sakes he sanctified himself, that we
might be sanctified through the Truth; Heb. 9.24. Col 3.3. 1 John 5.11, 12.
and that Christ as our High Priest, appears in Heaven for us and that he is
our Life (both of Holiness and Righteousness), and that he that has the Son,
has Life; were not Christ our sanctifier as well as justifier, he were not a
perfect Savior, but he is both; he is All in All to us, by our mystical Union
with him: and what would your souls have more? we are justified by Christ, but
sanctified in Christ Jesus, because of the wonderful spiritual intimate Union
between us and Christ. 1 Cor. 1.2. Ego vero malui servare proepositionem (...),
quod melius declaret quomodo nos Pater per Christum sanctificet, nempe donando
nos filio suo, ut ipse sit in nobis, and nos in eo. Reverend Beza in 1 Cor. 1.2.


Oh that every contrite heart would live purely by faith on Christ, as the Lord
their Righteousness, and as their Head and fountain of Holiness; the just must
live by faith, Heb. 12.2.
and is not he the Author and finisher of your Faith? Thus your Sanctification
and Consolation will grow up, and increase together.

My chief design in this Publication, is to advance Holiness in the world, and
thereby God's Honor, which is so much fallen to decay, Partly by the
abominable profaneness and debauchery of some, and partly (yea chiefly) by the
horrid Hypocrisy and Apostasy of others, who Dema's-like have made gain
godliness, and so shipwrackt faith and a good Conscience. The Lord recover such
out of the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.25, 26.
and give them repentance unto life, for his infinite mercies sake. I might
tell ye, that Families, Cities, Countries, Thrones, Kingdoms, See Prove. 20.28.
Pro. 14.34. Isa. 1.9. Fiat justitia, aut ruat Coelum. Jer. 31.23.
yea the whole world stands by Holiness, and for the sake of holy Ones, and
that we can never expect to be an Happy, unless we are an Holy Nation; Oh that
that most blessed Blessing might be pronounced upon this Kingdom; The Lord
bless thee O Habitation of justice, and Mountain of Holiness, This would be the
consternation of wicked men and Devils, but the rejoicing of Saints and of all
the Holy Angels; The Lord accomplish it in his time. The Blessing of Heaven
attend these poor labors to their intended and desired end; Isa. 55.10, 11.
And Grant this Word, (like the rain and snow from Heaven) may be prosperous to
them that read it. If any shall be hereby enlightened, quickened, awakened,
reproved, comforted, confirmed, or any way edified. Let she Father of Lights,
from whom comes down every good and perfect Gift, Jam. 1.17.
have all the Glory, And be pleased to remember at the Throne of Grace,

Your affectionate Friend and Servant in the Lord, T. C.

Christ our Sanctification.
1 Cor. 1.30. Some part of that verse.

-- Who of God is made unto us -- Sanctification. --

The whole verse runs thus.

But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

But the words which ((...)) we shall insist on at this time, and in this small
Tract, are these:

-- Who of God is made unto us, Sanctification. --


THe Apostle Paul, Romans 1.14. confesses himself a debtor both to the Greeks,
and to the Barbarians, (i. e.) to all sorts of Gentiles, (for he was the great
Apostle to the Gentiles) both to the wise, and to the unwise; i. e. to all
kinds and sorts of men in particular amongst them: for all sorts of men may be
ranged into these two Ranks or Orders, the wise, and unwise.

In imitation of the holy Apostle, I who am the lowest and least of Saints, and
the unworthiest of all the servants of the Lord, most unfit for so honorable
and high a Calling, as the Ministry of the Gospel, must reckon my self a debtor
both to the wise and unwise, to the learned and unlearned; as well to the more
acute and perspicacious, as to the less judicious and enquiring Christian: And
therefore (as in duty bound) must cast in my Mite into the Saints Treasury, and
employ my Talent (though but one, and a small one) as for the information of
the more ignorant, so also for the satisfaction of the more ingenious and
learned Reader: For his satisfaction therefore, or at leastwise for an Essay
thereunto, I think it neither unnecessary nor inexpedient, before I come to the
words themselves, to preface the subsequent Discourse with these (I think)
convenient Prolegomena.

THE PROLEGOMENA TO THE Ensuing Discourse.
ALl I have to say in the Proem to the Text, I shall reduce to these Heads
following.

I shall endeavor to show 1. By whom this Epistle was written. 2. To whom it
was written. 3. Upon what occasion the Apostle wrote this Epistle. 4. What is
the Argument of this Epistle. 5. At what time, and where this Epistle was
written.


1. By whom this Epistle was written.
The Apostle Paul, a Act. 9.15.
chosen Vessel of God, was the Author of this Epistle, a man that was caught up
to the third heaven, (where he heard (...); which Montanus and the Vulgar
translate, arcana verba: But Beza, ineffabilia verba, unspeakable words; as our
English Translators do well render; such words (...); id est, quae sando
explicari a quoquam homine non possint. Beza.
which no man can explain by speaking.) A man inspired with the Spirit of God,
as he testifies of himself in this Epistle, 1 Cor. 7.40. Therefore by the
inspiration of the Spirit of God he wrote this Epistle. Paul, and all other
holy men of old that wrote the Canonical and Divine Scriptures, were but
Amanuenses Penmen, or Secretaries to the Spirit, the Spirit was the immediate
Author, Inditer, and Composer of the Scriptures: All Scripture is of Divine
Inspiration, (...).
2 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet. 1.21. For the Prophecy came not in old time, or rather
(...) aliquando, at any time, by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as
they were (...), acti, inspirati; acted or moved by the Holy Ghost. D Owen
expounding this Text in his Divine Original of the Scripture, p. 25.
One of our Worthies has an excellent gloss upon this Text. When the Word
came, or rather was brought (...) to the holy men that wrote the Scriptures, it
was not left to their understandings, wisdoms, minds, memories* to order,
dispose, and give it out; but they were born, acted, carried out by the Holy
Ghost, to speak, deliver, and write all that and nothing but that, to every
tittle that was so brought to them; they invented not words themselves, suited
to the things they had learned, but only expressed the words that they
received. And a little after he says, Not only the Doctrine they taught was
the Word of Truth, Truth its self, Joh. 17.17. but the words whereby they
taught it, were words of truth from God himself, etc. Thus this Epistle, and
other sacred Scriptures, being of Divine Authority, and thereupon of
uncontrollable Sovereignty, and of Eternal Verity, ought to be received and
entertained of us with holy respect and reverence, to be heard and read as the
Oracles of God.

2. To whom this Epistle was written, together with a Description of Corinth.
This Epistle was written to the men of Corinth, but more specifically, the
Apostle himself tells ye, 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God which is at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with
all that in every place call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours.

The Corinthians were Achaians. Corinthii Achaici fuerunt.
Corinth was a famous and rich City of Achaia, not only one of the chi f, but
the Metropolitan, or chiefest of that Region; it was a City placed in an
Isthmus, or narrow straight, going into Peloponnesus, now called Morea; and
being situate between Both Poets and Geographers use to call her Corinthus
Bi-maris, Corinthus Achaiae, Metroplis olim erat, ob portuum commoditatem
Emporium totius Asiae, tum celeberrimum, tum opulentissimum. Marl.
two Seas, the A^gean, and Ionian, having fair Havens toward these two Seas, a
great concourse of people from many Countries resorted thither, whereupon it
was called Nobilissimum Emporium, opibus abundans, a most Noble Mart-Town,
overflowing with a confluence of wealth and worldly prosperity; yea, so famous
and flourishing was this City, that the Romans themselves began to suspect her
greatness; but the Corinthians were as insolent as the Romans were suspicious,
for they uncivilly abused the Roman Ambassadors, and cast Urine upon their
heads as they passed through the So Cicero relates it.
City. Upon this disgrace the Romans sent Lucius Mummius, then Consul, who
burnt the City, and made it level with the ground: In the burning of it, so
many rich and costly Images of sundry sorts of metal were melted, that thereof
was found a very precious Brass called Aes Corinthium, more esteemed than
Silver among the Romans. At last it was (say some) re-edified by Julius Caesar;
(say others) by Augustus Caesar: because of the excellent fitness and
situation of the place, it quickly increased to its former wealth and
splendor. It was a place famous for the profession of Christianity, but of
late it fell into the hands of Turks and Infidels, Anno Chapter 1451.
and by them it is at this day called Corinto and Coranto.

To this City the Apostle Paul came from Athens, Act. 18.^.
where he converted to the Faith of Christ Crispus and Sosthenes, two chief
Rulers of the Jewish Synagogue, Act. 18.8.17.
and many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptized, for the Lord
had by a Vision in the night told him, he had much people in that City; and
withal, for his encouragement, to preach there uncessantly, and to abide there
patiently. The Lord bids him be not afraid, (...) 8.9.
but speak, and hold not thy peace. These words were Pillars of Support, and
Cordials of Comfort to his fainting heart: Gods words are not empty or aerie
Dictates, like Vox and praete^ca nihil.
man's, a voice, and no more; but creating, corroborating, comforting,
soul-renewing, and soul-quickning, and soul-restoring, and reviving precepts,
where, when, He up^^^ ^eth all thing by the Word o^ his (...). H^b. 1.3.
and in whom he pleases; for his word is the word of his power, and therefore
a word with power: The words that I speak (s ith Christ) they are spirit, and
they are life, Joh. 6.63.

Again, the Lord promises to be with Paul, for I am with thee, Act. 18.10
and no man shall set on thee to hurt thee, etc. God did not only promise the
assistance of his Spirit to his Ministry, (though that is rather implied than
expressed) but God also promises his Protecting Presence to his person, that
no man should set on him to hurt him. How valiantly and cheerfully may a soul
fight after such a Leader, and under such Ensigns? under the promise of the
faithful God, and in the presence of the Mighty God. He to whom God is a Sun of
influence, and a Shield of defense, (as he has promised) Psa. 84.11. may go on
in the face of the greatest difficulty with courage and success, and fear no
colors, because one single God is eminently and infinitely more, more for
strength, support and succor, than all the enemies are for fear and terror.

When the snares of death prevent thee, Psa. 18.4, 5.
and the floods of the ungodly make thee afraid, call upon God, cry to the Lord
in thy distress, as David did, Psa. 18.6. Act faith on God by the Warrant of
his own precious Promises; these among others are very pertinent and pregnant,
Isa. 41 10, 11. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, etc. (...) 2. When thou
passest through the waters, I will be with thee, etc. Isa. 8.12, 13, 14.
Neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid, but sanctify th Lord ^f Hosts
himself and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread. This is Gods
Precept, and your Duty; v. 14. And he shall be for a Sanctuary. This is Gods
Promise, and your Privilege.

But to return; the Apostle hereby animated, continued at Corinth a year and
six months, Act 18.11.
teaching the Word of God among them; during which space of time, by the
blessing of God upon his Ministry, (or in his own phrase) by the grace of God
which was with him, 1 Cor. 15.10. he had gathered and planted a most
flourishing Church at Corinth, to whom he gives many Encomiums, or Titles of
praise, in the beginning of this Epistle, Chap. 1.5, 6, 7. God had indeed much
people in this City, whom he sanctified in Christ Jesus, and called to be
Saints. A Quis, Quaeso Electos multos in perv^si ^^^a civitate quaesi ^isset?
Deus tamen no^e^^t quos ^^gisset, and qui fui essent. Pa^^us.
German Divine admiring at Gods goodness, and Paul's success, cries our, Who (I
pray) would have sought for many Elect in a most perverse City? But God knew
whom he had elected, and who were his. No place is so profane (says the same
Author) in which God has not his. This passage puts me in mind of an excellent
note of a M. Car^l in his Exposition yea the three first Charters ^ Joh, ^.^3.
Worthy Divine of ours, where he observes; God has his servants in all places,
in the worst of places: There was never any air so bad, but that a servant of
God may breathe in it. God had a choice piece even in the Land of Uz, a place
of profaneness; here was Bethel in Bethaven, an House of God in a Land of
wickedness; and so he goes on excellently. There were Saints in Caesar's (wicked
Neroes) household; so there were Saints, many Saints, at leastwise many, which
the Lord did intend actually to call and sanctify by Paul's Ministry, and
consequently to save and glorify, that were Inhabitants even in Corinth, in
that most In (...) and perver^ (...).
corrupt and most perverse City, infamous for luxury, effemin^teness, and many
other vices, as a good Author does observe.

3. Upon what occasion this Epistle was written.
The occasion was twofold.

First was, Those grievous and great scandals and vices which crept in, and
invaded the Church of Corinth after the departure of the Apostle; of which,
throughout the whole Epistle, we hear at large.

The Apostle having planted a great Church there, went forward in his
Ministerial Circuit, (according to his Commission) from thence to preach the
Gospel in other Cities of Asia, and after a considerable time, being now at
Ephesus, as may be gathered from 1 Cor. 16.8. he understood there from some of
the A Cloes fam^^aribus Apostolus edoctus esset. (...). This Clo^ seems to have
been an honest Mat^on, and of esteem among the Church of Corinth. So the Dutch
Annotat.
household of Cloe, that there were divisions among them; wherefore because he
could not come himself in person at present to apply healing plasters to their
sores, he sends them this Epistle, wherein he does gravely advertise them, put
them in mind of their duty; he shows them their fall and folly, and directs
them to the right cure and recovery; and that the cure might be wrought
effectually, he labors to effect it several ways, if possibly he might take
them with honest guile.

1. Sometimes he praises, commends, and speaks them fair, as a Father.

2. Sometimes he speaks roughly, and reproves sharply, with Power and
Authority, as an Apostle.

3. Sometimes he prays, entreats, and gently instructs them, as a Brother, and
all to make them sensible of their sinful malady, and receptive of a spiritual
remedy.

2. The other occasion was the Epi^tle sent to him from the Corinthians, as
appears from 1 Cor. 7.1. wherein they asked the Apostles advice and counsel
touching diverse matters; as touching Matrimonials, Cum primis de
Matrimonialibus de Idolothytis, de Spiritualibus charismatis, de modo
Prophetandi, de collecta denique facienda.
or the affairs that have reference to Marriage, of Meat dedicated or offered
up to Idols, of Spiritual Gifts, of the manner of Prophesying: Lastly, touching
a collection to be made for the poor Saints at Jerusalem, as is evident from 1
Cor. 16.3.

As this last from this Text, so all the former are very clear and manifest to
every eye that reads, and to every serious mind that notes the Series of this
Epistle.

4. What is the Argument of this Epistle.
(...).
The whole Argument of this Epistle is corrective and hor^atory, consisting of
Hujus Epistolae varia est ac multiplex utilitas: multos enim insignes locos
continet. Calv.
diverse parts, as that Church did labor under diverse distempers: All may be
reduced to these eight Heads.

1. In the four first Chapters, the Apostle reproves the factious spirits and
courses of the Corinthians, whereby they had re^^ themselves into Sects and
Parties, and exhorts them to concord and unity: he also excuses the plainness,
simplicity, and purity of his Doctrine; and on the contrary, nips and sharply
checks the vanity of the false Apostles in the ostentation of their
Grandiloquence, i. e. their lofty and stately Eloquence; by which Artifice,
they thought to bring the Apostle into contempt among the people, as though he
had been (in comparison of them) a very illiterate and rude Preacher.

2. In the fifth and sixth Chapters he chargeeth them with three vices.

1. In that they continued the incestuous p^^son in their company and
communion, who ought rather to have been delivered over unto Satan, and ejected
out of the Society of the Church.

2. In that they went to Law, De (...), de secularibus, aut ad hanc vitam
pertinentibus. (...) Plenty begets strife.
and contended one with another even before the Heathen Judges, about things
pertaining to this life: This (says the Apostle) I speak to your shame, 1 Cor.
6.4, 5. For indeed this contentious practice of theirs, brought an odium and
shame upon the Christian Religion, and made that pure and pea^cable profession
to stink in the N^strils of the Heathen. There were indeed at Corinth many
Merchants, who are (as one observes) Homin^m genus delicatum, quaestuosum,
habendi cupidissimum, injuria impatientissimum, etc.
a delicate kind of men, very desirous of gain, most greedy of having, and most
impatient of injury and loosing. This scandal he reproves, and labors to
remove.

3. He reprehends them, for that they took fornication for an indifferent
thing, or for a matter of no great moment; against which silthy sin, as well
dishonorable to their bodies (which ought to be the Members of Christ, and the
Temple of the Holy Ghost) as damnable to their souls, he inveighs severely, and
presses them by many cogent reasons to Chastity, and Sanctimony.

3. In the seventh Chap. he comes to answer their Epistle, and delivers many
Apostolical Precepts, as to diverse Matrimonial cases, and as to the private
condition of every individual.

Corinthiorum dubia de Matrimonialibus.
The Questions which the Corinthians by their Letter desired a Solution of, seem
(to me) to be these: 1. Whether a Christian might marry? 2. Whether Christian
yoke-fellows ought to render to one another due benevolence? 3. Whether it be
lawful for a married person to leave or withdraw from his yoke fellow? 4.
Whether a single life be not better than a married state? 5. Whether Divorces
are lawful? 6. Whether it be lawful for a believer to dwell with an unbeliever?
7. Whether a Believer being forsaken by the unbeliever, may be held in bondage?
8. Whether it were the best or wisest course for Virgins to marry? Lastly,
whether second Marriages are lawful for Widows?


4. In the eighth, ninth and tenth Chapters, he reprehends those, who by
pretense of Christian liberty, did very scandalously, and to the offense of
others, communicate with the Gentiles in things offered up to Idols; from which
unlawful and unchristian communion he does strongly dehort them, and that he
does two ways.

1. By his own example, showing, that sometimes we ought to abstain from things
that are in themselves lawful, (in case of scandal) much more from things
unlawful, as he himself forbore to receive any stipend salary, or wages for
preaching to them; to avoid thereby the least color of calumny; for he knew,
the false Teachers were ready to catch at any thing that might defame his
Person, or traduce his Doctrine, being filled with rancour and emulation.

2. He dehorts them from communion with the Idols, and meats offered to them,
by a most convincing Argument, that they could not, nor should not, be
partakers of the Lords Table, and of the Table of Devils; for to have
fellowship with Idols, was to have fellowship with Devils; for the things the
Gentiles sacrificed, were sacrificed to Devils, and not to God, 1 Cor.
10.19.20, 21.

5. In the eleventh Chapter he reproves and corrects two abuses.

1. One about seemly behavior in the Church, which both women and men did
violate, Circa decorum Ecclesiasticum.
and thereby both created scandals: The women praying and prophesying with
their heads uncovered in the Congregation, acted against modesty, and became
allurements to the men: And the men praying and prophesying in the Church with
their heads covered, acted against Reverence, and against the Light of Nature;
both was uncomely.

2. The other was about the Supper of the Lord, Circa coenam Dominicam.
which the richer sort did mingle with profane feasts, eating and drinking
even to excess and luxury; the poorer sort, in the mean time, being shamed,
despised, and left hungry.

6. In the twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth Chapters, the Apostle lays down
several Precepts, both concerning the difference, and use of Spiritual Gifts,
and declares by the Allegory of the members of a natural body, that all things
are to be referred to unity, and edification of the whole: Having spoken much
of the variety and excellency of gifts, he concludes, that all gifts are
nothing without the Grace of Love, in the praises whereof he makes a pathetical
and sweet digression: of all gifts, he seems both to commend and exhort unto
the gift of Prophecy; Mulieres a Muniis Ecclesiasticis arcet.
as also, that a convenient and due order should be kept in Prophesying.
Lastly, he bars women from meddling with Ecclesiastical Offices or Functions.

7. In the fifteenth Chapter, he corrects the profane error of some in denying
the Resurrection of the flesh, Resurrectio carnis, spes nostra. Tertul.
and confirms and fortifies the contrary truth, an Article of our Faith, with
most weighty and grave Arguments; and excellently shows in many things the
specifical differences, between the body now vile, and the body glorious then;
and how this Doctrine of the Resurrection may very profitably and practically
be accommodated to the Consolation of the Saints.

8. In the sixteenth Chapter, he minds them of a contribution for the poor
Saints and Brethren at Jerusalem, which he enforces by the example of the
Churches of Galatia, and after several godly Exhortations, he closes the
Epistle with Salutations, and with a Benediction.

5. At what time, and where, or at what place was this Epistle written?
Although by reason of the defect of History, it cannot be positively known at
what time, or in what order the Epistles of Paul were written; Epistolarum
Paulinarum ordo.
yet relation being had unto, and collation of them being made with the
Apostles Race or Circuit described in the Acts, affords some probable guesses
or conjectures.

First and foremost. The first of all the Epistles written by Paul, seems to be
the first Epistle to the Thessalonians.

The next, the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, sent from Athens.

The third in order is reputed the first Epistle to Timothy, sent from Laodicea.

The fourth is deemed to be this first Epistle to the Corinthians, before his
passage through Macedonia, 1 Cor. 16.5. The Greek Copies relate it to be
written from Philippi, but many hold it was written at Ephesus before
Pentecost: For he says, 1 Cor. 16.8. I will tarry at Ephesus until Pentecost,
which happened in the year of Christ 64. and of Nero 9. in which year coming to
Jerusalem, he was cast into prison. Of this Opinion, (of the Ancient) is
Athanasius and Chrysostom; (of the Modern) Dionysius, Sixtus Senensis, Martyr,
Illyricus, Stapleton, etc.

Thus much (if not too much) for the Prolegomena: Palliate (good Reader) my
imbecility and prolixity, with thy Humanity and Christian candor; though the
Porch of Entrance may seem too large, yet (I trust) thy passage may be more
light some into the body of this choice Epistle, and more facile into the
bowels of the discourse at hand.

The first Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, may be divided into
three Parts.
1 Pro^mium.
The first is the Proem, containing the inscription, subscription, and
salutation; as also a Gratulation or Thanksgiving to God on their behalf, with
a commendation of them, and his hearty desire for them, carried on from the
first to the tenth verse.

2 Propositio Dehortatoria.
The second is a Proposition Dehortatory, that they cherish not Schisms among
themselves, least (Viper-like) they eat out their own bowels; whence he had
information, and what their Schisms or Divisions were, he explains in ver. 10,
11, 12.

3. Confirmatio.
The third is a Confirmation of his Dehortatory Proposition; many of his
Arguments are taken ab absurdo, as they call it.

1. Because to cherish Schisms is, as it were, to divide or tear Christ in
pieces, v. 13.

2. Because none of their Teachers was crucified for them, v. 13.

3. Because they were not baptized in the name of any of their Teachers, v. 13.

Neque Baptizando nec praedicando. Par. Non cum dicendi peritia. Beza.
4. Because the Apostle had given them no occasion of abusing his name to
Schisms; neither by baptizing, for he baptized but few of them, v. 14, 15, 16.
nor by his Preaching, for he preached not with ostentation, (...), not in the
wisdom of speech, not in quaint terms, not with Rhetorical flourishes, Visus
autem fuisset Christi crucifixi Spiritus nihil agere, si humanae facundia vi
homines ad Christianismum essent adducti. Beza 1 Ab effectu contrarii.
or humane Eloquence, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect,
v. 17. that is, lest the Doctrine of Christ crucified should become fruitless;
for as a learned Author well observes, The Spirit of Christ crucified would
have seemed to have done nothing, if men should have been brought to
Christianity by the force of Humane Eloquence.

1. This is the first reason, and it is drawn ab effectu contrarii, from the
effect of the contrary. Now least any should think, that plainness of speech
did render the Doctrine of the Cross contemptible, a tacit Objection is
answered in v. 18. by a distinction; Though the Doctrine of the Cross be
foolishness to the Reprobates, yet it is the Power of God to such as shall be
saved.

2. From the miserable condition of worldly wisdom, it is an Enemy to God, 2 A
condition mundanae sapientae.
and God an Enemy to it, and threatens to destroy it; I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, ver. 19. (...), tollam e medio. The Prophet, Isa. 29.14.
(from whence these words are taken) there uses a Verb Neuter, which the Greeks
have turned into a Verb Active.

3. From the good pleasure of God, 3 A Ben* placito Dei.
willing to save by the foolishness of Preaching them that believe; and though
the obstinate Jews, and Philosophical Greeks, reputed the Gospel foolishness,
(for how can blind men distinguish colors?) yet it is in very deed and truth
infinitely wiser than humane wisdom, and infinitely stronger than humane
power; for it is the Wisdom and Power of God himself, Psa. 110.2 The Lord shall
send the Rod of thy strength out of Zion: Rule thou in the midst of thine
Enemies. Here, vocatio pro vocatis metony nice ponatur, sicut passim
circumcisio pro circumcisis and praeputium pro incircumcisis. Beza in loc and
Marl. in loc. to the same purpose A Finc ultim^.
ver. 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. The Publication of the Gospel, is the Scepter by
which the Lord Reigns, the Rod of Christ's strength, by which he does and shall
rule in the midst of his Enemies.

4. From the blessed effect of Gods good pleasure, expressed in calling, Not many
wise, not many Mighty, not many Noble, (though some few of these in all Ages
have been called) but rather the poor, the foolish persons and things, that in
the eye of the carnal world are contemptible, and counted of no account, mere
nothings, ver. 26, 27. Ye see your calling Brethren, that is, what way or
manner the Lord has taken in calling you; or rather, quinam ex vobis sint
vocati, who, or what kind of men among you are called, not the wise and Mighty,
but commonly and generally, the foolish and weak; for the poor receive the
Gospel, as Christ speaks.

5. From the ultimate, or last end, That no flesh should glory in his presence,
but in the Lord himself, of whom we are in Christ Jesus, who of God is made
unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Thus by this
Clue of five Threads, I mean the five last Heads, I have brought you to the
Text.

1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.
THe Sacred Scriptures do hold forth our Lord Jesus Christ to be both the
Treasurer and the Treasury of all our blessedness, both in this and in the
other world; all our Treasures are in him, as well as from him; 2 Col. 3. In
him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge; He is our life, and our
life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.3, 4. The beloved Apostle that leaned
upon Jesus his bosom, tells us, 1 John 5.11, 12. This is the Record, that God
has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. Could we ever have
wished it in a surer or sweeter place, than in the bosom of our blessed
Savior, the Son of God, and Prince of Life? And farther, He that has the Son,
has life; and he that has not the Son of God, has not life, etc. Our life of
righteousness, our life of holiness, our life of glory, or our eternal life,
our spiritual life in these three considerations is wrapped, or bound up in Jesus
Christ, the bundle of life: As sin and death came by Adam, so righteousness and
life came by Jesus Christ; according to that of the Apostle, Romans 5.21. That as
sin has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness
unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

This pregnant Text which I am now discoursing from, more rich than Hermes
Table bespangled with Emeraulds, presents ye with these four most Orient
Jewels; the Jewels of Heaven, the choice blessings of the Covenant, (viz.
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption; and that which is the
glory of all, this Text acquaints ye with, to your inexpressible comfort, that
Christ Jesus is all these in himself, and by himself to ye, and for ye; God the
Father has made him your All in All, Col. 3.11. Christ is all in all, all in
all in in Illumination, all in all in Justification, all in all in
Reconciliation, all in all in Adoption, all in all in Sanctification, 2 Timothy
4.10.
all in all in Redemption, all in all in preservation to his heavenly Kingdom.

And though it be sa^d of the Saints enjoyment of God in heaven, that God, (i.
e.) God the Father is all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. yet certainly, as God the
Father is pleased to communicate himself in the riches of his grace through the
Son to his Saints here, so he will everlastingly communicate himself in the
treasures of his glory through the Son to his Saints in heaven; as Christ is
the Medium of your spiritual union with God here, so he will continue the
eternal Medium of your glorious communion with God hereafter; in his l^ght ye
shall see light. The Soul-ravishing Vision of Jesus the Mediator of the New
Covenant, Heb. 12.24. Domine fecisti nos pro te, and cor irrequietum est, denec
venial ad te. Aug.
and the Beatifical Vision of ever-blessed and glorious Deity in and through
the Mediator, is no small part or portion of the Saints Celestial happiness:
God indeed is the Essence of the Soul, the Eternal Entity of our happiness, the
Father of Spirits, is the only rest and center of our immortal Spirits; for 1
Pet. 3.18. Christ once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he
might bring us to God; (our approximation or drawing nigh to God being the
ultimate end (as to us) of Christ's passion) yet the seeing of Christ as he is,
when he shall appear in his Fathers glory, when he shall come in power and
great glory, to see him as he is in his greatest glory and fullest Majesty,
sitting at the right hand of the Father, and to see our humane nature in him as
far exalted above, so far more glorious than those glittering morning stars,
the Angels, will be no small part or measure of our blessedness, (though not
the quintess^nce, compendium or complement thereof) 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now
are we the Sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be: But we
know, that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is.

But to return;

Our Lord Christ is (...) by way of Eminency called, that one Pearl of great
price, Mat. 13.46. which the wise Merchant-man sold all that he had and bought.
This Pearl eminently and virtually contains all other Pearls in it, is
comprehensive of all excellent and Sovereign good, which our souls stand in
need of, infinitely more precious and excellent than the rest, and infinitely
to be prized and preferred above the rest: Christ not only has, but is wisdom
to the simple, raiment to the naked, riches to the poor, rest to the weary,
bread of life to the hungry, water of life to the thirsty, righteousness to the
guilty, sanctification to the filthy, redemption to the captive, peace and
reconciliation to the enemy, power to the faint, a rock and refuge to the
afflicted, a shineing Sun to the disconsolate, a saving shield to the
assaulted; in a word, a full fons of living water, of rich supply to those that
labor under any distress or misery, whether inward perpl^xity, or outward
calamity.

Philosophers brag much of their Elixir, Naturalists boast much of their
Panacea and Catholicon, and they would bear the world in hand, as though these
were Sovereign remedies against all maladies, good against all diseases; but
these, and all other, whether natural, artificial, or moral excellencies, are
less than Ciphers to Jesus Christ; compared with him, they are less than
nothing, and vanity, Isa. 40.17. 1. As Christ is God, the worlds were made by
him, and for him, by his power, and for his glory, Heb. 1.2. Col. 1.16. 2. As
Christ is Mediator God-man, so he is Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. whom he,
that is, the Father, has appointed heir of all things; by whom also he made
the worlds: Now can he want light that lives in the midst of the Sun? Can he
want air that lives upon the top of the highest Mountain? Can he want water
that lives at the Well head? No more can he want light, life, grace, strength,
comfort, or any good thing that lives in union and communion with Jesus Christ,
in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2.9. Qui habet
habentem om^ia, habet omnia.
He that has him that owneth and possesses all things, has all things: It Is
an old and true saying, Si Christum noscis, nihil est, si caetera nescis,
Si Christum nescis, nihil est, si caetera noscis.
Has the Father given us the Son, the Son of his eternal love, of his eternal
bosom? then we may safely make (with the Apostle) this sweet inference, How
shall he not with him freely give us all things, Romans 8.32. All things
pertaining to life and godliness, as the Apostle expresses and explaineth it
elsewhere, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. presents ye with a Christians Inventory, and
with a Christians tenure.

1. A Christians Inventory: All things. A Christian has a large dominion, a
great possession; all things are yours, (...), for all things are yours:
Descend from generals to particulars, then all things must be referred to, or
subdivided by persons, and things. All persons are yours, that is, for your
good and benefit, whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, whether Ecclesiastical or
secular persons, whether godly, or ungodly, whether spiritual men, or carnal
men; therefore v. 22. he adds the world, the wicked World, or rather the wicked
of the world, (who ere long shall be judged by the Saints, as Assessors with
Jesus Christ the Supreme Judge) 1 Cor. 6.2. shall be subservient to Gods glory,
and to the Saints good. Those Slaves and Scullions that rub off the rust, and
scour and cleanse the Vessels of Honor, by temptations, afflictions,
imprisonments, persecutions, etc. (though not intentionally, as to them) yet
accidentally and eventually (by the blessing of God) shall really promote and
carry on their spiritual and eternal interest.

2. As all persons, so all things are theirs, whether life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, ver. 22. What can a soul either have
or wish for more? for a man not only to enjoy the comforts of life, but also to
find sweetness in death; to find meat in this Eat^r, to find honey in this
Lion, to live in the midst of death, to lie down in peace in the arms, or
rather Jaws of the King of Terrors, for this deadly Enemy, by the death of
Christ, to be made one of our best friends.

Again, For a man to be rich in possession, and rich in reversion too, for a
man to have an interest in all things present, and an interest in all things
future also; to have Territories as broad as the earth, and a treasure as high
as heaven, and returns of glory coming in unto him, and upon him, to all
eternity; this is an incomparable rich person, and an incomparable blessed
estate indeed.

2. Note the Tenure: Ye hold all in Capite, in and by union with him who is
Gods Heir, and your Head, Ephesians. 1. last; and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods, v. 23. Ye are the Bride, Christ is the Bridegroom; ye are the Body,
Christ is the Head; as the Head of Christ is God, so the Head of the Church is
Christ.

The Father in an ineffable manner communicated (as of old, the Divine Essence
and Nature) so at his Incarnation, an unmeasurable, an overflowing fullness of
the Spirit and Grace to the Son; yea, it pleased the Father, that in him should
all fullness dwell, even as Mediator, Col. 1.19. And the Son by the Ordination
and appointment of the Father, communicates, derives, and by his Spirit imparts
unto his Saints, Ephesians. 1.3. Ephesians. 3.8.
all those spiritual blessings, all those unsearchable riches, all those riches
of glory, or glorious riches, Ephesians. 3.16. which he has received of his Father
for them. Some of which heavenly and choicest treasures we find lying in the
field, or rather Mine of this Text, (viz.) Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption.

I shall now (Deo juvante) consider the Text it self, open the sense of the
words, and draw some practical conclusions from the whole.

The Apostle having humbled and dejected the Corinthians, ver. 26, 27. of this
Chap. in calling upon them to see or consider their calling, (for ye see your
calling Brethren, etc.) where calling is put metonymically for the persons
called, that is, what manner of men they themselves were, and generally are,
which God calls by the Gospel; not the wise after the flesh, not the Mighty,
not the Noble, but commonly the foolish, weak, and base, for the poor receive
the Gospel. Now in this verse the Apostle comforts and cheers them, Quos antea
dejecerat, nunc supra omnes mortales evehit, sed ita ut omnem ipsorum
dignitatem doceat, non ab ipsis, sed a Christo emanare, idque a Deo, id est,
Dei unius vi, ac beneficio. Beza in loc.
and lifts up their heads above all other mortals, by informing them of their
Origination from God, their Union with Christ, their spiritual descent from him
in Christ Jesus. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus. Here the Apostle shows them
the true rise of true honor, Corinthiorum animos de jecerat revocando eos ad
intuendam suam ipsorum vocationem: quod fuit propemodum acsi dirisset, eos
insipientes, ignobiles, infirmos omnes fuisse, and quasi non essent, quum ad
Christum vocarentur. Quare nunc illos erigit, and pulchre consolatur, d^^ens,
licet ex vobis ipsis tales fueritis ut modo estis a me descripti; Attamen jam
ex Deo estis. P. Martyr in loc.
and of divine dignity, not springing from noble birth, or liberal breeding;
not from any natural, moral, or secular accomplishments or considerations
whatsoever.

But from the special grace of God, the Father in Christ Jesus, manifested and
put forth in a double act of divine love.

1. In Election. 2. In Regeneration.
1. In Election. God the Father did choose all believers in Christ before the
foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4. in that eternal compact, or Foederal
transactions between the Father and the Son, Emphasis est in verbo estis q. d.
a Deo vobis est principium qui ea quae non sunt, vo^at in Christo vero
subsistentia, etc. Calvin.
commonly called the Covenant of Redemption: Ye are of God in Christ Jesus;
(viz.) by virtue of the Eternal Purpose and Decree of God: The gracious purpose
of God the Father in Christ, is the beginning of the ways of God; the Original
and highest Wellhead of all our holiness and happiness, as appears 2 Timothy 1.9.
where ye shall find, that both our Salvation and Calling are no other than the
genuine efflux and products of Gods purpose and grace given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began. So Tit. 1.2. In hope of eternal life, which God that
cannot lie, D. Jacomb in his Sermon upon Isa. 55.10.
promised before the world began. How was this life promised before the world
began, but in this everlasting Covenant, wherein the Father promised unto
Christ eternal life for all his Seed?

Though the Decrees of God are immanent, Decreta Dei nihil ponunt in Actu.
and not transient acts, abiding (with reverence) in the Mind or Breast of God,
and not actually passing upon the creature, yet Gods eternal purpose in
electing us in Christ is the primum mobile, the great wheel that sets all the
other inferior wheels at work, that animates, quickens, and actually moves and
influenceth, and constantly carries on and perfects all other intermediate acts
of grace in order to our Salvation.

Gods blessing us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things and places,
is said to be in relation unto, in correspondence with, in pursuance of his
electing us in Christ, according as he has chosen us in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
They are all Emanations from this Fountain.

Thus in the first place, (and I think not improperly) we may be said to be of
God in Christ Jesus, viz.) of God, originally and primarily, Neque hoc
intelligit quoad creationem, sed ait de eo, quod per gratiam and Regenerationem
consequnti erant. P. Martyr.
in Christ Jesus, vertually and radically, by virtue of Gods electing love to
us in Christ before the world began.

2. More principally, according to the purport of this place; we are of God in
Christ Jesus by the grace of Regeneration; we are Gods workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. Believers are of God, i. e. born of
God in Christ Jesus; for the Father of our Lord Jesus, as our Spiritual Father,
is said to have begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of
Jesus from the dead, Eadem sententia est cum illa, qui non ex sanguinibus neque
ex voluntate carnis, etc. Pomeran.
1 Pet. 1.3. By virtue of his Will we are elected; and by the Power of the same
Will we are called and regenerated, Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us by
the word of truth, etc. One says, This sentence is the same with that Joh.
1.13. which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the
will of man, but of God.

Let it not grieve the Saints in that they are not born of Nobles, nor
descended of the blood of Princes, but rather rejoice and raise up their
sp^rits in the midst of all reproaches and sufferings, in that they are the
Sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, a Divine Offspring, of an heavenly
Extraction; rejoice in this, that your names are written in heaven: Ye are
wise, noble, honorable, every way glorious creatures in Christ Jesus; Ephesians 1.6.
In Christo Jesu; id est, per Christum Jesum, p^opter Christum Jesum, n^m per
Christum, and propter Christum, accepti and grati samus Patri.
in Christ Jesus, that is, by Christ Jesus, and for Christ Jesus; for indeed we
can be no way amiable or acceptable to the Father but in the beloved. We are
said not only to be Elect in Christ Jesus, but also to be sanctified in Christ
Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.2. For indeed all our good the Father has laid up in him, and
daily dispenses the same to us by him, and through him.

Thus I have considered the former clause of the Text in haec verba, But of him
are ye in Christ Jesus.

Now the latter fall under an Analytical Examen, in these words, Who of God is
made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

For the better explaining whereof, I shall briefly speak to these four.

1. Quis. 2. Quid. 3. A Quo, or unde. 4. Quomodo.
1. The Quis: Who is made of God unto us Wisdom; who, or what is the
Antecedent to this relative; who? why Christ Jesus: Of him are ye in Christ
Jesus; who, or which Christ Jesus is made of God unto us wisdom, etc. Valde
observandus est hic locus, in quo, ad quatuor praecipua capita revocantur omnia
quae in Christo adipiscimur beneficia. Beza.


2. The Quid: What is Christ Jesus made to the Saints; he is made indeed in
effect all in all, and all things to the Saints; specifically in this Text
these four, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; to which
four chief Heads all the benefits, dignities and privileges we obtain by
Christ, may be reduced, as a learned Writer well observes.

Though the believing Corinthians, and all other truly sanctified in Christ
Jesus, as men, are as vile as the dung, and as low as the dust, Factus est
nobis a Deo sapientia, etc. i. e. ut sapientes and justi, and sancti, and
liberi simus. Theohylact. in loc.
yet as Christians they shine as the stars, and are exalted as high as heaven.

1. Their understandings are enlightened by the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation, their darkness is scattered, their ignorance healed by Jesus Christ
their Wisdom; and they (in their measure) like the Angels of God for wisdom,
though they are foolish both in the worlds matters, and in the worlds account;
for commonly the children of this world are wiser in their Generation than the
children of light; yet they are wise with the wisdom of Christ, the highest
and purest wisdom; they are wise for heaven, wise for eternity, wise unto
salvation. This is the first excellency.

2. They are freed from the guilt and punishment of sin, both from the dominion
of sin and condemnation, and reputed righteous in foro coeli, in the Court of
heaven, justified, acquitted, and accepted as Heirs of eternal life and glory
by Jesus Christ their righteousness, The Lord their righteousness, Jer. 23.6.

3. They are delivered from the power of sin, and cleansed from the filth of
sin, decked with grace, endued with inward holiness, beautified with this
purest glory by Jesus Christ their Sanctification.

4. They are delivered from the power of darkness, from the bondage of
corruption, from all the pollutions of this world, from the slavish fears of
death and hell, redeemed, or (^t leastwise) ere long actually shall be from all
the sins, sorrows, sufferings, and miseries attendant upon, or contingent unto
this mortal and frail life; and lastly, saved from all their enemies, and from
the hands of all that hate them, Luke 1.71. by Jesus Christ their Redemption.

These are the special dignities the Saints are advanced to, and the spiritual
Royalties the Saints by Christ Jesus are invested with; who of God is made unto
us wisdom, righteousness, etc.

Here is Christ displayed in all his glory, a Mine discovered in all its
Treasures, a Fountain opened in all its fullness, our Mediator revealed in all
his Offices; our illumination, or wisdom, belongs to the Office of Christ, as
Prophet; both our Justification and Sanctification belong to the Office of
Christ as High Priest, and great Apostle of our profession, Heb. 3.1. our
Redemption externally from all Enemies, and internally from all sins and
sorrows, respect the Office of Christ as Lord and King; for our Savior must be
a Princely Savior, a Savior, and a Prince, Acts 5.31. And the Father has
made him both Lord and Christ, Lord over the dead and living; it is he that
delivers us from the power of darkness, and translates us into his own
Kingdom, Col. 1.13.

3. A Quo, or unde: By whom is Christ made unto us wisdom, righteousness? etc.
I answer, by God the Father, who of God is made unto us, etc.

Christ the Son, in the Economy or Dispensation of the Mediatorship, must be
considered as Gods servant; he is so called, Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant whom
I uphold.

The Father broke the business to him of our Salvation; 'twas the Father that
sent him into the world, and anointed him, Isa. 61.1. He had both his Mission
and Commission from his Father, him has God the Father sealed; 'twas the
Father that gave him the Spirit without measure, that filled him with an
overflowing fullness of all good to us, and for us; therefore we have this
phrase here, who of God is made unto us wisdom, etc.

Neque enim Christus creatus aut factus est quoad essentiam divinam: sed
ordinatus and donatus nobis ad haec bona conferenda; ergo dicitur factus nobis.
Par.
4. Quomodo. How is Jesus Christ, or may Jesus Christ be said to be made unto us
wisdom, etc. who is made to us, non creatione, sed ordinatione; not by
Creation, but by appointment; he is constituted, ordained, or appointed by the
Father to be our Wisdom, (that is) to be our Prophet, to open our ears to
Discipline, and teach us wisdom; to be our Righteousness, that is, to be our
Justifier, our High Priest, to reconcile us to God, and make an atonement for
us; to be our Sanctification, that is, to be our Sanctifier, (for whom he
justifies by his Merit, them he sanctifies by his Spirit) to restore our souls
for us, to renew us in the Spirit of our minds by the Spirit of holiness;
Postremo dicitur nobis factus Redemtio quod ita per cum justificati, and
sanctificati certam Redemtionem tandem assequamur. Beza.
to be our Redemption, that is, to be a perfect and complete Redeemer to us; by
being all this before, he will be Redemption in the abstract, a glorious
Redeemer or Savior to the uttermost at the last, Heb. 7.25. Factus est nobis a
Deo, etc. id est, qui datus est nobis a Deo; who is made to us of God, that is,
who is given to us of God, etc. to be our Wisdom, etc. Christ is not here
given of the Father to us empty or scanty, but he comes to us laden and fully
fraught with the blessings of heaven, and treasures of the Gospel. (...).
Christus fidelibus non est datus vacuus, ed ad eos cum amplissimis thesau^is
venit. P. M


Christ is not given as an ordinary, but as a supereminent and transcendent
gift, Joh. 4.10. He is that gift of God; he the Peerless Pearl, and personal
Gift, came down from the Father of Lights, and brought all other good and
perfect gifts, real, spiritual, divine, immortal excellencies from heaven along
with him, Jam. 1.17. Joh. 1.16, 17, 18.

Christ does not give (...), giftless gifts, as commonly the men of the world
give, but gifts of the highest nature, and of the greatest moment: As the
Father gives the Son, so the Son gives himself, Tit. 2.16. He gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works: And with himself he gives us the most
suitable, the most profitable, the most permanent, the most magnificent and
noble gifts; in a word, all spiritual blessings in heavenly things and places,
Ephesians. 1.3.

Thus have ye the Analysis of the Text; the Propositions most obvious from the
Text, are these:

1. That Christians are of a Divine Origination, they are of God in Christ
Jesus. 2. That Christ Jesus is given of God the Father in all his fullness to
true Christians. 3. That Christ Jesus is given of God the Father for our
wisdom, for our illumination. 4. That Christ Jesus is given of God the Father
for our justification or righteousness. 5. That Christ Jesus is given of God
the Father for our sanctification or holiness. 6. That Christ Jesus is given of
God the Father for our redemption, or for our deliverance from all our enemies
and miseries.
To all these Propositions I have in some measure (so far as I have received)
spoken: But the Argument I intend (God assisting) at this time, and in this
Tract to dilate upon, is contained in the fifth Proposition, ( That Christ
Jesus is made, i. e. is ordained, is given of God the Father for our
sanctification.) Reserving the rest for another Treatise, if these poor labors
shall find acceptance with the Saints.

Who of God is made unto us -- Sanctification.

Doct. Christ Jesus is given of God the Father for our sanctification.

In the prosecution of this precious point, I shall observe this method.

1. I shall prove the point. 2. Endeavor to show how, or in what sense Jesus
Christ is our sanctification. 3. Show what sanctification is. 4. The difference
between justification and sanctification. 5. The transcendent excellencies of
sanctification. 6. The blessed fruits of sanctification. 7ly and lastly, Make
application of the whole.
1. For the proof of the point, this Text is plain and clear enough; Christ is
made of God unto us sanctification. I need call in but two or three more
Scriptures for farther confirmation, That out of the mouth of two or three
wit^^sses every word might be established.

The Testimonies I shall allege, are these; Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a
peculiar people, H^^^ing. Co^. in loc.
zealous of good works; concerning which Text we may say, as one has done
before us, Singula verba singularem emphasin habent; every word has a special
emphasis: The particulars herein may be reduced to these four Principals.

1. The Donum or Donativum. 2. The Donans. 3. The Donati. 4. Finis Donationis.
1. The Donum or Donativum; the gift here said to be given is the great God,
and that is here, even our Savior Jesus Christ. The Particle (...) here, is
not to be construed disjunctively, but exegetically.

2. The Donans; the giver or restorer of that gift is also Christ himself, who
gave himself.

3. The Donati; the persons on whom this gift is bestowed; i. e. us, who gave
himself for us.

4. Finis Donationis; the end wherefore this gift was given, is here expressed
to be twofold.

For Redemption. Purification.


1. For Redemption: That he might redeem us from all iniquity.

2. For our Purification: And purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works.

Where Christ is a Redeemer, he is also a Purifier; whom he justifies by his
Merit and Blood from the guilt and punishment of sin, those he sanctifies by
his Spirit and Word, from the contagion and filth of sin: And this he does two
ways.

Sacramentally. Really.
1. Sacramentally: By instituting diverse kinds of offerings and washings, and
other ceremonial observances in the days of old; of these the Apostle tells
us, that they sanctified to the purifying of the flesh, In soro Ecclesiae.
Heb. 9.13. making such as used them externally and Ecclesiastically pure and
holy. And thus Christians may be said to be purified in and by the Ordinances
of Baptism, under the Gospel now.

2. Really: By inward, real and spiritual washing and purifying of the inner
man, which consists in two things:

In washing away the Guilt and Filth of sin.


The one is done away in Justification, the other in Sanctification.

1. In Justification. The blood of Christ (...) cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. So Heb. 1.3. Christ by himself purged our sins, (...); having made a
purgation, or purification, that is, by making satisfaction to Divine Justice
by the sacrifice of himself.

2. In Sanctification. Christ takes away the filth of sin; sin is called, but
never out of its own name pollution, uncleanness, superfluity of raughtiness,
the scum of filthiness; and in order to our purification from it, the Blood and
Spirit, Word and Ordinances of our Lord Jesus are called and compared to water,
to cleanse us from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; and as God has given us
many promises to act faith upon, through Christ, for our purification; as Ezekiel.
36.25. F om all your filthiness; and from all your Idols will I cleanse you;
and in v. 29. I will save you from all your uncleanness: So Jesus Christ has
undertaken (by Gods appointment) to see these purifying promises performed in
his Saints, in whom they are all Yea and Amen; and to bless and sanctify his
Word and Ordinances for his peoples purification, according to the Commandment
he has received from his Father.

Again, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Who loved his Church, and gave himself for it,
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word,
that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, that it should be holy, and without blemish. Christ
gave himself, that is, to death, (by the will of God, as it is expressed, Gal.
1.4.) that he might sanctify it, that is, (say the Dutch Annotations) that he
might separate her from all worldly men, and appropriate her to himself, and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the Word; that is, by his Blood and
Spirit, whereof the washing of water in Baptism is a sign and seal, and
withal, the means whereby the Spirit of Christ does more and more strengthen
this cleansing. The sum whereof is this; Christ by the will of God, and our
Father gave himself to death for his Church. The Blood of Christ is the
meritorious cause, the Spirit of Christ is the efficient cause, Instrumenta in
divinis operantur acs^no^ operantur.
the Word and Ordinances are as subservient causes; they work as Instruments in
the hands of Christ for the Churches sanctification; all the virtue that is in
them, or flows out to the Saints from them, they receive from the efficiency of
Jesus Christ. These Pipes receive the Golden Oil from this Candlestick.

Lastly, the end of all is this, that he might present her to himself a
glorious Church without spot, or wrinkle, etc. Thus the Church must be prepared
by the Bridegrooms grace, and so fitted for the Bridegrooms glory.

As the Virgins in Esther were to be purified with Oil of Myrrh, Esther 2.12.
and sweet Odours, before they entered into the Kings Palace, or stood in the
Kings presence: So all the Virgins and followers of the Lamb are to be purified
and refined by the Spirit and grace of the Lamb, and perfectly sanctified,
completely glorified at the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19.7.9.
Christians, your blessed Savior is made of God, both righteousness and
sanctification to ye; he has both a glorious Robe of justification to impute,
and a glorious Robe of sanctification to impart to all believers; and this,
without controversy, is the white Linen of the Saints, which render them
truly glorious, which commends them to God, to good men, to the holy Angels,
which garment of glory and beauty they shall wear for ever in their Fathers
presence.

The believing Corinthians, called to be Saints, are said to be sanctified in
Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1, 2.

The Church considered in her Inherent Grace, is but fair as the Moon, has
many spots in her, but in her Relation to Christ; so she is clear as the Sun,
etc. Wherefore, though the Church in her self may be said to be poor, forlorn,
deformed, needy* yet by Union with Christ, being implanted into him, Ecclesia
omnem suam sanctitatem venustatem and pulchritudinem, omnia sua bona in genere
a Christo Jesu sponso suo accip^re and habere dicitur. P. Mart.
she is rich with her Husbands riches, holy with his holiness, comely with his
comeliness, illustrious with his glory, replenisht with his fullness: He that is
in Christ is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. When by faith unfeigned we are
united, ingrafted into Christ the true Vine, We really partake of spiritual
life and sensation from him; we are sanctified in him, and by him: Wherefore
speaks a worthy Sanctificamur ergo, dum in Christi corpus inserimur, extra quod
non nisi pollutio est: nec aliunde etitiam nobis confertur spiritus, quam a
Christo, per quem Deo adhaeremus, and in quo simus nova creaturae. Calv.
Author, we are then sanctified, when we are ingrafted into Christ's body, out
of which, instead of sanctification, there is nothing else but pollution, and
no other way but from and by Christ is the Spirit of Holiness conferred upon
us, etc.

Christ in his most heavenly prayer, solemnly confesses, that his Father sent
him into the world for the sake of true believers, Joh. 17.18. and that for
their sakes he did sanctify himself, i. e. dedicate and give up himself for an
holy Sacrifice, that they (viz.) believers might be sanctified by the truth,
(that is, as most render it) might receive remission of sins, and
sanctification of the Spirit; and in fine, the salvation of their souls, as
evidently appears from Heb. 10.10. Through the which will we are sanctified,
through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all: And v. 14. For
by one offering he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified

All which Scriptures seem to a judicious ear to join in Consort, and speak one
voice and language with the Text and point in hand; That Jesus Christ is given
of God the Father for our Sanctification.

Thus much for the first thing promised, (viz.) the proof of the point.

We come to the second general.

2. How, or in what sense Jesus Christ may be said to be our Sanctification; or
made, ordained, constituted, or given of God to be our Sanctification?

I conceive Christ may be said to be our Sanctification in Scripture sense,
these four ways.

1. By Imputation. 2. By Union. 3. By Assimilation. 4. By Influence and
Communication.
1. By Imputation. It Is the saying of a Reverend man (now with God,) That the
perfect purity of Christ's Humane Nature is reckoned unto believers by free
imputation of faith: M. Wilson in his Christian Dictionary
Christ is made unto us Sanctification; this is, (says he) Sanctification
imputed.

Jesus Christ being consecrated, and set apart of God to be the Messiah and
Mediator for mankind, and having for that purpose all the bounty and fullness of
the Father poured on him, being truly God, and truly Man; and as Man, being
conceived of the Holy Ghost without sin, ordained to be a Sacrifice for sin,
and to sanctify and make his people holy, is worthily in Scripture called,
That Holy One, Psa. 16.10. Act. 3.1^. Joh. 1.2.20. Also he is termed the Holy
of Holies, or most Holy, Dan. 9.24. And to anoint the most Holy.

The poor imperfect Church of Christ, notwithstanding all her blots and spots,
Uxor illuce scit radiis mariti.

Qui justificantur sanctificantur, hae gratiae individuo nexu cohaerent. Calv.


blains and blemishes contracted by original and actual sins, is reputed as a
glorious Church without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, as she shines by
the rays of the Sun of righteousness, through the sanctification or perfect
holiness of her Bridegroom Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ is a believers
righteousness for Justification, and his holiness for sanctification also:
These two are Twins inseparable.

The Lamb of God without spot was slain, 1 Pet. 1.18. to purge us from the
guilt of sin, for without shedding of blood there could be no remission, Heb.
9.22. And it must be a Lamb without spot and blemish, and offered up to God by
the Eternal Spirit: This Lamb must be (...), God-man, or else your pollutions
had never been removed, your Natures never sanctified, your consciences never
purged from dead works, Heb. 9.14. But Christ by the Hypostatical union is
eminently qualified, to be both vertually and efficiently your sanctification.

As the benefits of Redemption accrue to us by the Kingly Office of Christ, so
the benefits of Justification and Sanctification do accrue to us by the
Priestly Office of Christ, as Pareus notes: Such an High Priest it became us,
who is holy, harmless, separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26. And such an one is
Christ: He did not only satisfy divine Justice, pacify the Fathers wrath,
make reconciliation for the sins of the people; but also, as the H^gh-Priest of
old, he did, and does still appear before the Lord in garments of glory and
beauty. See Exodus 28.2, 3, 4, 5. Those garments of gold, blew, purple, scarlet,
etc. did consecrate Aaron to his Priestly Office: Those glorious garments,
without controversy, did typifie the pure habitual and actual holiness of our
great High Priest Jesus Christ, expressed by his anointing, Isa. 61.1. and
receiving the Spirit without measure, Joh. 3.34.

That unction and unmeasurable effusion of the Spirit upon him, did consecrate
and sanctify him to all his Offices, he was anointed for us, to be a Prophet
to us, to be a King in us, to be a Priest for us; which fullness of the Spirit
of grace in our Head Christ, is reputed to every one sanctified in Christ Jesus
for their sanctification or holiness, which does also expiate and purge out of
the sight of God, all their impurity or unholiness: This holy person described
by his glorious titles, (viz.) the Son of God, the Heir of all things, the
Maker of the worlds, the brightness of his Fathers glory, the express Image of
his person, the upholder of all things by the Word of his Power, is said by
himself to have purged our sins, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. As by the merit of his passive
righteousness to purge us from the guilt of sin, so by the influential efficacy
of his sanctity, or inherent righteousness, to purge us from the filth of sin,
and take down the power of it.

God accepts of believers in themselves impure and imperfect, as perfect and
complete in him, who is our Head and fullness.

Thus Christ is our Sanctification, by way of Imputation.

2. Jesus Christ is our sanctification by way of Union: Union with him is the
ground or Basis both of our Justification and Sanctification by him: He that
has the Son, has life, Joh. 1.5.12. Dulcius ex ipso font.
With him is the fountain of life, Psa. 36.9. by Faith (through the spirit) a
believer has union with Christ's person, and so communion with his life: He
that believes on the Son, has everlasting life, Joh. 3. ult. Whereupon Jesus
Christ is called the life, Joh. 14.6. and our life, Col. 3.4. our life of
righteousness, our life of holiness, our life of glory, or happiness; and this
life is in his Son, 1 Ioh. 5.11.

By believing we are united to Christ, who is our Head, Fountain, and Principle
of spiritual life, or holiness, as the Head is the Principle and Fountain of
sense and motion, Ephesians. 4.15.16. From him, the Head, the Apostle tells us, the
whole body is fitly joined and compacted together, and so makes increase to
the edifying of it self in love. All the grace that is in us is but a measure
or overflowing of his fullness. Christ is -- principle of holiness, by which it
is wrought, and also the rule unto which it is proportioned. Dr. Reynolds in
his life of Christ. Heb. 12.2.
Christ is the Author and finisher of our faith; he is the first and the last,
the Alpha and Omega, both the beginner of our sanctification here on earth, and
the perfecter thereof in heaven.

As the members by nerves and ligaments are firmly knit to the Head, the
superstructure to the foundation, the branches to the Vine, the Wife to the
Husband by the Marriage-knot, so are the Saints of God firmly and closely
united to Jesus Christ in the spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. By virtue of which union
they cannot but derive and draw down continual supplies of spiritual life from
him; for he is the life, and he is their life.

Consider a little the nature of this wonderful Union, I shall but touch it in
transitu.

1. It is an Union of Nature; we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of
his bones, Heb. 2.14. because the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same: Christ condescended to assume our
Humane Nature, that we might partake of his Divine Nature; he took upon him our
rag of flesh, that he might cloth us with his robe of glory.

2. It is an union of and in the spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the
Lord is one spirit; as man and wife united make one flesh, so Christ and
believers united in and by the spirit, make up one spiritual Christ.

3. It is an union of relations, and that of the nearest and sweetest: Christ
is the everlasting Father, Isa 9.6. and begets children to God in his own
likeness. Christ is the Son of God, believers are the Sons of God, but Christ
is the Son of Gods Nature, but we are the Sons of Gods will; he by eternal
Generation, but we by the grace of Regeneration, to conformity to whose Image
we are predestined, Romans 8.29. He is the firstborn among many Brethren, and
is not ashamed to call us Brethren, Heb. 2. which relation also bespeaks
likeness, for brethren for the most part resemble brethren.

Lastly, Christ is our redeeming Kinsman, and Husband, and we are his redeemed
Kindred and Spouse: These relations also import similitude, and proportion
between Christ and us: Christ as our Redeemer came to deliver us, etc. that we
might be like him, and serve him in holiness and righteousness, Luke 1.74, 75.
he came not only to justify, but also to sanctify, Tit. 2.16. he came as
Redeemer, not only to save from hell, but also to save from sin, Mat. 1.21. not
only to deliver us from eternal condemnation, but also from our vain
conversation, 1 Pet. 1.18. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3.
not only to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the prisons
to them that are bound, Zech. 3.3.4.
but also to pull off their rotten rags, their nasty prison garments, and to
cloth them with change of raiment; to cleanse and wash them from the pollution
of sin, and put upon them a robe of righteousness, and renew them with inward
holiness, and so to present them as beautiful and glorious, without spot or
wrinkle, etc.

To show consent, M. Jeremy Buroughs in his Saints Treasury. p. 46.
I shall take the boldness to transcribe the words of a Famous man (now in
heaven:) Our Sanctification (says he) is not only from Christ meritoriously,
but efficiently, and in a kind materially too; he does not only merit it, and
work it by his spirit, but through our union with him, there is a kind of
flowing of Sanctification from him into us, as the principle of our life; as
from the liver there flows blood into all the parts of the body, so through our
union with Christ, he having the fullness of the Godhead in him, from him, as
from a Fountain, sanctification flows into the souls of Saints; their
sanctification comes not so much from their struggling, I wish all disconsolate
souls, desponding for want of holiness, would (in the strength of the Lord)
take his counsel.
and endeavors, vows, and resolutions, as it comes flowing to them, from their
closing with Christ, and union with him: There may be (says he) a great deal
of striving and endeavoring that may be utterly ineffectual for want of having
recourse to Christ, as the Spring and Wellhead of all grace and holiness.

Thus Jesus Christ is our Sanctification; by union with him, we are sanctified
in him, and daily receive supplies of grace from him.

3. Jesus Christ may be said to be our Sanctification, and to be given of God
for our Sanctification, in regard of Assimilation.

1 Christ is the pattern of our Sanctification.
1. As Christ is the Author, so Christ is the Rule and Pattern of our
Sanctification; formal and complete Sanctification consists in a souls
conformity to Jesus Christ, as the Exemplar or Pattern of his obedience, Heb.
12.3. Consider him that endured, etc. i. e. consider him as the Pattern and
President of your obedience, both active and passive: Wherefore ye shall find
that Christ propounds his own example, as the pattern of our obedience, Ioh.
13.15. I have given you an example, i. e. of meekness and humility, that you
should do as I have done to you. So Mat. 11.29. Learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly. Again, Phil. 2.5. Let the same mind be in you as was in Christ; i. e.
the same opinion, judgment, affections, compassions. Once more, 1 Pet. 1.15.
As he who has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation.
Christ throughout his whole life was a standing rule, a walking Bible, a
visible Commentary on Gods Law, whose ordinary communicable works and duties,
are recorded for our imitation.

2. Holiness is the Image of Christ: 2. Holiness is the Image of Christ.
Now as the face is both the fountain of that Image or Species which is shed
upon the glass, and likewise it is the exact pattern and example of it too; so
Jesus Christ is both the principle of holiness, by whom it is wrought, and the
pattern to which it is conform. Now in an Image there are two things.

1. Proportion. 2. Deduction.
1. Proportion. A similitude of one thing to another.

2. Deduction. A derivation, or impression of similitude upon the one from the
other, and with relation thereunto.

Now our Renovation is after the Image of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.49. As we have born
the Image of the earthly, so we shall bear the Image of the heavenly Adam,
begat a Son in his own likeness, i. e. his Son was like him in corruption and
mortality; so in the Regeneration, Christ begets children to himself in his own
likeness, i. e. like him in grace and holiness, in spirituality and
immortality, for the seed of which we are begotten is incorruptible. 1 Pet. 1.23
When man had lost that glorious Image of God wherein he was created, he became
an ugly and a miserable creature presently; ugly, because he had lost his
holiness; miserable, because full of guilt and horror; he durst no more draw
near to the most holy inaccessible Majesty, than stubble before the flames: No
man can see his face, (...) deficiuntur.
and live: We all by sin are come short of Gods glory, Romans 3.23. both of the
glory of his Image, and of the glory of his Kingdom. Now unless the Lord be
pleased to exhibit this Image to us through some glass or veil, we must be for
ever both desolate and destitute. And this the Lord has graciously been
pleased to do by the veil of Christ's flesh; he is God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. The glory of God now shines in upon us, and before us, in and from
the face of Jesus Christ, Col. 1.15.
2 Cor. 4.6. Christ is the Image of the invisible God, and he that has seen
him, has seen the Father: So that now by the Incarnation of the Son, there is
a Vision of Gods glory, and a restoration of Gods Image, Ioh. 1.18. No man
has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the
Father, he has declared him.

The glittering beamings of the Invisible and Eternal Glory, did and do shine
most resplendently through the transparent medium of Christ's Humane Nature,
which seen, and taken in by the eye of Faith, do strangely irradiate and
enlighten, beautify and glorify the soul of man, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.
and renew it according to the Image of God, in righteousness and true holiness.

4ly and lastly, Jesus Christ is our Sanctification, by way of influence and
communication: This is more general, and has some connection with, and
dependence upon the former: Ye have received an Unction from the Holy One, i.
e. Christ, etc. Ioh. 1.2.20. This Unction is like that ointment that ran down
from the head of Aaron unto the skirts of his garments, to note the plentiful
effusion of the Spirit on Christ, and from Christ, unto his lowest members.

1. The Spirit of holiness was Christ's right jure proprio, by virtue of the
personal union; so that Christ had a plenitude or fullness of the spirit in him,
like the fullness of a fountain; but to us the spirit belongs by an inferior
union through Christ our Head, So Bishop Down^m in his Justification.
by way of influence from Christ our Head: from the grace of the Spirit is
derived in such proportion, as Christ is pleased to communicate, yet it is the
same holiness for truth and substance: Simile.
As it is the same light which breaks forth in the dawning of the day, with
that which inhereth in the body of the Sun, shining in his strength; it is in
Christ in fullness, in us in measure: The Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 3.18. We are
changed into the same likeness with Christ by the Spirit of the Lord.

2. Of this fullness of the Spirit which is in Christ, believers do receive, and
grace for grace, Ioh. 1.16. As the Child receives member for member from the
Father, and as the paper receives letter for letter from the Press, etc. so a
sanctified soul receives grace for grace, i. e. all manner of grace, exactly
and proportionably from Jesus Christ. The glorious Image of Gods holiness in
Christ, fashioneth and produces it self in the hearts of the faithful; Simile.
as an Image or species of light shining on a glass, does from thence fashion
it self upon a wall by reflection: As the head communicates real influences to
the body, so Jesus Christ, who is both an head of eminence and of influence,
communicates his spirit, grace, light, life, comfort to his Body the Church;
for he that sanctifies, and they that are sanctified, are both of one: As they
are one in Nature, so one in Spirit, and in spiritual likeness also.

For the farther explication and illustration of this deep and illustrious
truth, (viz.) That Jesus Christ is our Sanctification. Before I come to the
definition of Sanctification, Causa (...).
I shall subjoyn these particulars.

Causa (...), quae (...) ^^ritor^a.
1. That the will of God is the inward impulsive cause of our Sanctification. 2.
That the blood of Christ is the moral and meritorious cause of our
Sanctification. Causa materialis.
3. That the holiness of Christ is the material cause. Causa formalis.
4. That the infusion of Holiness, or giving of the Spirit, is the formal cause.
Causa Effici^^s.
5. That the Spirit of Christ is the efficient cause. Caus^ Admin^^trae.
6. That the Word, Ordinances and Faith, are the ministering instrumental causes.
Polan.
Causae exemplares.
7. That the Death and Resurrection of Christ, are the exemplary causes or
patterns. D. Am^^ in (...), Theolog.
8 y and lastly, That the glory of God in the Consecration and Salvation of a
sinful creature, is the supreme end, or final cause of our Sanctification.
1 The principal moving cause.
1. The Will of God is the principal internal moving cause of our
Sanctification, Heb. 10.9, 10. Then, said he, Lo I come to do thy will O God:
He takes away the first. that he may establish the second; that is, he takes
away the first sort of Sacrifices and Propitiations, which was the blood of
Bulls and Goats, etc. and establish the second standing Sacrifice, (which is)
the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ once for all, by the which will we
are sanctified, v. 10. (...).
i. e. it was the good pleasure of the Fathers will, to appoint and accept this
precious Sacrifice for our Justification, Sanctification, and complete
Salvation. This is the will of God, even our Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. This
is the will of his Precept, that Christ Jesus should be our Sanctification;
this is also the will of his Purpose, and Eternal Counsel: Why did God choose us
in Christ before the foundation of the world? the Apostle tells us, that we
should be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. The principal moving cause of our Regeneration, is
the will of God; Of his own will begat he us, etc. 1 Jam. 18. What more clear?
2 The meritorious cause. Omne donum gratiae Dei in Christo est. Ambr in Ephesians.
1. Cau^a efficiens interna propter quam Deus nos regenera^, est meritum,
justitia obedientia Christi. Polan.


2. The blood of Christ is the moral and meritorious cause of our
Sanctification; all blessings and graces come down from the Father of Lights
through the Sun of Righteousness; both grace and glory, holiness and happiness,
flow in to us through the Channel of Christ's blood: The blood of Christ is both
(...), and (...); both the Price of our Redemption, and the Laver of
Regeneration also; as is evident by these Scriptures, Heb. 9.14. How much more
shall the blood of Christ, who by the Eternal Spirit offered up himself without
spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works, etc. 1 John 1.7. The blood
of Christ cleanses from all sin, f om the guilt and filth of sin. Heb. 1.3. He
by himself has purged our sins; Heb. 13.12. And that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, he suffered without the gate. As a price is said to
do that, which a man does by that power the price purchases, so the blood of
Christ is said to cleanse us, because the Office or Power whereby he sanctified
us, was conferred upon him sub intuitu pretii, under the condition of
suffering; for it was necessary, that Remission and Purification should be both
by blood, Morte sua Christus est meritus, resurrection^ efficaciter
^^generationem nobis applicat. Syntag. Polan. p. 467.
Heb. 9.22, 23. Christ by his bloody death merited, impetrated, and obtained of
his Father the spirit of holiness, faith, the word, promises, and all spiritual
blessings, in order to his peoples sanctification, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. Phil. 1.29.
Had it not been for this moral and meritorious cause, (the blood of Christ)
which is the sole foundation of the Spirits efficiency, of the Faiths existence
and instrumentality, of the Word and Promises operation and efficacy, we should
never have felt the efficiency of the Spirit, nor the working of Faith, nor the
effectual operation of the Word and Promises in the Purification of our
Natures, or in the conversion of our souls to God.

This purifying virtue of the blood of Christ was typically held forth by
diverse kinds of offerings, and washings, oblations, and ablutions under the
Law, and other ceremonial observances, which the Apostle has reference to,
Heb. 9.13. The blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling
the unclean, sanctified to the purifying of the flesh; that is, it legally and
carnally sanctified them, and made them externally pure and holy, as to the
Church, into which they were incorporated: But that which was legally and
carnally in the Type, was really, substantially, and spiritually effected in
the Antitype, the sacrifice of Christ's body, typified by that bloody sacrifice
of beasts; as ver. 14. following asserteth; How much more (says he) shall the
blood of Christ, etc.

Thus it is clear, that the blood of Christ is the moral and meritorious cause
of our Sanctification; yea, and the procuring cause of all other blessings,
causes, helps, and means, which by divine order and appointment concur to,
cooperate in the production and progress of our Sanctification.

3. What is the material cause of our Sanctification?

I answer. 3 The material cause.
As the Filiation or Sonship of Christ is the material cause of our Adoption,
and as the full satisfaction of Christ to the Justice of God, is the material
cause of our Reconciliation; and as the perfect righteousness of Christ, as
God-man; is the material cause of our justification, so (I humbly suppose) the
perfect purity of Christ's Humane Nature, by the Hypostatical Union, united to
the divine in one person, and the unmeasurable fullness of the spirit in him, is
the material cause of our Sanctification; all the holiness that is in us, is
but the beaming forth of his holiness, a ray of his glory, a measure of his
spirit, a sprinkling of his Unction, an overflowing of his fullness, for of his
fullness we receive, and grace for grace, Joh. 1.16. In a word, it is the
communication of the Divine Nature, (...). Divine consortes naturae. So
Montanus.
2 Pet. 1.4. The Saints are there said to be partakers of the Divine Nature:
But how? not that we are Christed into Christ, or Godded into God, as some of
late days have most absurdly (if not blasphemously) imagined. We cannot be
partakers of Gods Substance, or Essence, for that is incommunicable to any
creature, but believers partake ( per Christ) of the communicable divine
qualities and perfections, as wisdom, knowledge, righteousness, holiness, etc.
Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. This glorious Image of God we lost in the first, and
have it restored in the second Adam.

Christ received the spirit above measure, we have but some drops or drams of
it; Joh. 3 34.
he was anointed with the Oil of gladness above his fellows, yet for his
fellows, whole Christ was given to us, Isa. 9.6. To us a Child is born, to us a
Son is given: His sanctification also must needs be for us, for our good and
benefit; For their sakes I sanctify my self, (says Christ) that they might be
sanctified by the truth, Joh. 17.19. Holiness in Christ is as the light in the
Sun ever shining, and as water in a living fountain never sailing, S^^ile.
ever running: He is b^th an everflowing, and an overflowing fountain of grace
to us; as it is endless and boundless in Christ, so it is diffusive and
communicative to h s members: J^s s Christ is the Candlestick, from whence the
Golden Pipes do empty the golden oil through themselves, Zech. 4.11, 12. Christ
is this Candlestick; See the Dutch Annotat. on the place.
the two Olive Trees signify his Kingly and Priestly Offices; the Golden Oil,
signifies the gifts and graces of the Spirit: It must needs be so, because it
is the pleasure of the Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19.
What is this fullness? It is all the fullness of the Godhead (...) bodily, i. e.
personally, substantially; for as the Hebrews put souls for persons, as so many
souls went down into Egypt, etc. so the Greeks put bodies for persons. Our Lord
Jesus is his Fathers Gazophylacium, the great Magazine of infinite riches and
treasures. Note here a Climax, yea three gradations, the Godhead, the fullness
of the Godhead; yea, all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in Christ bodily.
Now our holiness is a stream derived from this Fountain, a part or parcel of
this fullness.

4. 4 The formal cause.
What is the formal cause of our Sanctification?

I answer, It Is the infusion of the habits of grace into us, (as the Schoolmen
call them) it is the endowment of the soul with inward holiness: So Mr. Perkins,
It Is the infusion of, or communion with the spirit: So D. Reynolds, It Is the
operation of the spirit dwelling in us, as a spirit of sanctification, Luke
11.13. Joh. 14.16, 17. It Is the deriving or drawing down the holiness that is
in Christ our Head, by the spirit of holiness, who is the Bond of union and
communion between him and us; it is the spirits transforming of us into the
likeness of our Lord Jesus, or the delineation of the Picture of Christ, The
spirit looks directly upon the glorious Image of Christ represented in the
Gospel, and draws exactly the picture thereof in a Saints heart. Mr. Rich.
Vines in Loc. Zech. 13.1.
by the spirit of Christ in the soul of man, 2 Cor. 3.18. Its Synonima's in
Scripture are very emphatical, it is called a quickening, Ephesians. 2.1. a birth,
Joh. 3.3. a forming of Christ, Gal. 4.19. a Regeneration, or begetting again, 1
Pet. 1.3. a new heart, and a new spirit, Ezekiel. 36.26. a renewing of the mind,
Romans 12.2. a new creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. the new man, Ephesians. 4.24. the renewing
of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. And the Divine Nature, and the Image or likeness
of Christ, in respect of its Divine original and transcendent excellency.

The Father sends the Son into the world to work out eternal Redemption for us;
and to that end, to open a fountain in his side and heart for our purification;
he furnished him with an instrumental fullness and fitness, to be the Lord our
righteousness, and our Fountain of grace and holiness; Joh. 17.4 Ephesians 4.8.
the Son finisheth his work, ascends up on high, receives gifts for men, sends
the holy spirit, the sanctifier and comforter, as his Viceroy, to dwell in us,
and abide with us for ever; and not only to dwell in us, as our heavenly
companion and comforter, Joh 14 16 17.
but also to work in us as our Sanctifier, and therefore called. The Spirit of
holiness, Romans 1.4. Joh. 16 14. He shall glorify me (says Christ) for he shall
receive of mine.
He receives from the Son wisdom, righteousness, holiness, all gifts and
graces wherewith Christ was anointed, and bestows them upon the Saints,
annoints them with this Unction, implants in them these gifts and graces,
imprints upon them the Divine Nature, and therewith sanctifies them; which very
impression of the Divine Nature (or likeness of Christ) on the soul of man, by
the energy of the spirit, I conceive to be the very formality of sanctification.

For the better explication and dilucidation of this Argument, give me leave to
show what it is to sanctify.

The word Sanctify has many acceptions, the most famous are these two: 1. To
set apart. 2. To cleanse.


In each of which we suppose something privative, and something positive.

1. When it signifies to set apart, we must conceive, not only a setting a
thing or a person apart from a common or profane use, but also its or his
actual dedication to holy uses, or setting apart for God, which is the proper
notion of it.

2. When it signifies to cleanse, you must not only conceive a purgation from
filthiness, but also a plantation of the seed of grace, called the seed of God.
The abolition of natural corruption is the privative part; the renovation of
Gods Image is the positive part of Sanctification.

1. To sanctify, is to set apart, and dedicate. Thus Gods people are set
apart, and dedicated by God, and for God.

1. Before time. 2. In time.
1. Before time. Psa. 1.4.
They are set apart by Gods Decree to be an holy seed to himself in and by Christ, separate from the reprobate and perishing world, to be Vessels of Honor;
whereas the Reprobates are called Vessels of wrath, and dishonor, M. Buroughs
in his Saints Treasury.
Psa. 1.4. Him that is godly, God has set apart for himself; i. e. as a good
man says, Not only actually set apart in vocation, but vertually set apart by
God from eternity in Election, Ephesians. 1.4. Having chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, etc.

2. In time. They are regenerated, called, or actually sanctified, or set apart
to be Vessels of Honor, sanctified, and meet for the Masters service,
Wollebius in his Body of Divinity.
2 Timothy 2.21. Sanctification is an actual Election, by which we are set apart
from the miserable and vain world, to act for God by Jesus Christ, and to seek
the things that make for his glory. Thus by Regeneration we are called his
First Fruits, which under the Law were the Lords portion, Jam. 1.18. Of his own
will begat he us, by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of the first
fruits of his new creatures; Joh. 3.3. (...).
as they are born from above, so they are born for above; they have heavenly
affections, and heavenly conversations, and shall have heavenly Mansions. Joh.
14 2.
The Saints of God, among other Titles, are called an holy Nation, a Royal
Priesthood, and a Peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2.9. The Priests of old were men
consecrated to Minister in Gods presence. Now

1. This Consecration infers an holy preciseness, and peculiar singularity in
the Saints, to keep themselves unspotted from the world, Jam. 1.28.

2. As God does consecrate the Saints, so they themselves having received grace
from above, do willingly dedicate and consecrate themselves to God. They
present their bodies, i. e. their persons, (the body being put Synechdochically
for the whole man) as an holy and living sacrifice, Romans 12.1. And for this
dedication, the Lord calls, when he says, My Son, give me thine heart, etc. he
is pleased to call it by the name of a gift, when it is his due debt; and
because our free consent is a necessary fruit of his free grace, every gracious
soul does voluntarily surrender or give up it self to God, (as the Macedonians
did) 2 Cor. 8.5. Thus in the first place, to sanctify is to set apart, and
dedicate to an holy use.

2. To sanctify, is to cleanse, together with its positive act, to renew,
endow, or adorn with grace: The privative part is cleansing, the positive part
is adorning.

First, I shall consider the privative part of Sanctification, as it is a
cleansing work.

As the word Sanctify signifies to separate, so there is a difference between
the Saints, and others; but as it signifies to cleanse, so there is a
difference between the Saints, and themselves.

1. They differ from others, because they are a people set apart to live and
act for God, whether they eat or drink, buy or sell, they do all for God, that
is, with respect to his glory, 1 Cor. 10.31. and so they are distinct from the
men of the world, who are merely biased by their own principles, swayed by
their own interests, and act for Carnal Self in all they do.

2. Sanctification makes a difference between them and themselves, inter them
unregenerate, and themselves regenerate; they were filthy before, but washen
now; impure before, but holy now; Lions before, Lambs now; Swine before, but
Doves now: May not we say to, and of, the best of Saints that are extant, as
the Apostle speaks of the converted Corinthians? 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of
you; i. e. some of you had been Idolaters, Adulterers, Drunkards, Covetous,
etc. but now ye are washed, justified, and sanctified in the Name, and by the
Spirit of our Lord Jesus; that is, ye are not the same men and women that ye
were before, the grace of God having changed both their relations, and their
qualities. As a man, lately converted, answered his old Companions, when
solicited to excess of Riot, Ego non sum Ego, (...).
Now I am not I: As sin makes a wonderful cursed change in and upon the soul,
from good to bad, yea, to stark naught; so grace makes a wonderful blessed
change in and upon the soul, from the worst, to the best relation and condition
that the rational creature can attain unto. The deep and ingrained pollution of
our nature is purged and done away.

1. Inchoatively, and generally, at our grand bathing in Regeneration, or first
conversion, Tit. 3.5. when the soul does begin at first to wash it self in the
Fountain of Christ's blood, that Fountain opened for sin, Z^ch 13.1.
and for uncleanness; that is the first cleansing, then the Leprosy begins to
be abated, and the soul to be made white in the blood of the Lamb; then sin
has its mortal blow.

2. Gradually, and progressively, by degrees; the Image of Christ is drawn
brighter and brighter, goes on from glory to glory in the soul of man, by the
Pourtraicture of the spirit, 2 Cor. 3.18. and as the righteousness of
Justification, so the righteousness of Sanctification also is revealed, and
carried on from faith to faith: The path of the just is a shining light, Pro.
4.18.
that shines more and more unto the perfect day: As Naaman by the Prophets
order went down, 2 Kin. 5.10.14.
and washed himself seven times in the streams of Jordan; so the sinful soul of
man must go down believingly, and wash it self in the blood of Christ, and in
the water of the spirit, in the stream of this Jordan, if ever it will be
clean. Christ washed his Disciples feet, Joh. 13.11, 12. alluding to the custom
of the Jews, who wearing Sandals, and dirtying their feet daily, were wont to
wash their feet daily: So every day, while we converse in and with the world,
we contract dirt and filth daily, we must be therefore washing off the dirt, by
the renewed acts of faith and repentance daily; we ought to make recourse daily
to the blood, spirit, word, and promises of Christ for our Justification, and
thereby cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1.

3. Totally, or wholly, that is at our dissolution, when we shall be glorified,
when the body of flesh shall lie in the dust of death, then the body of sin
shall lie down with it, then the souls of the Saints shall be presented
glorious, without spot, or wrinkle, be pure from sin, and perfect in holiness.
Now through grace, the Saints are freed from the guilt and dominion of sin, but
at death they are perfectly free from the being of it: As a worthy man well
observes, D. Manton in M. Loves Funeral Sermon.
That as sin brought death into the world with it, so death, by way of revenge,
carries out sin: It Is probable, the time will be in the very moment of
expiring, (says the same Author.) As the soul in the moment of its conjunction
with the body, became sinful; so the soul in the moment of its disjunction from
the body, becomes perfectly sanctified, and is presented perfect by Christ to
God; for no unclean thing shall enter into the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27. Thus
much for the privative part of Sanctification, as it is a cleansing work.

2. Something (very briefly) of the positive work of Sanctification, as it is a
decking or adorning the soul with grace; under the Law, as there was an Altar
for Oblation, so there was a Laver for Ablution; and the Priests were commanded
to wash in the great Laver, before they came to minister at the Altar, Exodus
30.18, 19, 20. As the Oblation, or Offering, did note Justification, so the
ablution, or washing, did note our Sanctification. And moreover, the legal
Priests were to be adorned with gorgeous attire, with glorious garments, when
they appeared before the Lord; which garments of glory and beauty, Exodus 28.
without controversy, did figure out, the glorious graces of Christ, and all
true Christians; for as Christ is their King and Priest, so they (through the
riches of grace) have Communion with him in his Offices, and therefore called a
Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. To be sanctified, is more than to be purified;
for besides the expulsion of sin in Sanctification, there is an infusion of
grace, a new disposition and frame of soul, called a new heart, and a new
spirit, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. (i. e.) a new mind, new apprehensions, a new will,
new desires, new affections, from whence there follows newness of life and
conversation.

1. There is a new heart, that is conformity to Gods Nature, when the heart of
man is like the heart of God, as David is said to be a man after Gods own
heart: 2 Pet. 1.4.
Conformity to the Divine Nature, is this new heart: The Nature of God, is the
pattern of that Sanctification which is wrought in the heart of man.

2. There is a new life, that is, our conformity to Gods Law, or revealed Will,
whose will is our Sanctification, 1 These. 4.3. An holy heart breathes and
breaks out into an heavenly conversation, Phil. 3.20. Our conversation is in
heaven: The first is our habitual holiness, the second is our actual. The sum
is this, our habitual conformity to the Nature or Image of God, and our actual
conformity to the Will of God, (thereon depending) is formally our
Sanctification. Thus I have showed what it is to sanctify, and have opened the
more eminent acceptations of it: We come now to the fifth thing propounded.

5. The Spi it of Christ is the efficient cause of our Sanctification.

The work of Creation is commonly ascribed to God the Father, the work of
Redemption to God the Son, and the work of Sanctification to God the Holy
Spirit; yet Sanctification being a work ad extra, is common to all the persons.

1. It is ascribed to God the Father, Jude 1. to them which are called and
sanctified of God the Father. 1 Pet. 1.3. Blessed be God the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant mercy, has begotten us again
unto a lively hope, etc.

2. Christ is said to sanctify us; He is made of God to us Sanctification, 1
Cor. 1.2. To the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified
in Christ Jesus, Heb. 13.12. Wherefore Jesus, that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, suffered without the gate.

3. The Spirit is said to sanctify: Hence these phrases, the sanctification of
the Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.2. 2 These. 2.13, 14. and the Spirit of holiness, Romans 1.4.
The Sanctification of the Spirit, is as necessary as the mercy of the Father,
or the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus.

Christ by the redundancy of his Merit has impetrated, and obtained the Spirit
of the Father, to sanctify those whom he means to save, to purify, and make
them meet for glory, whom he died for, and justified by his blood,

The Inchoation is from the Father, the Dispensation is by the Son, the
Consummation by the Spirit: It Is from the love of the Father, and by virtue of
the Merit of the Son, that we are sanctified; but it is properly the Office, and
the distinct personal operation of the spirit of holiness to sanctify; and it
must be the mighty power of the eternal spirit, that converts or sanctifies,
because it is such a power as is commensurate and proportionate to the raising
of the dead, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. (...), Supereminens magnitudo. Montan.
called the exceeding greatness of his power, etc. We are not sanctified or
converted, as the Papists and Arminians say, by a moral suasion, or by the bare
improvement of our own free will, nor by the accession of some additional help
to Nature, but by the most strong, and yet most sweet efficacy of the Almighty
Spirit, Psa. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power; or as
some render it, in the day of thy Armies; it is therefore called a Regeneration,
In die Copiarum. So M. Ainsworth.
a begetting a soul again, it is a new Creation, it is a Vivification, or
quickening a man before dead in sins and trespasses, not languishing and
declining, but in a moral sense stark dead; nay, it is a Resurrection, a rising
out of the grave of sin and death: All these works of wonder, or rather this
one mysterious work of Sanctification, illustrated by these Metaphors, bespeaks
no less than the Almighty power of a God, Phil. 3.21
who is able to subdue all things to himself.

1. It Is a Regeneration, or a begetting again, 1 Pet. 1.3. Jam. 1.18.

2. It Is a Creation, Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship, created in Christ
Jesus to good works: 2 Cor. 5.17. He that is in Christ is a new creature:
Behold, (says Christ) I make all things new.

3. It Is a vivification, or quickening, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were
dead in sins and trespasses. A natural man is both legally and morally dead,
till the Spirit of Life breaths upon him, and quickens him, Joh. 5.25. That
promise is still in fulfilling now, that the dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live.

4. It Is a Resurrection, Col. 3.1. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek the
things that are above; yea, it is more, a kind of con-session, or sitting
together with Christ, Ephesians. 2.6. And has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus. If we live to God, we l ve the
life of heaven: Now to regenerate, to create, to make all things new, to revive
a man dead, to raise up a man out of the grave (as Lazarus) both dead and
buried; all these are the Acts of Omnipotency, the works of a God, and all
those works are done in this one work, by the invincible efficiency of the
Spirit.

6. The word and faith are the Ministering and Instrumental causes of our
Sanctification. The Spirit is called the Spirit of Faith. Aristotle calls the
hand (...), the instrument of instruments.
Faith being the gift of God, and wrought by the operation of the Spirit,
unites the soul to Christ, the Fountain of Holiness, and Head of Influence, and
having united the soul to him, continually receives supplies from him: It Is the
hand of the soul, that useful instrument, whereby we apprehend Christ, and
whereby we draw down virtue from Christ. Hence, as an Organ or Instrument, it
is said to purify, Acts 15.9. Having purified their hearts by faith. As Faith
has the Noblest Objects, so Faith for its use and office here, is the Noblest
grace; Faith indeed infused and created in us by the Spirit, See Dr. Owens
death of death, p. 126. Simile.
is commonly called the Mother grace, and is it self formally a great part of
our sanctification. As the woman sick of the Bloody Issue put forth her hand,
and touching the Hem of Christ's garment, drew virtue from him, and was healed:
So that soul to whom Christ has given the hand of Faith, does put it forth,
make application of the Merits, and mediation of Jesus Christ for his
Purification, and does in truth draw in virtue by that application, 1 John 3.3.
He that has this hope does purify himself, even as he is pure. Faith exerts
the office of all the senses, and if all the members it is the eye, the hand,
the mouth the foot of the Soul, etc. as might be proved easily, if I should
exspatiate: As Christ is all in all to the soul in the sanctification of it, so
Fai h, (of all graces) is all in all in the outgoing of the soul to Christ, and
in the Incomes of grace from him.

2. As Faith is the Instrumental, Causa Administra. Evangelium est medium, ce^
instrumentum, quo Spiritus sanctus efficaciam suam exerit, and fidem, and
conversionem operatur. Syntag. Polan.
so the Word is the ministering cause or medium of sanctification, Psa. 19.7.
The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul; the Law in all its
Exhortations, Commands, Consolations, Prohibitions, Comminations and Promises,
is a perfect Law, serving as a perfect means for conversion: But the Promissory
and Consolatory part ^h reof, is p^incipally more purifying: Having these
promises, let us cleanse our selves, etc. 2 Cor. 7.1. 2 Pet. 1.4. The Gospel,
or Law of Faith, is vehiculum spiritus, the Chariot in which the spirit rides
to give your souls a gracious visit, Gal. 3.2. Received ye the spirit by the
works of the Law, Fides quae creditur. He that makes the Clouds his Chariots,
mak^s also his Word, his Ordinances, and his Ministers, his Chariots, wherein
he ^^des down into these lower parts, to give the world a meeting. Mr. Al^ens
Heaven Opened. p. 172.
or by the hearing of faith, i. e. by the hearing of the Gospel, which is the
doctrine of faith. The sanctifying spirit accompanying the holy Word; then the
Word is sanctifying, Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them by thy truth, thy Word is
truth. When the Gospel is spoken and heard in the evidence and demonstration of
the Spirit, and of Power, then is the Arm of the Lord revealed, Isa. 53.1. then
the Word of God works and grows mightily for sanctification and salvation; then
the blind eyes are opened, then are the captives released, then are the dead
raised, then are the lepers cleansed, then are the devils dispossessed, then
are filthy souls washed, unholy souls sanctified.

7. Causa Exemplaris. The Exemplar, or Pattern, to which our Sanctification, in
the two parts of it, (viz.) our mortification and vivification is conformable,
is the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ; by virtue of the force and
energy whereof, through the operation and application of the spirit of faith,
our sanctification is effected. The Apostle Paul holds forth a clear Analogy,
or proportion, between our dying to sin, and Christ's dying for sin; and between
our newness of life, or vivification, and Christ's Resurrection, Romans 6.4 5, 6,
7, 8. where ye may see at large the parallel between them. And the Apostle
Peter tells us, We are begotten again unto a lively hope by the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead.

8ly and lastly. The glory of Gods Grace in the Consecration and Salvation of a
sinful creature, is the supreme end, or final cause of our Sanctification;
there is a mutual intimate coherence, and relation of these three to o^e
another.

1. The glory of Gods Grace is the Supreme end, as of our Election in Christ,
so of our Sanctification by him. All the Acts of Gods love in Christ, whether
immanent or transient, they are all for the praise of the glory of his grace,
both in this, and in the other world, Ephesians. 1.4.6. And specifically
Sanctification has a direct tendency unto, and termination in the glory of
God. When we keep our bodies and spirits chaste, and holy, we are then said to
glorify God, 1 Cor. 6.20. Glorify God in your bodies, and in your spirits,
which are Gods.

2. Consecration. This is (finis qui) the end for which (quoad nos) we are
sanctified, and necessary (necessitate medii) to our Salvation, Jam. 1.18. We
are begotten by the Will of God, that we might be a kind of the first fruits of
his creatures; that is, as Beza, Polanus, and others observe, that we might be
consecrated and devoted to the Lord, separated from the common lump of mankind,
as an holy offering; at the first fruits under the Law were presented to the
Lord, as an holy Offering, as the Lords own portion.

3. Salvation. This is our ultimate end: the Apostle Peter acquaints us, 1 Pet.
1.3. We are begotten again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection of Jesus
Christ, etc. What is that lively hope we are begotten and born to in
Regeneration? he tells ye in ver. 4. Even to an inheritance incorruptible,
und^filed, that fades not away, reserved in heaven for you. This incomparable
Inheritance, See Dr. Owens Death of Death, p. 119, 120, 121, 122, etc.
dignified with all these transcendent Epithets, is comprehended in one word,
Salvation, 2 These. 2.13, 14. God has from the beginning chosen us to
Salvation, that is the end, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of
the truth; that is the way and means.

Thus having cleared our way, now we come to the plain and full definition of
Sanctification.

Sanctification (in the sense of the Text, and of this Tract) is a new inward
habitual frame of grace, infused by the power of the Eternal Spirit into the
heart of a justified person, united to Christ, whereby he is renewed after the
Image of Christ, in knowledge, righteousness, and true holiness; and thereby
enabled to die to sin, and to live to God, for the praise of Gods glorious
grace in his Consecration and Salvation.

This definition is the sum of the former discourse; every part and branch of
this description has been already proved in the aforegoing particulars,
therefore I shall not actum agere, do over the same things again; only give me
leave to acquaint you, Holiness is not any single grace alone but a
Constellations conjunction of all graces together in the Soul.
our Sanctification, or Inherent Holiness, consists in these two things.

1. In the infusing of holy principles, divine qualities, or supernatural
graces into the soul, such as the Apostle mentions in Gal. 5.22, 23. But the
fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
faith, meekness, temperance, against such there is no Law. These habits of
grace, which are severally distinguished, by the names of faith, love, hope,
meekness, patience, temperance, etc. are nothing else but the new nature, the
new creature, the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. 1 John 3.9 2 Cor. 1.21. 1 John 2.27.
These seeds of holiness, these habits of grace, are those sweet ointments
wherewith all must be anointed that ever expect to be glorified: Though men
may talk much of God, and brag much of their Interest in heaven and happiness,
yet without these habits and seeds of holiness (I am sure) they shall never
reap a crop of blessedness.

2. Holiness lies in the use and lively exercise of those supernatural graces,
or holy habits in the soul: Holy habits must be brought forth into holy acts,
gracious habits are, and and must be attended with gracious motions, gracious
operations, Act. 10.35. 1 John 1.3.7. 2 Pet. 1.8. Tit. 2.12. (...). Eth. c. 1.
and a gracious Conversation; outward works must be suitable to inward habits;
as the Philosophers speak concerning the summum bonum, it consists (say they)
neque in Idearum contemplatione, neque in virtutis habitu, neither in the
contemplation of Idea's, nor in the habit of virtue: But the summum bonum, or
chief good, (say they) is the operation or action of the reasonable soul,
according to the best and most perfect virtue in a perfect life.

I am sure, Sanctification, which is the true felicity and beauty of the soul
of man, consists in both (viz.) in internal holy principles, and in external
holy practices. Holy habits are golden Talents that must be employed and
improved; they are the Candles of the Lord set up in us, Where there are the
seeds, there will appear the Flowers of Holiness.
not to idle by, but to work and and walk by: Where is holiness of disposition?
there is, and will be holiness of Conversation: An holy heart expresses it
self in an holy life.

In the next place I shall endeavor, (as I promised) to show the difference
between Justification and Sanctification, and then the transcendent
excellencies of Sanctification, as appears by the honorable and excellent
titles the Scriptures put upon it, and cloathe it with them, as its proper
Robes, and due Ornaments. And then something as to the Concomitants, adjuncts,
and fruits of sanctification. And then lastly, Close all with Application.

How Justification and Sanct fication d^ffer.
1. Wherein Justification and Sanctification differs.

1. They differ in their kind. 2. In order of Nature. 3. In the manner, or
form, 4. They differ in degrees.
1 In genere.
1. They differ in their kind. The righteousness of Justification is in the
Category of Relation; the righteousness of Sanctification is in the predicament
of quality: Justification is a change of a man's Relation and estate, not a
change of a man's person; it is a change without a man, or upon a man, not a
change within a man: But Sanctification is not properly a Relative, but a real
inherent change; not a change without a man, but a change within a man; it is
the^^ p^^sion of sin, and the infusion of grace or holiness into the soul of
Man.

2. They differ in the order of nature; 2 In ordine Naturae.
in order of nature (Divines hold) justification precedes sanctification,
though in order of time, they are both wrought together. In the description of
the order of causes, Romans 8.30. the Link of Justification is set before
Glorification in that golden Chain: Beza, Polanus, M. Jeremy Buroughs, cum
multis aliis, etc.
The best Expositors I have met withal, (and many I have read upon the place)
do generally conclude, that sanctification is essentially (though not
gradually) the same with Glorification, and must of necessity be included in
it, because sanctification is the seed, glorification is the flower;
sanctification is the first fruits, glorification is the full crop or vintage;
sanctification is the Newborn Babe, Ephesians. 4.13.
Glorification is the perfect man arrived to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.

Sanctification is like the dawning of the day, Cum sol medium superaverat axim.
like the early glittering and guilding of the Mountains by the Sunbeams; but
Glorification is the Sun shining in the Meridian, in his greatest strength and
splendor: The difference between Glorification and Sanctification is not
specifical, but gradual: We are justified by the Merit of Christ from the
guilt, and punishment of sin, in order of Nature, before we are sanctified by
the spirit from the pollution and filth of sin, and endowed with inward
holiness, though in order of time, Qui justifi^^ntur sanctific^ntur.
Hae gratiae individuo nexu cohaerent, as Calvin speaks, they are wrought
together, as the most precious effects of the free grace of God through the
blood of Christ.

3 Modo ceu forma.
3. They differ in their form. Take three Notes.

1. In Justification, a believer by the hand of Faith receives Christ, and
lays hold upon him as the Lord his righteousness, and inwrappeth his soul with
this glorious Robe, and Garment of Salvation; but in Sanctification Faith is
considered as a new quality, formally a part of our holiness, and as the root
and beginning of good works. In Justification Faith is considered as an useful
instrument, in Sanctification as a special grace, or new quality.

2. In Justification sin is taken away, in respect of guilt, Ne imputetur.
and condemnation, that it be not imputed; but in Sanctification sin is taken
away, Ne regnet.
as to the dominion, or reigning power of it, that it may not reign; as in
glorification, (which is the perfection of sanctification) sin, all the
remainders of it shall be quite taken away, Ne restet.
that it shall not exist, or have any being left.

3. In Justification Christ's righteousness is imputed to us; in Sanctification,
a new inherent righteousness is implanted in us; in the first our sins are
pardoned, our persons absolved, acquitted, and accepted, through the imputation
of Christ's righteousness, Romans 4.6, 7. By the second our souls are renewed, our
Natures changed, decked and adorned with the graces of the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.23,
24. by the participation of Christ's holiness. Thus Justification and
Sanctification do differ in their form.

4. 4 In gradibus.
Justification and Sanctification do differ in degrees. 1. Justification is one
individual perfect act, contingent to all the godly: Some of our best Divines
do hold, that Justification is transacted in our first union and incorporation
into Christ, when the pardon of sin is sealed to a believer at once: How at
once? Bishop Downam on Justification. Burgess upon Justification.
I answer with Reverend Downam, at once, as excluding degrees; our
justification is perfect at first as well as at last: Or as Learned Burgess, at
once, as connoting a state we are put into, upon our believing; And indeed
thereupon, some godly learned persons take Justification for one continued act,
from our vocation to our glorification, and in that sense we are justified but
once.

A justified person is rectus in curia, acquitted by God the Judge of all, in
foro coeli, he has shot the Gulf, he is gone beyond the Gunshot of
condemnation, (...), Romans 8.1. to him there is not one condemnation: But
Sanctification is an inchoate and successive act, carried on by degrees, and
compared with Justification; it is but imperfect, (though it be an immortal
principle, an incorruptible seed, growing up and tending to perfection) for
here we know but in part, we see but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 11, 12.
we see as in a glass darkly. Now the dust is in our eyes, much blindness and
darkness in the eyes of the most enlightened, our understandings are partly
light, and partly darkness; our wills are partly flesh, and partly spirit: we
find, do we not? a contrary Principle working, a contrary Law rebelling, that
when we would do good, evil is present with us, Romans 7.21. There is a Law in
the members, Romans 7.23
and a Law of the mind: There is a double Enemy carrying on a double interest
in one soul; there is a Jacob and an Esau, struggling and striving for Mastery
in one heart; there remains the being of sin, concupiscence, evil lusting and
motions, many sins of ignorance, negligence, and of invincible infirmity in the
Saints; for whilst they abide in earthly, they abide in sinful Tabernacles:
The bitter moans, groans, complaints, tears, together with the sad lapses of
the Saints, do sadly evidence the truth of this, 1 Kin. 8.46. Jam. 3.2. 1 Ioh.
1.8. Eccl. 7.20. As a child, as soon as born, is a true man, though not a
perfect man, he has all the parts of a man, not the strength and stature.
besides the ample testification of many Scriptures: The Saints that are
sanctified in Christ Jesus, are in a sense perfect, and in a sense imperfect,
they are perfect as to perfection of parts, every part and faculty of soul and
body is sanctified, and yet they are in a sense imperfect, (i. e.) as to
perfection of degrees: thus the word perfect is differently to be understood,
Phil. 3.12.15. In the 12th ver. it notes the fullest measure, or highest Achme
of perfection attainable by a Christian: In the 15th ver. it notes sincerity o^
integrity, which is a Christians Evangelical perfection. God (according to the
tenor of the New Covenant) accepting his person in Christ as perfect, (viz.)
in and through Christ's perfect righteousness and intercession; and thereupon a
believers gracious desires and endeavors for performances, his will for the
deed, and his sincerity for perfection.

Perfection of degrees being too great a privilege for a Militant estate, is
reserved as one of the peculiar Flowers or Jewels of the Triumphant Crown for
the Saints to wear in their Fathers Kingdom: (...). A precious jewel which
nothing can defile, or dull its shining; so is the state above.
wherefore among the singular distinguishing Epithetes given by the Spirit of
God to our inheritance, this is one, an inheritance undefiled, 1 Pet. 1.4.

By our Justification now we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. all our sins past
and present are actually pardoned, and this favor received, is a pledge of
assurance, that for the future, by applying our selves to Christ, we shall
receive remission of daily sins; and that at the last day we shall be for ever
free from all accusations and condemnation. Our Justification is perfect now;
(though the most solemn pronunciation of it in a magnificent manner, is the
work of the great day) but our Sanctification is inchoate, imperfect and
progressive here; by the supplies of the Spirit of Grace, there must be a going
on from faith to faith, from strength to strength; but it shall be most
complete and perfect at Christ's appearing: the Picture of Christ will be
gloriously drawn, even to the life then; We know, Phil. 1.6.
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.

2. The righteousness of justification is equally perfect, and equally imputed
to all believers; my meaning is, all believers are alike justified, one as well
and as much as another, the weak as much as the strong, the newborn Babes so
much as the old Fathers, the feeblest Lambs as much as the Hee-goats of the
Flock; he that has the least, as well as he that has the greatest measure of
the Spirit: Gemmam amplectitur Gigas, and puerulus; licet Gigas fortius eam
amplectitur, quam puerulus, tamen manet gemma aeque preciosa. Luther
A Giant holds a jewel, and so does a Child; the jewel is the same, though
the Giant holds it with a stronger hand: So here, the righteousness of
justification is the same, though the faith of believers is not the same, some
being weak, and others strong in faith: As to inherent righteousness, there is
much difference; but as to imputed righteousness, all the Saints are equal,
none have purer linen than the rest. A believer, of the lowest form in Christ's
School, of the meanest stature or growth in Christ, of the weakest and dullest
capacity in the mysteries of the Kingdom of Christ, So M. Buroughs on the
Beatitudes, Matthew. 5.
is in point of justification, equal with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses,
Samuel, and David, equal with all the most glorious Patriarchs, Prophets,
Martyrs, and eminent Saints that are. Thou (if a believer) art as much
acquitted from sin, and as much accepted as righteous in the sight of God, and
as undoubted an Heir of, and have as true a title to the Inheritance of heaven,
as the most famous Saints that are. But there is a great deal of difference
among the Sain s themselves, as to sanctification; some Saints are children,
some are strong men, 1 Cor. 15.41.
some are fathers; one star excels another star in glory: There are stellae
primae and secundae magnitudinis, etc. Some Saints are more sluggish and dull
of hearing, more dull and dark in understanding, others are more acute and
quick; some are younglings, weaklings, and have need of milk, (viz.) the
principles of the Oracles of God; others are strong men, and have need of meat,
can dive into, and digest the deepest mysteries revealed in the Gospel, Heb.
5.12, 13, 14.
God having given them senses exercised to discern both good and evil: Some are
more dead to duty, and in duty, others are more vigorous, more fervent in
spirit, and lively; some walk more humbly with God, more holily before God,
more exactly and venerably before the world, than others do.

Some do much fully and stain their garments, others (comparatively) walk in
white, and keep their garments clean, and also keep themselves unspotted from
the world, Jam. 1. ult.

Thus great is the difference between Saint and Saint in sanctification, Cant.
5.10 My beloved is white and ruddy, white in the glory of his Deity, ruddy in
the preciousness of his Humanity, and white in the beauty of his purity* and
ruddy in the blood of his Oblation. Owens Communion. p. 52, 53.
as great is the difference between man and man in growth and stature; but in
justification, the infant of days, and man of gray hairs, the shrub, and the
Cedar, the smaller, and greater stars, the Saints of all dimensions and
denominations, of all ages and statures, are equally perfect, and shine equally
bright and glorious, because the glory of that righteousness is not inherent in
them, as the light is inherent in the body of the Sun; but this robe of
righteousness (so it is called, Isai. 61.10.) is imputed to them, and put upon
them by the Sun of righteousness, their Elder Brother, who wove this garment of
Sunbeams for them out of his own Mediatorial holiness, both in life and death.

Thus you have had some representation or Adumbration, something shadowed out,
of the difference between Justification and Sanctification: Our knowledge of
these mysteries ought to be distinct, and clear, and not intricate and
confused, for the clearer our knowledge is, the stronger and greater will our
comfort be. The great Apostle handles these two great Doctrines, (viz.)
Justification and Sanctification, distinctly, and in order. First he begins
with Justification, and treats on that Argument throughout the 3, 4, and 5th
Chap. to the Romans. Then he falls upon the Doctrine of Sanctification, and
insists on that necessary argument, throughout the 6, 7, and 8th Chap. to the
Romans, Pareus.
as a German Divine well observes. And in this method, since I have pitched upon
this Text, I have endeavored, or made an Essay to handle them, beginning with
Justification first, expressed by its Synonima, in the Text righteousness, and
then proceeded to sanctification afterward.

Let thus much suffice for the critical differences between Justification and
Sanctification.

We now come in the next place, to the next general propounded to be spoken to,
(viz.) to the excellency of Sanctification, illustrated by the high and
Honorable Enc^miums, wherewith we find it dignified in the Scriptures, in
which, (as in a glass (...) Mirror) you may behold the incomparable beauty and
worth of holiness.

1. Holiness is the N me of God, Isa. 57.15. Thus says the High and lofty One,
that inhabiteth Eternity, whose name is Holy, I dwell in the high and holy
place, etc. Gods Name is holy, Psa. 111.9. Holy and Reverend is his Name. How
often is he called Holy One, and the Holy One of Israel in the Scriptures? His
holiness is himself, when he swears by his Holiness; (as Psa. 89.35. Once have
I sworn by my holiness, Quicquid est in Deo, Deus est.
that I will not lie unto David) he swears by himself; for whatsoever is in
God, is God: God is essentially, infinitely, and primitively holy, the Saints
only by participation of his holiness, they are called godly from God,
Christians from Christ, and Saints from the sanctification of the Holy Spirit:
The chosen Generation are an holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. they partake of Gods Name
(Holiness.)

2. It is called the Seed of God, 1 John 3.9. (...), peccatum non operatur, or,
peccato non dat operam. As Beza (i. e.) does not make sin his work and
business. 1 Pet. 1.3.
whosoever is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him,
etc. And this seed, (viz.) the Word of God, (i. e.) of which we are begotten
and born again, is incorruptible or immortal, 1 Pet. 1.23. Jam. 1.18.
Sanctification by these Texts, and elsewhere, is held out by the Metaphor of
Generation. God the Father of Spirits, is the Spiritual Father that begets a
soul to himself in Christ, the Word is the Seed of God, of which the soul is
begotten again, ^he Ordinances are the Bed wherein the soul is begotten, Can.
1.16. also our Bed is green, (viz.) flourishing Ordinances. Holiness is a
Divine Seed.

3. Holiness is the Will and Word of God, or rather the Will of God revealed in
his Word: The word of God is the signification of his will, and it is the Royal
Mandatory will of God, that we should be holy, 1 These. 4.3. This is the will of
God, even your sanctification, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. As he which has called you is
holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation; for it is written, be ye
holy, because I am holy. 'Twas the great Honor of King David, that he served
his Generation, (...) fa^^et omnes vol^^tates meas.
according to the will of God, Acts 13.22. yea, he fulfilled all Gods wills,
for the Greek is plural. So it is the highest honor of any creature, as well as
duty, whether of Angel or man, to fulfill the wills of God, the whole pleasure
of his will, especially his main design, and great command, in being holy.

4. Holiness is the work of God: All Gods works (as in Creation and Providence)
are like himself, honorable and glorious, so the Psalmist calls them, Ps. 111.2,
3. and it is our bounden duty to consider, and admire them: But here that old
rule holds good, Operari sequitar esse.
the work is like unto the worke^; next to the highest of all Gods works, viz.
the Incarnation of the Son of God, the second person in the Trinity, the work
of sanctification, without controversy, is the most great and glorious, as
appears by these Scriptures, 2 Cor. 5.5. He that has wrought us for the
self-same thing, is God. This is called by way of eminency, Gods workmanship,
Ephesians. 2.10. We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
etc. Holiness is the special, peculiar work of the holy God.

5. Holiness is the very Image of God, and this is more than all the former:
The s ul as a spirit may be said (in a sense) to b^th^ mage of God; but the
soul, as qualify wi h grace, or adorned with knowledge, wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, Col 3.10. Ephesians 4.24.
(in which the Image of God omisteth) is the most lively likeness, and Image of
God in the world: By these graces we should show forth Gods virtues, 1 Pet.
2.9. It Is in the Greek virtues, and not prai^es. Now note: (...), virtutes.
An Image represents a thing in its highest excellency; an image does not
represent the legs, feet, or inferiou^ parts of a man, but his countenance,
head, face, breast, the most Noble parts: So our sanctification, or inherent
righ^eousness, represents God in his chiefest ^x^elency, as he is glorious in
holiness, Exodus 15.11. In the works of Creation, and Providence, we see the
footsteps, at most, the back-parts of the Almighty; but in the Saints we see
his face or Image, though not perfectly drawn, and to the life. An holy soul
represents God in the most lively way, Simile.
as the Image of a man in his child is more lively seen than in a piece of
wood, or stone; so the Image of God is more lively seen, and more gloriously
drawn in the hearts of his Saints (next to Christ, Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3.
who is the Image of the Invisible God,) etc. than in all the creatures in the
world besides.

6. Holiness is the life of God, and this is m re, a man may see his Image, but
no man can see his life. Grace is called the life of God, Ephesians 4.18. Being
alienated from the life of God. N w w at is G ds ^i^e? and what is a Saints
life? Go s life consists in this, in willing himself the chiefest and high^st
good, and in acting for his own glory, as them ^m^te end, Vita est in se
reflexio
and in ordering all things to this blessed end; this is the excellency of the
life of God; and a Saint (through grace) lives this life, he propounds God to
be his chiefest good, and the glory of God, as the utmost end of all his
actings, and the w ll of God revealed in the Word, he makes his Rule, and
drives on all his designs to this end: And this is the excellency of the life
of Sanctification which a Saint (in his measure) lives; he acts from right
principles by a right line, to a right end; the perfection of which life the
blessed spirits live in heaven.

7. Sanctification or holiness is the Nature of God; 2 Pet. 1.4.
we are said to be (...), partakers, or Communicants of the Divine Nature, a
very high expression. This place I have already opened, and cleared it of
absurdities: By Divine Nature, in a word is meant, the Divine qualities, etc.
Grace is nothing else but the reflection, or the sparkling forth of the Divine
Nature that is in God himself; it is a ray from his glory, a beam from his Sun;
every Saint is a Diamond of Christ's own pointing, shining with light and luster
(in some measure) like himself: One spark of this Divine Nature is of greater
worth and value, than rubies, than the Topaz of Ethiopia (in a word) than all
the treasures of the earth; nil, to be compared to it.

8. Sanctification is the Glory of God in the soul of man, which is higher yet
than all the former, (...), deficiuntur.
Romans 3.23. all have sinned, and are come short of the glory of God, (i. e.) of
the glorious estate of holiness, in which we were created; and also of the
glorious estate of happiness. Adam was planted in a glorious place, Paradise,
and adorned with a glorious Ornament (viz.) holiness, the Image and Glory of
God, but through sin he fell from both. Now holiness the glory of man, and the
glory of God (as to man) lies in the dust, but when in sanctification the
Image of God is renewed in, and restored to the soul, the glory of God and man
returns again. Holiness is Gods great Title of Honor, Exodus 15.11. Who is like
unto thee among the Gods, glorious in holiness? etc. God is said in Scripture
to be rich in mercy, plenteous in redemption, Ephesians. 2.4. Psa. 130.7. Psa. 147.5.
Exodus 15.11
great in power, infinite in understanding, but glorious in holiness. It Is the
glory of all his works, Psalm. 145.17. The Lord is righteous in all his ways,
and holy in all his works; his holiness shines forth in all his Providence:
It Is the glory of all his Attributes; his blessed Attributes are, as it were,
enamelled with holiness; else his Sovereignty would look like Tyranny, else his
patience would look like indulgence of sin, else his Justice would look like
cruelty, else his special distinguishing mercy would look like respecting of
persons, or partiality: All the Attributes of God run in the Channel of his
holiness, and partake of its tincture: This glorious Attribute is the ground of
the Songs of praise, which are sung to his glory by the Seraphins, Isa. 6.2, 3.
Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory,
which is repeated, Rev. 4.8. Holy, holy, holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and
is, and is to come. Why is Gods day honorable, but that it is holy? Why is
Christ's Spouse beautiful, but that she is holy? Why are the Angels of God such
glorious creatures, but that they are holy? take away holiness, and they would
soon turn devils of darkness: As sin is the basest filth, dishonor, and shame,
so e contrario, holiness is the highest honor, the greatest glory, in or upon
any rational soul. Upon all these considerations, how glorious is Holiness? But
to proceed.

9. Sanctification exalts a Saint above his Neighbor, it lif^s him up above
the Sphere and Region of other men, Prove. 12.26. The righteous is more
excellent than his Neighbor. Perhaps a Saint is a po^r mean man in the world,
and his Neighbor a rich man, a great man, a Knight or Lord, worth several
hundreds or th^usands a year; but yet the righteous, a person vested with the
righteousness of Sanctification, is far more excellent in the esteem of God,
than the graceless great ones of the earth, for all their Lands and Lordships,
for all their their Noble Par^ntage, for all their Eschutcheons, Ensigns, Psa.
16.3.
and Titles of Honor, the Saints are the excellent in the earth: The Saints,
in regard of Sa ntship, are Gods peculiar treasure, his choice Jewels; Mal.
3.17.
all others God reckons but as Luggage and Lumber: The vast difference between
man and man, lies in this; one in all his glory, is but a branch of the old
stock, and has but the Image of the earthly; but the other is transplanted
into a new stock, the tree of life, 1 Cor. 15.49.
and has the Image of the heavenly engraven in his soul.

10. Sanctification must needs be excellent, because it is one great end, and
precious attainment of the death of Christ, Tit. 2.14. Christ gave himself for
us, not only to redeem us; but also to purify us. Again, Christ came into the
world, and was incarnate, not only to save us from our enemies, and from the
hands of all that hate us, wh ch implies Redemption; but also, that we mi^h^
serve him without fear in holiness, and righteousness all the days of our
life, and this takes in Sa^ctifi^^^^on. Further, the Apostle John tells us, that
for this purpose the S^n of God ((...)) appeared that he might u^loose, or
dissolve the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. (...). Dissolvere opera Diaboli.
Montan.

See the Dutch Annot on the place.


What are these works of the Devil, which Christ came t^ dissolve? they are
lusts, and sins: Christ dissolves these works two ways:

1. By suffering the punishment of them in his own person, Heb 2.14.15.

2. By regenerating his people by his Spirit, and thereby delivering them from
the dominion and slavery of sin. The Apostle Paul tells us, that Christ gave
himself for his Church that he might sanctify it, and present it a glorious
Church, without spot or wrinkle, etc. Ephesians. 5.25, 26. And without
controversy, Sanctification is as honorable and glorious Attainment, H^b
12.14.
as any of the Benefits that accrue to the Saints by the death of Christ; for,
(in short) there is no seeing ^he Face of God without it: without holiness no
man shall see the Lord.

11. The excellency of Sanctification consists in this, in that it is a
principle of union and communion with God; 1 John 1.3.
None but the sanctified in Christ jesus c^n have fellowship with the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ. Whilst a person is profane, unsanctified, what
communion can be between Light and Darkness, between Christ and Belial? It was
an old saying, (...).
between an holy God, and an impure sinner? God is Light in the abstract, 1 John 1.5. and an impure sinner is darkness in the abstract, Ephesians. 5. Holiness
is the principle of Union and Communion between God and man; Ephesians. 2.13. when
we are converted, sanctified, 1 Cor 6.17 He that is joined to the Lord is one
Spirit.
the soul is made nigh to God, (who before was afar off) and is now joined to
the Lord in the Spirit.

As a man cannot have communion with the Beasts, because they live not the same
life, nor the Beasts with the Plants, because they live a contrary life, no
more can a natural man have communion with God, because he lives not the same
life; but the Saints, through sanctification of the Spirit, live a spiritual
life, the life of God, and are therefore fitted for Communion with him, and for
the communications of his goodness to them.

12. Sanctification turns moral Virtues into Graces: Some persons are naturally
meek, patient, As 'twas said of Augustus Caesar; He turned brick into Marble.
sober, temperate, etc. Some natural persons are morally just and righteous in
their dealing and Conversation in the World, honest Dealers, good Pay-masters,
make their word their deed. All this a man may be, and do, and yet perish for
ever: but when once Wisdom enters into thy heart, whence once Sanctification
in the power of it, comes into thy soul, there is a great change wrought. The
new soul acts and works in natural and moral Actions, from inward renewed
principles. The principle of Grace (the true Elixir) turns moral Virtues into
Graces, and dignifies a man's natural Endowments, and moral actions with a
tincture of holiness, which makes a sweet perfume in Gods Nostrils: he now
acts from God, and for God in all he does; whether he eats, or drinks, or buys,
or sels, 1 Cor. 10.31.
all is for the glory of God. As carnal hearts are always carnal in spiritual
performances, (for the streams never run higher than the Head): so on the
contrary, gracious hearts are spiritual in natural and moral actions: The
reason is, the new man has a new principle to act from, and a new End to act
for, and aim at, but before he was sanctified, he had neither.

13. Another excellency of Sanctification, is this, That the righteousness of
Sanctification, next to the righteousness of Christ for justification, will be
of the greatest worth, and value, support and comfort at death and judgment.

At Death and Judgment, the rich man's Riches, the wise man's wisdom, the
ambitious man's honors, the voluptuous man's pleasures, the hypocrites
formality, the civil man's civility, and the moral man's morality: These Lying
Idols and rotten sticks which unholy persons have made their hope, their stay,
and the Rock of their Confidence, shall then all fail them, and sink quite
under them: but then shall the pure in heart see God, Mar. 5.8. Mat. 13.43.
then shall the Righteous lift up their heads like Princes, and shine as the
Sun in the presence of their Father; a dram of saving Grace will be then more
valuable and more comfortable, th^n mountains of Gold, than millions of Worlds.
This was a River of comfort flowing in upon Ezekiahs heart, as he lay upon his
sickbed (for ought he then knew) upon his deathbed, (viz.) the review of his
sanctified heart and life: Isa. 38.3.
Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, etc.

Beloved, There will be a great Cry at midnight, the Bridegroom comes, go forth
to meet him, Matthew. 25.6. The coming of Christ to Judgment will be very sudden,
and very terrible to secure sinners: if you, with the foolish Virgins, have
only oil in your Lamps, a blaze of profession without: and not with the wise,
oil in your Vessels, the true stock, and treasure of grace in your hearts, Mat.
25.12. Mat. 7.22.23. Read those words, and Tremble.
you will cry most dolefully, and shriek most dreadfully at that day; but
Christ will not hear you, he will take no notice of you; The King of glory
will enter his Presence Chamber with all his Saints: and shut the door against
you, ver. 10. And the door was shut, then knock never so hard, Grace is the
Bridegrooms favor, by which they are admitted into his Chamber of Glory.
cry never so loud, the door is shut, there is no hope of entrance, the Lord
will Answer, I know you not, verse. 12. Then your sop will be sorrow; weeping
and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, for madness and anguish will be your
portion; no grace, no glory. Wherefore Si^s, for the Lords sake, and for your
own souls-sake, look about you, the coming of the Lord draws nigh; If ever ye
hope in earnest to be saved, be sure you are truly and thoroughly sanctified,
for there is no hope of salvation without sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the Truth, 2 These. 2.13, 14.

14. And lastly, To name no more: Sanctification is the early dawning of
Salvation, the very beginning of Heaven. In that golden Chain, Romans 8.30. there
is mention made of Calling, Justification, and of Glorification, but nothing of
Sanctification, to note, that sanctification is Heaven begun already: it is not
only the way to Heaven, but it is Heaven it self, the more holy thou art, the
more thou do live the life of God; and the more thou do anticipate the life
of Heaven, that Glorious life, which the Angels of God, and the blessed spirits
of just men made perfect, live there. Heb 12.22.23.


Thus through the assistance of God, we have hinted something of the
transcendent excellency of Sanctification, which we have in, by, and from our
Lord Jesus, who is made of God, (or given of the Father to be) our
Sanctification.

Holiness is the Name of God, the Seed of God, the Will and Word of God; it is
the Work of God, it is the very Image of God, it is the Life of God, it is the
Nature of God, it is the Glory of God.

Again, Sanctification renders one man far m^re excellent than another: it is
one grand Attainment of the death of Christ, it is the principal of Union and
Communion with God. Sanctification turns moral Virtues into Graces: It Is the
second best Cordial of Comfort at Death and Judgment. Lastly, it is the dawning
of Salvation, the Aurora of Glory.

THat Christ is given of the Father to be our Sanctification, we have proved:
how Christ may be said to be our Sanctification we have showed: what are the
several Causes concurring to our Sanctification, we have explained: The
definition of Sanctification we have given: Something of its glory and
excellency we shadowed forth in the last Discourse: and now are arrived at the
last Stage, the last General, in the doctrinal part propounded, (viz.) what are
the sweet streams that issue from this Fountain? They may also serve for Trials
of your estate.
What are the precious Fruits that grow upon this Tree of Sanctification. You
may also call them the inseparable Concomitants, and Adjuncts of Sanctification
(if you please.)

1. If you have received the spirit of Sanctification, ye have also received
the spirit of Supplication, Zech. 12.10. The Spirit is entitled both the spirit
of Grace, and the spirit of Supplication, where he is the former, there he is
the other also; where he dwells as the spirit of holiness, there he dwells as
the spirit of prayer. Every sanctified heart is an Harp or Cymbal, to sound
forth Gods praises: an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. ult. and
the Temple of the Holy Ghost. The Temple of old was an holy place, a place of
relative and Typical holiness, and an house of Prayer. Every gracious heart
(like Gods Altar) offers up to God the sweet sacrifice and incense of praises
and Prayers. Every newborn Babe, (for the most part) comes into the world
crying. The word Abba, signifies Fa her, in the Syriack tongue, which the
Apostle here reteineth, which also young Children retein almost in all
Languages. Annotat.
I am sure every spiritual newborn Babe cries Abba Father, Romans 8.15. Gal.
4.6. And because ye are sons, God has sent the spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying Abba Father.

Now, if ye are Prayer-less persons, ye are graceless persons: persons without
Prayer, 'Twas the saying of an old Disciple, A man of much prayer, is a man of
much Grace.
are persons without Holiness: or though ye pray, yet if ye pray not in the
Spirit, (according to the caution) Ephesians. 6.18. (i. e.) in Faith, in fervency,
with the vigor and intension of the Spirit, or inner-man, if it be not Jam.
5.16. (...). If ye have no Communion ravishing, have ye Communion sanctifying?
an inwrought prayer (as the phrase is) if ye wrestle not with God in the
strength of God, (as Jacob did) if ye have no holy boldness, or Confidence at
Gods Throne; if ye never feel the sweet melting, quickening, warming, moving,
breathings of the Spirit in your souls; In a word, if ye find no growing
conformity in your hearts to the divine Nature by Duty, no sweet sanctifying,
refreshing communion with God in Duty: it is an evident sign to me, the Spirit
of holiness dwells not in ye; and consequently, if ye have not the spirit of
Christ, ye are none of his, Romans 8.9. But as for such as pray in the Spirit, as
make conscience of this Duty, and of the spiritual performance of it, and find
the relish of God, and Heaven in private prayer, it is one happy sign and
symptom of their translation from death to life, from a state of Nature to a
state of Grace.

There are diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit. 1 Cor. 1^.4.
Secondly, If the spirit of Sanctification dwells in thee, the same Spirit, as a
spirit of Illumination dwells in thee. If Jesus Christ be thy sanctification, he
is thy wisdom also; as thy holiness to sanctify thee, so thy wisdom to
instruct thee. It is the godly or holy man that feels the virtue and influence
of that blessed Promise, I will instruct then, and teach thee in the way that
thou should go, I will guide thee by mine eye, Psalm. 32.6, 8. verses
compared together.

That Text is famous for this purpose, Non acumine proprii sensus recte s^pere
homines sed illuminatione Spiritus. Buling. in loc. What Unction is? per
unctionem, Gratiam So. S. intelligit. Beza in loc.
1 John 2.20. Ye have received an Unction from the Holy One and ye know all
things.

By this Unction (or anointing) is meant, the gracious operation of the holy
Spirit, whereby they that are regenerate or sanctified, are also enlightened
with the saving Knowledge of Christ. This is compared to the p^uring out of
costly Ointment, Psalm 45.8. and 137.2.

Unction properly signifies the separation and consecration of a person to the
Lord, tog there with the gifts of Wisdom, Knowledge, Faith, Love, etc.
Wherefore it must follow, that a person anointed, consecrated unto God, is
also illuminated by God, if his person be sanctified, his eyes are opened,
anointed with Eye Salve; if anno^nted with Grace, then instructed in
Knowledge; 2 Cor. 1.21. Rev. 3.18.
if a V ssel full of Grace, then a Vessel full of oil: a burning lamp, and
shining light; For in Unction, sanctification and illumination are both
together inseparably and indivisibly, as light and heat in the Sunbeams. The
holy oil of Grace casts a sweet perfume, and splendid light in the hearts and
lives of the anointed. By virtue of this Unction, Darkness is now in a great
measure scattered, and the man is made light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. An
enlightened soul admires, how foolish he was, and ignorant, even brutish in his
knowledge before Conversion, he neither knew God, nor himself, he neither knew
his present danger, nor his future misery* he neither saw sin as a vicious, or
as a Penal evil, neither the evil in it, nor the evil after it; but went on
like a Fool to the stocks, like an Ox to the slaughter, and ran like a mad man
toward the Gulf of Ruin. Before sanct^fication, he neither saw his want of
Christ, nor knew the worth of Christ. The glory of Christ's Person, the beauty
of his ways, the merits of his Blood, the benefits of his Offices, the
comforts of his Spirit, the sweetness of his Fellowship, the savor of his
Ointments, the blessings of his Kingdom: All these (before Conversion) were
hid from his eyes, for the God of this world had blinded him, 2 Cor. 4.4.
Besides the natural Veil of darkness he brought into the world with him; he is
blinded by another, (viz.) a diabolical: but in and by Conversion, comes in
illumination, in turning from Satan to God, his eyes are opened, and his
understanding turns from darkness to light, Acts 26.18. Now the eyes of his
understanding being enlightened by the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, Ephesians.
1.17, 18. He comes to know, what is the hope of his Calling, and the riches of
the glory of his Inheritance in the Saints. Every word is a word of weight: 1
John 5.20. Phil. 1.9, 10.
he has now a visive faculty, an understanding given him to know things that
are excellent: he has now a new spiritual, clear affectionate knowledge of,
and a more distinct piercing knowledge in the Mysteries of the Gospel, than
ever he had before. An enlightened head, and a sanctified heart go both
together. This is the second effect, or rather sweet Concomitant of
Sanctification; (viz.) Illumination.

(...), id est. eandem fidem ex ejusdem spiritus affl^tu and dono Beza.
3. The third Effect, or rather Concomitant, or Adjunct of our Sanctification is
Faith; he that has the spirit of Holiness, has also the spirit of Faith: 2
Cor. 4.13. we having the same spirit of Faith; the spirit of Sanctification is
also the Author of Faith, for Fa th is formally a special part of
Sanctification, 1 John 5.1. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is
born of God; that is, our faith in Christ, is a certain sign and evidence of
our Regeneration. He that believes that Jesus is the Christ, i. e. the
promised Messiah, Blasphemia, and pessima Haeresis erat apud Judaeos Consiteri
Iesum Mariae filium esse Christum.
is born of God. The learned upon the place observe, that there was a great
Controversy in the Apostle John's days, whether Jesus the Son of Mary, was the
Christ the promised Messiah, or not? And the blasphemous and blinded Jews
counted it the worst of Heresies, to confess Jesus the Son of Mary to be Christ.

The Jews were many ways offended in him, offended in the vileness of his
Appearance, in the humility of his Conversation, in the ignobleness of his
Parentage, in the sharpness and Authority of his Doctrine, in the knowledge of
his Country, (as I might demonstrate easily); when Christ shall come (say
they) we know not whence he is, but we know, whence this man is, i. e. of what
Parentage, and of what Country, John 7.27. The Scriptures had foretold, that
the promised Messiah, when he came should redeem Israel, restore all things,
pardon sins, seek and save that which was lost, proclaim liberty to the
Captives, Comfort those that mourn, bind up the brokenhearted, bring in
everlasting Righteousness, and save his people with an everlasting salvation.
But the obstinate and heretical Jews would not grant all this to the son of
Mary; They denied Christ to be the true Messiah; They Traduced the Son of God,
and blasphemously in thought and word reputed him an Impostor. Therefore it is
said, 1 John 11.12, 13. verses: He came to his own, and his own received him
not; He came to his own creature man, and generally the generation of mankind
did not receive him, but refuse him, so some expound it: but others, as Calvin
give a better sense; Thus, he came to his own, (i. e.) to his own Country men
the Jews (of whom according to the flesh he came, who is over all, God blessed
for ever) but they received him not, (i. e.) Romans 9.5. Sed rectius sentiunt,
qui referunt ad solos Judaeos, Calvin. 1 John 11.
as their King and Savior, but to as many as received him, to them gave he
power (...), not only power, but also dignity, privilege to become the sons of
God, even to as many as believed in his Name; and who are these that thus
believe in Christ, and receive him into their hearts? Why, such as are not born
of blood, of an high and noble Parentage, which the Jews gloried in, being
descended from Abraham, nor of the flesh, nor of the will of man; not by any
principle of corrupted nature, not by the mere power of our own will, but by
the will and grace or gracious will of God, Jam 1.18. Ephesians. 2.4.
we are born again, or sanctified. Now who are they, that are born of the will
of God? Why, they that believe in Christ, and receive him by Faith into their
hearts, as God has promised, and propounded him in the Gospel, as Prophet,
Priest and King, in all his Offices; or as the Text has it, as wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption.

Secundum diversos respectus fides regenerationis nostrae pars est: ex
regeneratione tanquam ex font manat fides. Calv.
Through Faith the soul does receive in, and conceive with the incorruptible
seed of the Word of God, whereby Christ is formed, the new creature is
produced, the soul is regenerate, or born again into a new and divine life:
wherefore, if you are born again, or sanctified (which is the same) you have
faith in Christ crucified at Jerusalem.

1. You do believe that Jesus is the Christ.

2. You do believe on Jesus Christ.

1. You do believe that Jesus is the Christ, that Jesus is the Savior, that
there is no salvation by any other, Acts 4.12. That he was anointed by the
Father, as Prophet, Priest and King, Isa. 61.1. for the perfecting of your
salvation, for the obtaining of eternal Redemption for you, Heb. Ego saepe and
libenter hoc inculco, ut extra Christum, oculos and aures claudatis, and
di^atis, nullum vos scrire Deum, nisi qui fuit in Gremio Mariae, and suxit
ubera ejus. Luther. Credere quod sit Christus, est ab eo sperare quacunque de
Messia promissa sunt. Calv. Comment. in 1 John 5.1.
^ 12. Luther has a notable speech upon Psalm. 130. Often and willingly (says
he) do I inculcate this, that you should shut your eyes and your ears, and say
you know no God out of Christ, none but he that was in the lap of Mary, and
sucked her breasts: He means none out of him. It is not a mystical Christ
within you, but the man Christ Jesus without you, who was conceived by the Holy
Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, crucified at Jerusalem, rose again, and
ascended up into Glory, that you must believe in for the remission of all your
sins, for the justification of your persons, and for your eternal life. We
find it recorded in Scripture, and in History, that this was the Grand Test of
a Believer in the Primitive times. Do thou believe that Jesus is the Christ,
or that Jesus Christ is the son of God? because in those days it was little
less than Death among the Jews, thus to own and confess Christ.

2. If you are born again or sanctified: you do believe on Jesus, you believe
on the Name of the Son of God. This is Gods great Commandment, and our great
Duty, 1 John 3.23. As God does offer and propound him in the Gospel, so
accordingly ye do receive him into your hearts, with all his Offices, with all
his Graces, with all his inconveniences. You look upon Gods Terms as holy,
equitable, and most advantageous to you; Ye trust to Christ, and rely on him
alone for wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Hag. 2.7.
Cant. 5.10. Isa. 63.1. Heb 7.25. Heb. 2.17. Heb. 5.2.
God tenders his Son in the Gospel as the desire of all Nations, as the
chiefest, or Standard Bearer among Ten thousand, as the most mighty, merciful,
and every way glorious and complete Savior: God has made him your All in All,
He is of God made unto us wisdom, righteousness, etc. Now God requires you
should honor the Son, as he has honored him, for in honoring the Son, you
honor the Father, (and that in the highest manner); God expects you should
receive him as he has offered him; Oh then give glory to him, by receiving
him, Justifying faith is defined (in short) to be a Cordial, accepting of
Christ as Lord and Savior, in all his Offices, etc. So Dr. Preston, Mr. Will.
Strong, Mr. Baxter, etc.
by accepting of him for your Lord and Savior. Embrace your blessed Savior in
the arms of Faith, vail your souls to him, close with him, cling, and cleave
to him, glory and rejoice in him, draw down virtue daily from him, lay all your
wants upon him, the oftener you come to him, the more welcome, and the suller
and richer you shall go from him; As God has made him your All in All, Joh.
1.16.
so believe in him, and make use of him as your All in All.

Now is this precious faith, this faith unfeigned, this faith of Gods Elect
wrought in your souls, yea, or not. Know assuredly, if you are sanctified in
Christ Jesus, if you are Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, etc. Ephesians.
2.10. This precious grace is wrought in you, called (...) the work of God (...).
John. 6.29. This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has
sent. Where this precious Faith is, it is always found with these precious
principal properties, or vital operations: 1. It Animates, 2. It Purifies, 3.
It Fructifies, 4. It Pacifies, 5. It Operates, 6. Amplifies, 7. It
Corroborates, 8. It Exhilarates.

1. Faith Animates, enlivens and quickens the soul of man, it is such a
principle of spiritual Life, that a Believer does not so much live, as Christ
by faith lives in him. The spirit of Faith I am certain, if not faith it self
(which of all graces leads the Chorum) is the forma informans, whereby a man
before both legally and morally dead, is now enlivened, and lives to God, Gal.
2.20. Hab. 2.4. Romans 1.17. Heb. 10.38. Our whole life here is a life of Faith,
our life hereafter is a life of Vision or Sight; here we walk by faith, and not
by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. How sweet and heavenly is that Life which is derived
from, and maintained by the life of Christ himself.

2. Faith purifies, where there is life there is motion; where faith is, there
is purification. A Believer having a vital principle, like a living Fountain
labors to work out the mud of sin, to cleanse and purge it self from inward
filthiness, so as not to approve it, allow it, or mingle with it, Acts 15.9.
having purified their hearts by faith; as sickness is poison to the blood and
spirits, so is sin to the soul; now as all the spirits in their natural motions
tend to self-preservation, so the spirit of faith or the spirit by faith
musters together, and stirs up all the powers of the Inner-man for
self-purification, without purification there can be no preservation, and Faith
is the principal grace that purifies.

3. Faith fructifies, a living faith is a working, a fructifying or a
fruit-bearing faith, as the Apostle James demonstrates, James 2.14, to the end.
They that are purified by faith in the blood of Christ, are zealous of good
works: Tit. 2.14. How many Believers at large are there, that look green and
fair, and make a brave flourish afar off, but come near them, and well observe
them, view their hearts and their lives, or their hearts by their lives, and
works, and you shall find them like the barren Fig Tree which Jesus saw, full
of leaves, but without fruit to relieve him in his hunger; the Curse of
barrenness will strike to the hearts of such Professors, as it did to the heart
of that Fig Tree. Psalm. 36.9. Jer. 2.13. Joh. 15.1. Rev. 23.2.
By Faith we have Union with Christ the fountain of Life, the fountain of
living waters, the True Vine, and Tree of Life, that grows in the midst of the
Paradise of God. All these Metaphors bespeak abundant fruitfulness, and that of
the choicest fruit. The grapes of Canaan, the graces of the Spirit, the works
of Righteousness, and Acts of charity and mercy to the praise and glory of God
by Jesus Christ. In a word, have you faith in Christ Jesus, and hope in Heaven,
why then ye bring forth fruit, as they do all the world over, that have
recieved the grace of God in truth. Consider well, 1 Col. 4.5, 6.

4. Faith pacifies, as well as fructifies: as it fructifies a barren Desert,
and makes the wilderness and solitary place to blossom as the Rose, as Lebanon,
Psa. 35.1, 2
Sharon and Carmel; so it pacifies a troubled Conscience, it stils the rage and
surges of this Sea. As once Christ said to the Winds and Waves, so faith in the
name and power of Christ speaks to the perplexed soul, peace, and be still,
and there is a great calm. Christians would live more the life of peace, if
they lived more the life of Faith, the more of faith, the less of ^ervile fear,
being justified by faith we have peace with God, etc. Romans 5.1. Phil. 4.7. And
this peace of God passes all understanding. When the Clouds of Temptation, and
the winds and waves of passion are up, a few thoughts of Faith will quiet all,
as Dr. Tho. Goodwin, in his Vanity of Thoughts.
a worthy Man observes. There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked, Isa.
57.21. but a true Believer has peace with God through Jesus Christ the Prince
of peace, he has peace in Heaven, and peace on Earth, peace with God, and
peace with his own conscience, for the Kingdom of God is righteousness, peace
and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17.

5. Faith operates, it acts and works by love, Gal. 5.6. for, in Jesus Christ,
neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, Magnes amoris amor.
but faith which works by love. Faith works love, we love God, when by
faith we apprehend that God loves us first, 1 John 4.19. we love him, because
he first loved us, and as faith works love, so it works by love; Faith is the
great Wheel, the principal Grace, that animates, actuates, moves influences,
love, patience, zeal, and every other grace, that sets all other wheels a
going, that quickens and strengthens all other graces in their proper
respective motions and operations.

The words of Dr. Bates, in his Sermon upon Heb. 11.6.
In the 11 Chapter to the Hebrews, Faith is represented as the principle of
Obedience, conveying vigor and strength to other graces, whereby they become
operative to several ends and Objects; Hence those Acts which immediately
spring from other graces as their proper stock, are attributed to faith, that
being the principle of their heavenly working, in this respect; as the success
of an Army redounds to the Generals Honor, so the victory which is effected by
other Christian qualities, is here ascribed to Faith, which animates them, and
leads them forth as their chief Captain.

6. Faith Amplifies, dilates, enlarges the heart to run the ways of Gods
Commandments, 1 John 5.1. and 3. verses compared together, whosoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ is born of God, etc. verse. 1. For this is the love of
God, that we keep his Commandments, etc. verse 3. Faith is the ground of Love,
and Love the Author of Obedience; holy obedience is the daughter of a lively
Faith: when and where Christ dwells in the heart by faith, that soul being
rooted and grounded in love, comprehends with all Saints, (secundum quid) what
is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height of the love of Christ,
Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Which love like a fire in his bones, like a flame in his
bowels, enflames his soul with love to God and Christ, opens, and enlarges his
heart to duties of obedience, to serve the Lord with a most free and Princely
spirit. The soul of an affectionate Believer, runs swiftly, cheerfully, nobly
in the ways of God, like the Chariots of Aminnadib, Cant. 6.12. Faith thus
argues, Amminadib, i. e. my voluntary, free, bounteous, or noble people.
Ainsworth in Cant. 6.12. Psalm. 103.3, 4. Ephe. 1.3.
Has God loved me in his Son from everlasting? and will he love me to
everlasting? Has God in Christ forgiven such a wretch as I, all mine
iniquities? redeemed my life from destruction, and crowned me (even me) with
loving kindness and tender mercies? yea, with all spiritual blessings in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus? Then what shall I render to the Lord for all
his benefits? Nothing I can do, nothing I can suffer too much for him; I am,
and will be his for ever, at his Command, and for his service. Thus the faith
of a sanctified Person reasons.

7. Faith Corroborates, it strengthens the weak, it revives the faint, it
supports the desponding and sinking spirit. The Psalmist in great trials and
troubles had great experience of the supports of faith, Psalm 27.13. I had
fainted unless I had believed, to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of
the Living. Love keeps you from dissembling, Hope keeps you from desponding,
Patience keeps you from tyring, but it is Faith that keeps you from fainting.
When a 2 Chronicles. 2.20. Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed, in some translations, 't^s
suffultum est cor meum, my heart is underpropt.
great multitude from beyond the Sea, on this side Syria came up against Judah,
and the people were in sore distress; Jehosaphat their good King encouraged the
people, saying, believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established,
believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Faith in God is the
souls establishment; wherefore, a Believer shall not be afraid of evil
tidings, his heart is fixed trusting in the Lord: his heart is established, he
shall not be afraid, until he see his desire upon his enemies: Thus the
Psalmist swee^ly sings, Psalm 112.7, 8. The fixation of the soul by faith on
God, on Christ, on his Attributes, on his Promises yields the surest strength,
the speediest and sweetest relief and succor in the Crisis of any Exigence.
When David for fear of Saul was got into a Wood, Jonathan leaves his Father, 1 Samuel 23.16.
and privately came to David into the Wood, and strengthened his hand in God.
So, when a Believer is in a wood of fears and dangers, he strengthens his hand,
the hand of his faith in God; and the more his faith is up, the more his f^ars
are down. Divines use to compare, the base fears of m^n, and the embondaging
fears of Death, to the Lead that weighs the Net under water; and faith to the
Cork that keeps up the Net from sinking. Hope, the eldest daughter of Faith, is
an Anchor, sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.19. but Faith is the Ro^k, which this
Anchor rests on, according to the Proverb: were it not for Hope, heart would
break; and the Scripture tells us, Faith is both (...) substantia, and (...).
argumentum. Heb. 11.1.
Romans 8.24. We are saved by hope: but Hope receives all its subsistence and
strength from Faith. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence
of things not seen, Heb. 11.1.

8. Faith exhilarates, comforts, cheers the soul, fills it with joy and peace in
believing, Romans 15.13. The God of hope fills the soul with joy and peace in
believing. Faith is as a twinkling star in a dark Night, as a shining Sun in a
cloudy Day, as Rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in
a weary Land. The Apostle Peter elegantly expresses the soul exulting
operation of saving faith, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom (that is Christ) having not seen ye
love, in whom, though now ye see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory. Faith opens a crevis of light, and springs a
Mine of (...) Exa^tatis gaudio ineffabili and gloriosa. Beza.
exulting joy in the most insulting danger. When once a Believer is justified
by faith, and has peace with God, he then rejoiceth in the most glorious
Hope, (viz.) in the hope of the glory of God, and not only so, but he glories
also in tribulations, he glories in them, and he glories over them, because
the love of God is shed abroad (...), effusa est, is poured forth into his
heart by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.1, 2, and 5. verses. by faith in Christ, and by
communion with Christ in his Conquests, he knows he shall be more than a
Conqueror over all his Enemies, Romans 8.37. Neque enim simpliciter dirit (...),
sed (...): idest, ut vertit Cyprianus Epist. 26. supervincimus. Amplius quam
victores sumus. Beza.
it is not only said Conquerours, but more than Conquerors, as Cyprian and Beza,
on the place.

Thus I have endeavored to present you with some of the precious properties
and vital operations of precious Faith, which every one that is born of God,
(or sanctified) does enjoy to his inestimable benefit. Faith is an inseparable
Concomitant with, and an infallible evidence of our Sanctification; for
whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, 1 John 5.1. This
is the third Adjunct, and evidence of our Regeneration.

4th. Effect and evidence of our sanctification, is love to God and to the
Brethren. As Christ dwells in the heart by faith, Ephesians. 3.17. so the soul
sweetly reposeth it self in the bosom of God by love, 1 John 4 7, 8. Beloved,
let us love one another, for love is of God, and every one that loves is born
of God, and knows God; he that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love.
You see love to God, and to the Brethren is both a sure sign, and a genuine
effect of Regeneration (which is synomminous with Sanctification.) This grace
of Love is the very soul of all Religion, the very life of the new Creature,
the closure of the soul with God in the sweetest manner; he that has most of
this grace has most of all graces. This is one of the precious things promised
in the new Covenant, Deuteronomy. 30.6. (viz.) An heart to love the Lord; the Lord thy
God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord
thy God, with all thy heart and with all thy soul. This is made a special
effect and evidence of thy spiritual Circumcision, or Sanctification; In
Sanctification, as the understanding is enlightened to know God, so the will and
affections are renewed, changed, rightly ordered, and inclined to love God as
his chiefest good, and as his utmost End: Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and all the
world is then counted nothing to the light of Gods countenance. Psalm 4.6, 7.
Ca^t. 5.^0.
All other Beloveds are no body to Jesus Christ, the chiefest of ten thousands.

A sanctified soul exactly viewing, and well weighing the glittering pomp and
splendour of this world, all natural and moral excellencies on the one hand, and
Jesus Christ on the other, cries out with the Martyr Lambert, Foxes Acti and
Monuments. (...), propter eminentiam cognitionis Christi Jesus. Mont.
None but Christ, none but Christ; Counts all things (...) dogs-meat, garbage,
to the excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.8.

A Christian loves himself, his Relations and worldly comforts with a common
love, but God and Jesus Christ with a special love. He loves his temporal
Enjoiments secondarily and subordinately, but he loves God and Christ
primarily, intensively and superlatively; yea, so highly intensive is his love
to God his Father, to Christ his Savior, to the holy Spirit his souls
Comforter, to Heaven and heavenly things, his only Treasure; that his love to
other things (comparatively) may be called an Hatred, (i. e.) a much inferior,
a far more remiss love. See Luke 14.26. more distinctly.

First, Amore d^sideris.
A sanctified heart loves God with a love of desire; The strength of the heart
goes out in love, this is called the breathing, thirsting, and panting of the
heart after God, Psalm 42.1, 2. The soul that loves God above all things,
desires God above all things, both intensive with the greatest vigor, and
Adequate as its Adequate and complete Object: Whom have I in Heaven but thee?
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

2. A sanctified heart loves God with a love of Union, Amore unionis.
as the heart of Shechem clave to Dinah, Genesis 34.3. So an holy soul cleaves
unto God in Christ. Barnabas exhorted the Disciples, that with purpose of heart
they would cleave to the Lord, Acts 11.23. As the soul of Jonathan was knit
with the soul of David, 1 Samuel 1.18. So this Love, is as it were a knitting of
the soul with God: Faith makes a mystical union of Persons, Love makes a moral
union of affections. This is the very essence of Gospel-love; Amor non est,
nisi donum amantis in amatum.
God bestows himself on us, and we freely surrender our selves to God.

Thirdly, A sanctified heart loves God with a love of good will, or
Benevolence; we wish, and will, Amore Benevolentiae.
give and ascribe all honor and praise, all glory and dominion unto him. This
is the genuine product of his love in Christ to us, as Revel. 1.5, 6. Unto him
that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has made us
Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to him be glory and dominion for
ever and ever. Amen. Lord! says an holy soul, Cant 2.16
let all thine be mine, and let all mine be thine; and let thine be for thy
glory; let every person and creature and thing in Heaven above, and in earth
beneath be a shril Trumpet, a loud Cymbal to sound forth thy praises.

Amore complacentiae, and acquiescentiae.
Fourthly, A sanctified heart loves God with a love of Complacence and Rest.
Where we love, the eye of the soul (the mind) is fixed with a delightful stay,
ubi amor, ibi oculus, the Object dwells in the eye: we are still looking where
we love; Anima plu^ est ubi amat, quam ubi animat.
When I awake (says the Psalmist) I am still with thee, in my contemplations
and affections; My meditation of him shall be sweet: I will be glad in the
Lord, Psalm 104. 34. Love goes forth upon the feet of Desire, and rests in the
bosom of Delight. There is an holy acquiescence of the heart in God: God says
of his Saints, This is my Rest for ever, here will I dwell; the Saint says of
God, Psalm. 132.14. Psalm. 116.7. Psalm. 91.9^ Ephesians. 2* ult.
Return to thy rest, O my soul; A Saint makes God the most High his Habitation,
and a Saints heart is the Habitation of God through the Spirit. Here lies the
sweetness of holiness, the marrow and fatness of Religion. This World would be
a Dungeon, and Heaven it self a melancholy shade, without the love of God;
it is this, that makes Heaven and Earth sweet unto the sanctified, Heaven would
be no Heaven, God could not be the joy, if he were not the love of Saints,
Psalm. 16. ult.
but there both love and joy shall be full. But whilst the Saints are solacing
themselves with Heaven, and delighting themselves in God, other men are
following after other Lovers. The covetous man makes Mammon his God, the
voluptuous man makes Pleasure his God, the Ambitious man makes Honor his God,
the Formalist and Hypocrite makes Common grace, self-righteousness, a bare
profession, or the mere externals of Devotion, his God, and Savior; because
every one of these make some of these their only Treasure and Happiness: They
dote upon them, addict themselves to them, trust to them and in them, and love
them more than God. But a Saint that knows God, makes Jehovah his God, he has
but one, the living and true God, to honor, love, Psalm. 36.9. Psalm. 87.7. Col.
3.3.
and serve, who is the fountain of his life, and blessedness, in whom all his
springs are, in whom with Jesus Christ all his Comforts live; and from whom by
Jesus Christ all his felicity is conveyed, to make him happy in both worlds.
The new creature has a new heart, according to that full and free Promise,
Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within
you: which new heart I take to be the Genus of all the following graces. And
where there is this new heart, there will be new Affections, new longings, and
earnest breathings of soul after God, Christ, Heaven, and Immortality, for
behold, says Christ, I make all things new, Rev. 21.5.

Love of the Brethren, an evidence of Regeneration.
Secondly, As a sanctified person loves his God, so also he loves his Brother;
this is made one great evidence of our happy and new Translation, 1 John 3.14.
We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren:
he that loves not his Brother, abides in death. Qui diligit fratrem magis
novit d lectionem, qua diligit, quam fratrem quem diligit. Aug de Trinit.
Many a be-nighted soul (I have read and heard) upon the plank of this
evidence, have been kept from sinking down into the Whirl-pool of despair; it
has been a refreshing Cordial to many a doubting Christian upon their
Deathbeds: 1 John 4.7. Every one that loves is born of God, and knows God;
and in v. 20. the Apostle draws down a negative inference from the Premises: If
a man say, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he that loves
not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?
That interrogation is a plain Negation: if the amiable and visible workmanship
of God be not loved, it is impossible the invisible Author of that wo^kmanship
should.

Query, Who are the Brethren intended in this Epistle?

Answ. 1. There are Brethren by Nation, Acts 7.23.25. Romans 9 3.

2. Brethren by Nature descended of the sam^ Parents, Matthew. 1.2.

3. Brethren by Office, 2 Pet. 3.15. 2 Cor. 1.1. etc.

4. Bre hren by Grace and supernatural Relation, and so understand the Term
here.

Query, How shall we know whether we truly love the Brethren, which is so great
a sign of our new birth?

Answ. I answer Affirmatively:

1. When we love them as such. The Brethren for their spiritual brotherhood,
Christians for their Christianity, the Saints for their Sanctification, 1 John
5.1. He that loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him; he
that loves the Father, loves the Image of the Father in the Child; He that
loves the Person, loves the picture for the Persons sake. Grace must be the
principal Lodestone of our affection: not Beauty, birth, sweetness of
disposition, Breeding, Learning, Wealth, Honor, or any outward, or carnal
accomplishments whatsoever.

Secondly, When we love and delight in them above all other people: Psalm 16.2,
3. David a King, calls them the Excellent, in whom was all his delight; and
Christ prefers his spiritual before his own natural Relations, M^t. 12.47, 48,
49, 50.

3. When we love those of the Brotherhood most, that are most gracious, if
grace allures Love, (Caeteris paribus) the more of the former, the more of the
latter. Christ loved all his Disciples, John 13.1. but John eminently gracious,
was eminently beloved: wherefore called the beloved Disciple, John 21.20.

Noscitur ex Com^te, qui no^ digno ^itur ex se.
4. When we singularly and peculiarly love their society above all other; I am
(said David) a Companion to all them that fear thee. The sanctified can have no
intimate contenting fellowship with the unholy; Psalm 26.4, 5. I have not sat
with vain persons, etc. I have hated the Congregation of evil doers,, and will
not sit with the wicked. Again, Psalm 15.4. In whose eyes a vile person is
contemned; but he honors them that fear the Lord. This is one Character of
an Inhabitant in Gods holy Hill.

5. When we are willing in some cases to lay down our lives for the Brethren: A
Christian is bound not only to lay down his life for Christ, and for his
Gospel, when God calls him to it, but also in some special Cases for the
Brotherhood, Significat in eo ^^obari nostram charitatem, si amorem nostri in
fratres transferimus, ita ut sui quisque quodammodo oblitus, aliis C^nsulat.
Calv. in loc.
1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren. If our love to
the Brethren be singular, and to the life, (as Christ's was to us) we shall lay
down our lives for them; it is not a common or cold love of the Brethren that
evinceth your Regeneration, every new born babe does (with John) desire to
decrease, so that Christ Mystical may increase, that the Kingdom of Christ be
enlarged, the generation of the Righteous multiplied, amplified, and preserved,
though it be, (that in the promoting of it) he himself, his Honor, his Name,
his Li^e must lie in the dust of Death.

To these things I have spoken more fully from another Subject, I pass on to
the fifth particular.

5. A sanctified, or regenerate person overcomes the world, 1 John 5.4. He
that is born of God overcomes the world. 1. Here we have two Adversaries, the
Regenerate, and the World. Secondly, the Victor, 1. The regenerate who are
chiefly defensive, as the whole Armor of God is chiefly defensive, Ephesians. 6.14.
to 19. verses. 2. The world on the other part, principally offensive, John
15.18, 19, 20.

Now, what is the world? 1. Partly, the men of the world; these lie in
wickedness, 1 John 5.19. these hate the Saints, because they are not of the
world, but chosen out of the world by Christ, John 19.19.

1. By the world understand wicked worldlings with their persecutions of the
Saints.

2. Partly, the lusts of the world, So Calv. and Zanch, in loc.
in Charms and A^lurements, 1 John 2.16. the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, i. e, all the delights, pleasures, and
Contentments, which the flesh or body desires. Thus the world with all its
oppositions and insinuations, frowns and flatteries sets upon the Saints.

Secondly, The Victor, he that is born of God overcomes the world, he carries
away the Conquest. Whilst the Saints are in the world, h ey are in an estate
militant, there is carried on a spiritual War between two Antagonists, (viz)
the Spirit of Regeneration in the Saints, and the Spirit of the World with all
his worldly lusts and allurements: which Siren songs do draw in, and drown,
which Cups of fornication do choke and poison millions in the world. Now he
that is born of God by the spirit of faith dwelling in him, both as the Forma
informans, and forma Assistens, is empowred to subdue corruptions within, and
to vanquish temptations from without: so that by partaking of the divine
Nature, he escapes the pollutions that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet.
1.4. as the Apostle speaks. A sanctified man has in him the spirit of
sanctity, and a spirit of magnanimity (indeed his sanctity is his Magnanimity)
which makes him so high, that the world cannot master him, Inimicos dei, jam
hoc ipso quod non cessimus, vicimus. Cyprian.
and so holy, that the World cannot (in some sense) defile him. Thus in his
measure he keeps himself unspotted from the world, James 1. ult. by the world
is here meant, whatso^ver resists the Commands of God: Neither the worlds
frowns, nor favors, neither ^s Comminatious, nor its Invitations, Quicquid
mandatis Dei resistit. Polan.
neither the ^ears of the world, nor the flatteries of the world can turn a
regenerate person from the faith of Christ, nor from obedience to the Gospel,
nor bring him unto their Bow. In the German Reformation, when some persuaded
Erasmus to write to Luther, to bring him back to Popery, or else at leastwise
to write against his Doctrine; Erasmus answers, Luther was too great for him to
write to, or against. A Gracious spirit is too great a spirit, for the great
O^es of the world to force by power, or to bribe by favor, into a base
compliance with them against the honor of their God, and the conscience of
their Duty.

The Egyptians were wont to paint their Judges without hands, and eyes:
without hands, they must not take bribes: without eyes, in judgment they must
not be partial. Thus a godly man that has made God his portion, is hand-lelss
and eye-less: he is hand-less, the world does not, shall not bribe him: he is
eye-less, he beholds none of the worlds Terrors, so as to daunt him.

Thus a sanctified, or regenerate person, in the strength of Christ overcomes
the world.

6. A regenerate or sanctified person has the honor of Sonship.
Sanctification lays the foundation of our Adoption: when we are born again, we
are born Gods Children; we bear the Image of Christ by grace, as we have have
borne the Image of Adam by nature, when we are converted, (ipso facto) we are
adopted. Regeneration is the root or stock from which, and on which, this
Peer-less, and never fading flower Adoption grows. When a sinner becomes a
Saint, at that very moment a child of wrath is made a son of God, a member of
the first is made a member of the second Adam; a relative change is
contemporary with a real. Behold (ye Saints) this privilege with admiration;
Behold! What manner of love is this, 1 John 3.1.
that we should be called the sons of God, etc.

When Christ had converted the Paralytick, he calls him Son; Mat. 9 2.
When Christ had converted the Menstruous woman (which appears by her faith in
touching him, and drawing in virtue from him) he calls her daughter, Mark 5.34.
daughter, be of good cheer, etc. The new creature has both the white stone,
and the new name, the white stone of Absolution, the new name of Adoption.
There be some Honors a man can never attain to, unless he be born of Nobles,
or descended of the blood of Princes: Fortuitum est nas^i a principibus.
I cannot teach you to be Princes in this sense, it is a rare thing to be born
of Princes: but sure I am, unless ye be born again, not of bloods, or of the
will of man, but by the will, and of the Spirit of God, 1 John 13.3 John 3. ye
shall not see the Kingdom of God, much less become the s^ns of God, or Kings
and Priests to God, Rev. 1 6. and least of all live and reign as Princes, and
Peers of state in Glory. Now every sanctified soul to his great Comfort may
draw up this Syllogism: He that has the disposition, and the Affections, and
does the work of a child of God, is a child of God; But I have the
disposition, and the Affections, and do the work of a child of God; Therefore
I am a child of God.

If ye are right in the Assumption, ye are thrice happy in the Conclusion.

7th. Eff ct of Sanctification. Holiness brings the soul to its right frame
and Temper, Psalm 23.3. He restores my soul, etc. Sanctification is the souls
restoration, not only to joy and comfort, but also to its former soundness,
health and vigor, which was impaired by the fall. The health of the Body
consists in the right and sound constitution of of it: when all the members are
in their due positure, and all the humors in their right temperature, then the
body is in health; so the health of the soul consists in the rectification, or
right Constitution of all the faculties. So Dr. Sybs.
By the fall they all suffered deordination, disorder, deformity, confusion: by
Regeneration, they are set in joint again, renewed, rightly ordered, and
re-inclined to their proper, and right objects. Grace coming into the soul
(like Physic taken down into the body) works out the peccant humors, (...).
heals the soul of its old distempers, cleanses it of its former filthiness,
and superfluity of naughtiness, repairs nature by restoring to it the divine
Nature, and so makes the soul hail and healthful in Gods service; for indeed,
none but the vessel of Honor, which is sanctified, is meet for the Masters
use. Sin is the souls sickness: what sickness is to the body, that sin is to
the soul. Sin is compared to the worst of sicknesses, to the plague of the
heart, the noisome pestilence, the running Leprosy. A sick person cannot walk,
nor work with comfort, nor relish the sweetness of meat and drink, nor enjoy
himself in any of his enjoyments. Wherefore health is counted, the greatest
temporal blessing; far greater than wealth, honor, beauty, etc. Now sin being
a spiritual distemper, like a disease Physicians call a Corruption of the whole
substance of animals, vitals, Corruption totius substantiae.
naturals; an unholy sinner cannot walk in Heavens way, nor work the works of
God, nor savor the things of the Spirit, nor relish the sweetness of
Communion with God, nor the pleasures of Piety; his spirit is corrupted: this
internal Palate and appetite are vitiated, the whole man is quite out of frame
and order, he loves (like a Swine) to rowt in the dung and filth, and cannot
delight in God, nor in his holy Law. Things that are in themselves most
excellent, the great and glorious Mysteries of the Gospel, he looks upon as
things contemptible and vile; but sin in in its lusts and acts, viler than the
vilest filth he lives in, as his Element, and counts his greatest pleasure and
Glory; Phil. 3.11, 19.
he glories in his shame. O Lord! how sadly is man fallen? But in
sanctification the man is quite altered, the mind is informed, the will is
reformed, the affections are rightly ordered, the conscience is purged, the
Inner-man is recovered to its right temper: yea, the members of the body (which
before were weapons of unrighteousness) are now made sub-servient to the
Spirits Dictates: And the whole man (body soul and spirit) being sanctified,
Membra sunt Arma.
is now made ready for every good work, to which (before sanctification) it was
altogether reprobate. (Beloved Friends,) are your souls thus well and healthy?
are they recovered to their right temper? are ye sound in the faith? are ye
sincere at heart? is the habitual frame of your hearts right with God, and for
God, or not? deal impartially with your own souls. It Is true, a man that is
generally lively and healthy, may now and then by accident, get colds and
surfets, have fits of weakness, and for some time labor under some
infirmities; but a strong Constitution will rub along, wear off, and cast out
the disease at last; so an holy, a spiritually healthy man, through humane
frailty, and strong temptation, may for a time decay in grace, yea languish
very much; he may get cold, his love to God, his zeal for God may chil and
cool, his faith may weaken, his hope may almost fail, his patience may tire,
etc. And through the immoderate cares of this li^e, and inordinate affection to
the Creature, he may get a Surfeit, he may fall into sin, yea fowly fall into
great sins, Nemo esse sine delicto potest, quamdiu indument^ carni oneratus
est. Lactant. de vero cultu.
and labor under the sense of a wounded spirit a long time. Notwithstanding
all this, the immortal seed of God in him, (of which he is begotten) by the
supplies of the Spirit of Life, will revive and corroborate the man again. The
divine Nature in him will get head, exert its influence, and repair the man
again; Grace like Leaven will ferment the whole lump, the whole soul, and work
out the disease of sin; Psalm 1.3. Rev. 22.1.
(in a word) the withering stock of Grace within (like a Tree planted by the
River of Life) will spring, and flourish, scent, and bud again.

8. Blessed effect or Privilege. If thou art sanctified, or regenerated, thou
have a true and undoubted Title to the Kingdom, 3 John 3.5. Except ye are born
again ye cannot see, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. This Negative is
inclusive of the Affirmative. If ye are born again, ye shall both see, and
enter into Gods Kingdom. This Kingdom of God (if born again) is thy
Inheritance. If thou have the sanctification of the Spirit, thou art begotten
again unto a lively hope; this lively is also a most glorious hope; here hope
is put for the object hoped for; and what is that? the 3d. v. informs ye, an
inheritance, incorruptible, undefiled, which fades not away, reserved in
hea-for ye. The children of Regeneration are most certainly, and unquestionably
the children of the Kingdom: Sanctification is the Genuine and Evangelical
Title to salvation; see 2 These. 2.14. When ye are born from above, ye are at
that instant born for above, ye are born children of God, brethren of Christ.
Companions with Angels, and heirs of Glory: Nay, let me tell ye more,
Sanctification is the very entrance into the Kingdom of God: Sanctificatio est
Ing^estus in Regnum Dei. Ca^v. Phil 3.20.
Holiness is not only the way to Heaven, but it is Heaven it self. A
sanctified person lives the life of Heaven, * his conversation is in Heaven, he
lives the Life of God, whilst his body is here on earth; it is life eternal (in
the ptesent tense) in specie, and in primitiis, in the kind and first fruits of
it, to know God in Christ, John 17.3. When ye begin to be holy, ye then begin
to enter into the white cloud of Glory. Ah then! seeing every one would be
happy, who would not be holy? Holiness becomes thine House (O Lord) for ever:
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord (that is) with joy hereafter* Heb.
12.14. No, nor any enjoyment of the favor and fellowship with God here. An
unsanctified person is very miserable, he misseth heaven in both Worlds, he
has nether holiness, nor happiness, he has neither the seed, nor the flower,
neither the first fruits, nor the Vintage: he has not a grain of saving Grace,
no sweet dews falling from heaven on him, not a drop of the water of Life to
comfort him: But his soul is like the Heath in the Desert, and shall not see
when good comes, but shall inhabit the dry and parched places in the
wilderness, in a salt land, and not inhabited, Jer. 17.6. A most dismal state:
saltness, and barrenness is his doom here, fire and brimstone is his portion
for ever: Certainly, an unholy man must needs be very miserable.

Lastly, True sanctification is an abiding, flourishing, progressive Principle,

1. It is an abiding Principle: it lives and abides in it self, Semen manen^.
and it also quickens the soul in the life, and keeps the soul in the love of
God for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. A man externally sanctified may fall away, and come
to nothing, like a barren Tree he may lose in time both leaves and fruit: but a
man internally sanctified, can never fall away, neither totally, nor finally;
for the Name, and Nature of God, the Mark and Seal of God, the Image and Seed
of God is in him: And this is incorruptible and immortal; 1 Pet. 4.14.
the spirit of Glory and of God rests upon him, the sp rit of Holiness dwells
and abides in his soul for ever, the Father, Son, and Spirit, (according to
their omnipotency, faithfulness, and immutability) will never suffer their
seed, seal, nature, image to be lost. Though Hymenaeus and Philetus,
(hypocrites and heretics) may err concerning the truth, overthrow the faith of
some, and throw themselves and others down to H^ll: Nevertheless the foundation
of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy
2.17, 18, 19. The love of God in Election, and in Vocation (or Sanctification)
is like himself, unchangeable. The Gifts, Joh. 13.1. Romans 11.29.
and Calling of God are without Repentance. There may be partial and gradual
Apostasy in some of the Saints of God, they may backslide in their
apprehensions, in their affections, and in their conversations, as is too too
manifest by the Scripture-evidence, and by sad experience: but to backslide
totally from all the truths of God, and from all the profession of the Gospel,
and with the mind and will, with the consent of the whole soul, and finally to
fall away, bid an eternal farewell, or depart from God for ever; This cannot,
shall not be.

Among others, consult these Texts: Heb. 12.6, 2. He that is the Author, will
also be the Finisher of our faith; 1 Phil. 6. He that has begun the good work
in ye, will also perfect it. And Jer. 32.40. And I will make (says God) an
everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them
good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, and they shall not depart from
me. Here God in the Riches of his Grace through Christ, undertakes both for
himself and his Saints: 1. For himself; I will not turn away from them to do
them good. 2. For his Saints: I will put my fear into their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. Though they fall, they shall rise again, though they
step aside into the ways of death, God will bring them back, and give them
repentance unto life; They may turn from God for a season, but they shall never
finally depart from him; The Gates of Hell shall never prevail against them:
that is, either the infernal spirits, Ephesians. 6.12.
called principalities and powers, or the strength of Death and powers of the
Grave shall never dissolve the Union between Christ and them: for I am
persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

2. It is a flourishing and progressive Principle; Psalm 92.12, 13, 14. The
Motto of the Palm Tree is, Depressa Resurgo.
The Righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree, he shall grow like a Cedar in
Lebanon: Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the
Courts of our God, they shall bring forth fruit in old age: they shall be fat
and flourishing. Cant. 8.16. Awake, O North Wind, and come thou South, blow
upon my Garden that the spices thereof may flow out: in adversity, in
prosperity, under desertion, under consolation, come smiles, come frowns, come
the warm summer of joy, or the cold winter of sorrow: All the gales and blasts
of Divine Providence, shall sweetly conspire to open the Spices of Gods Garden
to ripen, and diffuse the savor of the graces of the Spirit in the hearts of
Saints: the North Wind is ripening, the South wind is refreshing, by both, the
Spices shall flow out. Grace small at first, like a grain of Mustard Seed, in
tract of time will grow to a Tree of so great a bulk, that the Fowls of the Air
may lodge in the branches of it: and of so high a stature, s^ to reach from
earth to Heaven. A spark of Grace (like a spark of fire) is kept alive in a sea
of water; Cant. 8.7.
Many waters shall not quench it, neither shall the floods drown it. I give to
them (says Christ) eternal life, and they shall never perish, etc. John 10.28,
26.

Lastly, Wherever the Image of Christ is, it is progressive. The picture or
likeness of a man in a frame grows not, it is always at a stand, but the image
of a man in his child is far different, it is lively, vigorous, and
progressive; it is the property (as well as duty) of every real Saint, to
perfect Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.
to forget the things behind, to reach forth unto those before, to press on
toward the Mark: Phil. 3.13.14. Romans 1.17, Psalm. 84.7. 2 Cor. 3.18. Gratia
Consummata est Gloria perficiens.
As the wicked grow worse and worse, the Saints grow better and better, they go
on from faith to faith, from strength to strength, and from Glory to Glory,
till they are swallowed up in Heavens Glory. The path of the just is as the
shining light, that shi^eth more and more unto the perfect day, Prove. 4.18.
Well then, cast up your Accounts, examine your hearts, consider your waves. Are
ye stars or Meteors? are ye burning Lamps, shining Lights, or Dark-lanthorns?
grow, (I am sure) ye do, either in sin, or holiness, upward, or downward,
Hell-ward, or Heavenward: And go ye do daily, either forward, or backward,
either toward the Mount of God, the H^ll of Holiness,, or toward the Lake of
Fire, the burning Tophet. If ye are Saints, rise up, Ascend, your Lord is
risen, Why seek ye the living among the dead? If ye are sanctified by him*
(...) Comes of (...) private. and (...) Terra, A Saint i^ not an earthly, but an
heavenly-minded man. Grace like fire, is always ascending to its Center.
ye are risen with him; If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, Col. 3.1. Set your affections on things above, and not on
things beneath, or on the earth; (...), i. e. mind the things above, and not
the things on, or of the earth.

If ye are redeemed from the earth, your Contemplation, your Communion, your
Conversation is, and ought to be above, where Christ sits at the right hand
of God; And the nearer ^o^e, the Omnis ascensus (in this sense) as well as
descensus, velocior in fine, quam in principio.
swifter should your pace be: Gird your Loins, Trim your Lamps, fill your
Vessels, prepare your Souls, do all diligence, make your Calling and Election
sure, for (...).
doing these things, ye shall never fall, but have an abundant entrance into
the everlasting Kingdom, etc. 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. so doing, ye shall have
Magnificent and Royal Entrance, the Gate of Heaven opened, full Assurance, and
most ample Reception into Glory. Thus having gone through the Doctrinal part
of the Propos^ ion, we proceed to App ication.

Now for Application.

If Jesus Christ be given of God the Father for our Sanctification; Then in the
first place, by way of Information: Ye that are the Saints of God, hence learn
to give distinct Glory in Believing, to the several Persons in the Blessed
Trinity. Get right apprehensions of the Divine Persons, and of the several
endearments, with which their Personal operations are clothed and represented,
and so worship, and glorify the Trinity of Persons, in the Unity of the Divine
Essence. God is most honored, your minds most enlightened, and your hearts
most warmed and comforted, when your thoughts are most distinct, explicit and
clear in this matter: in so doing Tuum Nomen sanctificetur rect^ per nomen
intelligimus benefi^ia personarum Patris officiu^, merita and beneficia filii
Mediatoris, and officium ac ben^ficia Spiritus sancti, quae in Scriptura
revelantur, and praedicantur. M. Chemnit. Harm. Evangel. p 610. Col. 1.12 Joh.
16.14.
you hallow, or sanctify the Name of God indeed. The Saints are Gods gift, the
Sons purchase, the Spirits charge. God in the Eternal Compact, gave the Saints
to Christ, to save, and Christ gives them to the Spirit to sanctify, and so
Tuum Nomen sanctificetur rect^ per nomen intelligimus benefi^ia personarum
Patris officiu^, merita and beneficia filii Mediatoris, and officium ac
ben^ficia Spiritus sancti, quae in Scriptura revelantur, and praedicantur. M.
Chemnit. Harm. Evangel. p 610. Col. 1.12 Joh. 16.14.
fit them for Glory. If the Father had not loved you before all worlds, the Son
had not Redeemed you, and if the Son had not Redeemed you, the Spirit had never
Sanctified you; and the Spirit works as the Sons Spirit, He (that is the
Spirit) shall glorify me, (says Christ) for he shall receive of mine, etc.
Now Consider the love of the Father in Election, the merit of the Son in
Redemption, and the efficacy of the Spirit in Sanctification; and give distinct
glory to each Person.

1. Consider the love of the Father in Election: It Is from the love of the
Father that we are blessed with all Spiritual blessings, Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
etc. that we are chosen in Christ, that we might be holy, etc. Christ himself
was a gift of the Fathers love, for God so loved the world, John 3.16
that he gave his only begotten Son, etc. this was unutterable, and
unconceivable love indeed: wherefore give due praise to the Father.

2. Consider the wonderful love and merit of the Son, his love was
transcendent, his merit was Infinite, Rev. 1.5, 6
wherefore to him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father, to him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen. It was superlative love in Christ
to lay down his precious life, to spill his precious blood for you, Gal. 2.20.
Christ by the merit of his blood (the price of your Sanctification) has
impetrated and obtained of the Father, the holy Spirit, with all the gifts and
graces of the same for your sanctification and salvation; see John 16.7, 13.
John 14.16, 17.

3. Consider the infinite power and efficacy of the Spirit: The same Spirit
that raised Christ from the dead, (called the Spirit of Holiness Romans 1.4.)
quickens the Saints to a new life, and dwells in them Romans 8.11. This new
life of holiness which is in Christ Jesus, is by the Spirit of life imparted to
you, Romans 8.2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 2
has made me free from the law of sin and death. Holiness in us is the fruit
of Christ's Purchase, the product of his merit, the sprinkling of his Unction, a
parcel of his Fullness, and a measure of his Spirit; we have as great need of
his Spirit to sanctify us, as of his blood to justify us; yea, the Eternal
Spirit was indispensibly needful to sanctify and dignifie the blessed
Sacrifice, of Christ's Humane Nature upon the Cross, or else I must profess my
Ignorance of that Text, Heb. 9.14.

(...). Supe eminens magnitudo virtutis ejus. So Montanus.
It Is not only the power, but the exceeding greatness of the Spirits power to
raise up a person, morally dead to an estate of newness of life; it is a work
proportionate to that power God wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the
dead* and set him at his own right hand in the Heavenly places, Ephesians. 1.19, 20.
Notwithstanding the Fathers E^ection, and the Sons Redemption, yet without the
Spirits Efficacy, we had all at this day, lain rotting, (^ike stinking Carrion)
in the Grave of sin and death. Gods Mercy, Christ's Merit, and the ^pirits
efficacy, It is very observable that all the three Persons challenge an equal
share in the working of holiness in the creature, it being such a part of Gods
G^orie. Mr. Buroughs Saints Treasury. p. 16.
must have their distinct glory. The Father is said to sanctify, the Son to
Sanctify, the Spirit to sanctify; but with their distinct Idioms or
Characters, our sanctification is from the Father in the Son and by the Spirit;
the Inchoation is from the Father, he is the prime ^^i^inal, the Dispensation
is by the Son, he is the way of Communication, the Application and Consummation
is by the Spirit; he receives of the Father and the Son, and shows it unto us,
that is, he works grace or holiness in us. Thus all the persons work jointly,
and yet distinctly, the love of the Father makes way for the Mediatorship of
the Son, and the Mediatorship of the Son for the Office of the Spirit. The
Sanctification of the Spir t is as necessary as the blood of Jesus, you may see
1 Pet. 1.2. how all the persons have their distinct operations. Communion with
the Spirit is as sweet and choice a privilege as the Grace of our Lord Jesus,
or the Love of God the Father. 2 Cor. 13.14. Thus sanctify the Name of God,
give Glory to the Father, Son and Spirit, to the Triuni Deo, the three one God,
(three in Persons, one in Essence and Nature) for your Sanctification.

I^ Jesus Christ be made of God Sanctification who of his own will has
begotten us by the Word of Truth; Jam. 1.18.
it is God the Father of our Lord Jesus, who of his abundant Mercy has
begotten us again, etc. 1 Pet. 1.3
Therefore we ought to bless and exalt his abundant Mercy as the Apostle does:
It Is the Father, the Heavenly Husbandman, that purges the Branches, John 15.1,
2.
that they might bring forth fruit.

As we ought to believe in Christ the Mediator, so in God as the first
Fountain and Author of Grace, and as the ultimate end of our happiness.

1. As the Fountain of all Grace, John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he
gave, etc. Ephesians. 2.4, 5. God who is rich in mercy, for his great love
wherewith he loved us, when we were dead in sins, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. Romans 4.24
has quickened us together with Christ. We must believe in him that raised our
Lord Jesus from the dead: He that believes in me, So Dr. M ^ton Expounds it in
his Commentary on Jude.
believes not in me, but in him that sent me; there not is not negative, but
corrective, not only in me, but his thoughts must ascend to the Father also,
who manifests himself in me: for God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, etc. 2 Cor. 5.19.

2. You must believe in God as the ultimate end of your happiness. Christ
suffered for sins, 1 Pet. 3.18
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. When the Mediator
brings the Soul into peace with God, by Justification, and into the likeness
and fellowship of God by Sanctification, he has attained the utmost end of his
Mediatourship, and the Soul has attained its chiefest good, and utmost
happiness: therefore is it said, that the Saints by Christ do believe in God, 1
Pet. 1.21
etc.

I would not wittingly or willingly speak a word for a world to detract any
thing from the honor of my blessed Savior, or from the glory of the sacred
Comforter; but to rectify your understandings, and to heighten your
apprehensions of the Fathers love, because many Christians carry all things in
the Name of Christ, and of the Spirit, (being more apprehensive of the Sons
love, and of the Spirit's grace) than of the Fathers abundant mercy; Give me
therefore leave to subjoin these four weighty Reasons.

Reas. 1. Because all grace begins with the Father: he is the first in order of
Being, and the first in order of Working, the Fountain of the Trinity (as we
may conceive) it is the Father that flows out to us in Christ by the Spirit:
he is the Father of lights, Jam. 1.17. And the Text tells ye, we are of God in
Christ Jesus: it is true, Christ as the second Person, is coequal with the
Father, in power and glory: but Christ as Mediator must be considered as the
Fathers Servant, Isa. 42.1.
as his elect or chosen Instrument.

Reas. 2. Glorify the Father, for whatsoever good Christ has done for you, or
in you, all is done with respect to the Fathers love and grant. 2 Timothy 1.9 Joh.
17.2.
God has saved us according to his own Purpose and Grace, given us in Christ
Jesus. God gave Christ power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal life
to those God had given him. Righteousness, Holiness, Heaven and Happiness, is
the Fathers free Grant or Donative. Rev. 19.18
To her it was granted to be covered with fine Linen, the Righteousness of the
Saints: and fear not little Flock, (...).
it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. or that
Kingdom. It Is very observable, that in all Christ's expressions of love to us,
he still expresses obedience to his Fathers Will, there is a double ground of
hope, as Stella speaks, See Stella at large, de amore Dei. cap. 18.
the Son loves us, because the Father requires it: and the Father loves us,
because the Son asks it.

Reas. 3. It is a great support and comfort to a Believer in the act of
believing, to consider the Love of the Father, as well as the Merit of the Son.
Two are better than one, 1 John 2.23, 24. 2 Ep. Joh. 9.
it is often made a great privilege to have both the Father and the Son. The
Fathers love the Sons Merit, severally and apart considered will not yield that
full joy and peace in believing, as both conjoined. There Is no coming to God
but by Christ, for God out of Christ is consuming fire: Again Christ separated
from the Father does not yield so firm a ground of confidence. The Fathers Act
with the Sons Merit gives us full security. Christ and the Father also are a
Believers Guardians, John 10.28, 29, 30. a double cord is not broken easily;
this twofold custody is the best security.

The Father is represented as the offended Party by man's sin. Conscience quakes
and trembles: now for a soul to know that God was in Christ reconciling the
World to himself: and that Christ came from Heaven to do his Fathers Will, and
that the Father has made him over to us in all his fullness, as wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption: This settles the soul in peace,
Thou will keep him in peace, peace (so it is in the Hebrew) whose mind is
stayed on thee. Isa. 26.3. It pleas^d the Father that in him should all fullness
dwell.
peace, in perfect peace, Isa. 26.3.

Reas. 4. Because in the Fathers love there are many engaging Circumstances,
not to be found in the other Persons.

1. In the Fathers Love and Acts of Grace, there is an Original fullness:
Christ's fullness as Mediator, is but drawn out of the Fathers plenty Col. 1.19.

2. The fullness of the Son in the dispensing of it, is limited by the Fathers
will, all that Christ dispensed was according to the charge and commandment of
the Father, Mat. 20.23. To sit on my right hand left is not mine to give (says
Christ) save to those for whom it is prepared of my Father. Christ as Mediator
was limited by the Fathers Will: To what end did God give Christ power over all
Flesh? but to give eternal life, to as many a God had given him, to none other.
Joh. 17.2.
Now it is sweet to think, that the Father himself loves us, who is first in
Order, and whose Will is absolute, and that he has laid up an inexhaustible
treasure in his Son for us.

3. In the Fathers Acts you have the purest and freest apprehensions of love.
'Twas the Father that began, and (as we conceive) broke the business of our
Redemption, and that sent his Son into the world to accomplish it. The Son as
Mediator can have an higher motive than his own love (viz.) the Fathers Will,
but the Father can have no higher motive than his own Love. After the Apostle
had treated of Election, Predestination to Adoption, Remission of sins, etc.
Ephesians. 1.11, 12.
he concludes all under the Will of God. The (...), or the good pleasure of the
Fathers Will, was the Wellhead, or Fountain, Cause of all those acts of Grace
that passed out unto the creature by the personal operations of the Son and
Spirit. The love of the Father was antecedent to the merit of Christ, and to
the operation of the Spirit; therefore in the Fathers Acts of Grace, ye have
the apprehensions of the first and freest love: you have great reason therefore
from Spiritual, Scriptural Considerations to glorify and praise the Father, as
the original Author of all your holiness and happiness. Thus much for the
second Use.



1. Sanctification is no easy work. God takes it to be his prerogative, I am
the Lord that sanctifies you, Levit. 21.8. Grace is his own proper immediate
creature, man's Will contributeth nothing to the work, but resistance and
rebellion, Domine errare per me potui, redire non potui. Aust. Meditat.
wherefore God makes the soul willing in the day of his power, Psalm. 110.3. and
outward means work not, unless the mighty power of the Spirit works with them,
or else, why should the same Word Preached by the same Minister, mollify some,
and harden others? Zech. 13.1.
Christ must come from Heaven, and open a Fountain in his own side and heart
for our purification: Heb. 9.14
Nothing but the blood of Christ can purge your Consciences from dead works. If
any other means had been effectual, Christ had never been made of God
Sanctification to us. It Is observable, Sanctification is not only expressed by
a Creation, (i. e.) Luke 11.21, 22. 1 John 4.4
a making of things out of nothing, but also by a victory, or a powerful
overcoming of opposition: In Creation, as there was nothing to help, so there
was nothing to resist or hinder, but when God comes to sanctify or convert a
soul, besides a Death in sin, God finds a strength of resistance against Grace.
Therefore Sanctification is wrought by the power of the Almighty: We deserve it
not, it comes from the Fathers Good Will, and Christ's Merit; and we work it
not, it is wrought in us by the power of the Holy Ghost.

2. Sanctification is not a common work: the making of man at first was not a
Common but a special work, Genesis 1.26
let us make man after our own likeness, the making of other creatures was by
the word of power, but the making of man was an act of counsel. And sure I am
the forming of Christ in the soul, the new workmanship created in Christ Jesus,
Ephesians. 2.10
to good works is one of the greatest and most glorious works of God, far
surpassing the Creation of Heaven and Earth: Wherein God shows himself an
Artist to the uttermost. Sanctification is the decking of the soul with Christ's
Image, a representation of God in his highest Excellency: and this is not a
common but a special Privilege, a divine Ornament which God bestows on none,
but upon his choice Favorites: a special and peculiar people. 1 Pet. 2.9.


Let all such that are in some measure sanctified, Phil. 1.6.
and for us, and he is faithful in the performance of his Promises to us.

1. He is able: Who has resisted his will: Romans 9.19 Isa. 59.1 Phil. 3.21 1
These. 5.24. Heb. 10.23
His hand is not shortened: He by the mighty power of his Spirit can subdue us
and all things to himself.

2. He is faithful, Faithful is he that has promised, who also will do it.
Believe O ye doubting desponding Souls in the veracity, fidelity, and
immutability of the great and good God: Hear what God, and not what the Tempter
speaks. God has promised to work in you to will and to do, (...). Et velle,
and perficere. These words are a M^osis.
Phil. 2.13. That Assertion carries along with it the nature of a Promise: Has
not the living and true God Promised in the New Covenant to sprinkle you with
clean water, to circumcise your hearts, to put his Law into our minds; to
write his Law in our hearts; to take away the heart of stone; to give us the
ministration of his Spirit; not to quench the smoking Flax, that is, to kindle
it; not to break the bruised Reed, that is, to strengthen it: and to send forth
Judgment unto Victory, that is, to carry on the work of Sanctification in the
Soul, (in spite of all opposition) till it be complete in Glory. Oh then! What
remains? but that we should all act Faith upon Gods power and faithfulness, in
making good his Promises, or else we shall discomfort our selves needlessly,
and dishonor God exceedingly. And withal remember, it is very expedient to turn
these Promises into Prayers, and act Faith on them in Prayer. The Promises are
as so many Bills under Gods own hand, which in the name of Christ we ought to
present to the Father, and to put them in suit; at the throne of Grace. Thus
come in Faith, and ye shall go away with Comfo^t.

Joh. 6. Joh. 14.1
believe in the Mediator, in him whom God has sent; honor the Son as ye
honor the Father, God has so appointed it: Look up to him all ye the ends of
the Earth and be saved, Isa. 45.22
so look up to him, and ye shall be also sanctified: be daily looking up to
Jesus the Author and Finisher of your Faith; the Alpha and Omega of your
holiness, (...). Aspicientes in illum. Isa. 61.1. 1 John 1.7
Heb. 12.2. Look up to Christ, for the Spirit of Sanctification from Christ, if
ever ye would partake of his Unction. The Crystal stream, wherein we are
washed and made clean, flows out of Christ's own heart. The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanses us from all sin: Faith makes Application of this blood, and so
it purifies: you may be poring long enough on your own filthiness, and be
filthy and dejected still, unless you look up to this Fountain, and see Christ
given of God for your Sanctification; you must apprehend him as the Lord your
Righteousness, and also as the High Priest of your holiness, else your
Consciences will never be pure, nor peaceable: Naaman by the Prophets order,
was to go down and dip himself seven times in Jordan, if he would be cured, 2
Kings 5.10. So by Gods order and appointment you must go down daily by the
renewed Acts of believing to this Fountain, and bathe and wash thy unclean Soul
in the streams of this Jordan, (I mean Christ's blood) if ever thou would be
healed of thy sinful Leprosy.

My sixth Use shall be to press us all to a serious sense of unum necessarium,
the one thing needful. Luke 10 42 Prove. 4.7
Sanctification is the principal thing: Sanctification is the Wedding Garment,
which renders ye amiable in the eyes of the King of Heaven: without this, the
King will say, Bind him hand and foot, and cast him into outer darkness. Mat.
22.12, 13. Certainly, this Wedding Garment is woven of the glorious beams of
the Sun of Righteousness, it is both the Righteousness of Christ imputed and
imparted; Christ's Righteousness (say others) with Faith and Holiness. So Calvin
and other Modern Writers.
The Graces of the Spirit are as Parliament-Robes. The Peers (say some) by rule
of Peereage, are not to sit in Parliament without their Robes. The Graces of
the spirit are the Jewels of the Covenant, and Robes of Heaven; No living or
reigning there; no sitting in Heaven as Peers of State, as Kings and Priests
without these Robes of Glory; the Righteousness of Christ for Justification,
and the Graces of Christ for Sanctification, without all this white Linen, the
Righteousness of the Saints. Sanctification is the Seal or Mark of Heaven.
There is a Necesse est put upon Sanctification.

1. For the honor of God, of each Person in the Trinity.

2. For our own happiness.

1. For the honor of the Father, that his choice be not disparaged. 2. For the
honor of the Son, that his Members be not deformed, nor polluted. 3. For the
honor of the Holy Spirit, that his charge may not miscarry, or fall short of
Glory.
1. For the Honor of the Father whose choice we are, we are chosen in Christ
to be holy, Ephesians. 1.4. and chosen to the Sanctification of the Spirit, 2 These.
2.14. Mere morality has something of Majesty in it in the eye of nature.
Those abominable Bruits at Rome could not practice their filthy lascivious
pranks, while grave Cato was on the Theater; the most carnal men have some
inward respect for holiness, for all their quarrelling with it, and dislike of
it. Now should not Gods chosen be an holy People, and live holily, they would
be a dishonor to his Name, a scandal to his Gospel a cloud to his Glory. God
therefore chiefly aims at our holiness in all his dispensations. I shall
instance in these three. 1. God Chooses us. 2. Calls us. 3. Corrects us,
that we might be holy.

1. God Chooses us, the chosen Generation are to be an holy Nation, and to show
forth Gods virtues. God chooses us that we should be of a choice Spirit, (...)
virtutes, 1 Pet. 2.9
he loved us with a singular love, that we should be persons of singular lives
to him.

2. God calls us that we may be holy, that he may put the honor of
holiness upon us, in the eye of the whole world; Be ye holy in all manner of
conversations, as he is holy; 1 Pet. 1.15 Mat. 5.16 (...) demum est vera
religio imitari Deum quem Colis. Lactan.
Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good-works. etc.
That is true Religion, when we imitate God whom we worship. It Is impossible God
should set his love upon a person altogether unlike himself, similitude is the
ground of Fellowship, can two walk together except they are agreed, for what
communion has light with darkness, or Christ with Belial? Surely, none at all.

3. Why does the Lord many times correct his people, but that they might be
holy; this is the sweet fruit that grows upon the sour tree of affliction;
this is all the fruit to take away their sin, Isa. 27.9. and more expressly,
Heb. 12.10. To make them partakers of his Holiness. We are Threshed, that our
husks may fly off; Winnowed, that we may be purged; Tried in the Furnace, that
our Graces may be brightned, and our dross, our lusts consumed, God never
afflicts his people but for their profit; (Though we may not) yet God many
times sees we have great need of affliction, 1 Pet. 1.6
because we have need of sanctification, many times the Saints get such deep
spots in their Consciences, and stains in their Garments, that nothing but the
Salt and Vinegar of afflition will rub them out: God had rather see his people
in a suffering, than in a sinful state; he had rather hear them cry, than see
them filthy: and better a thousandfold to be preserved in Brine, than to rot in
Honey.

2. Sanctification is absolutely needful for the honor of God the Son, least
his members should be deformed, and polluted; head and members must be
proportionate like to one another; Dan. 2.31, 32, 33
it were monstrous that Christ should have such a strange body; as
Nebuchadnezars Image, which he saw in his Dream, the head of Gold, the arms and
breasts of Silver, the thighs of Brass, the feet of Iron and Clay: so strange
and odd it is, that Christ should have such a misshapen Body, altogether unlike
himself: it is not for Christ's honor to be the head either of a monstrous or
ulcerous body: by how much we retain of sin, by so much we dishonor our
Redeemer, and put him to shame: therefore all Christ's aim is to make us holy.
Christ pitched on Sanctification as the fittest blessing to bestow upon us, to
make us holy and so to make us in and with himself honorable. Every distinct
society must have some distinct honor; now Christ has set apart his Church as
a distinct society to himself; He bestows not on her worldly pomp or splendor,
other societies have enough of that, but he beautifies her with holiness the
best Ornament: For holiness becomes thine House O Lord for ever, Psalm. 93.5.
This is a far greater gift, than any outward greatness, for moral
excellencies do far transcend civil or natural. Romans 10.12 Ephesians. 2.4 Romans 11.33
Exodus 24.6
God is said to be rich in Mercy, plentious in Redemption, abundant in
Goodness and Truth, infinite in Power, unsearchable in Counsel, but he is
glorious in Holiness, Exodus 15.11. Gods Goodness is his Treasure, but his
Holiness is his Glory. Again Christ in giving us Sanctification, did not only
respect its Excellency, but also our want of it. Christ came into the world to
repair and make up the ruins of the Fall; in the Fall we lost not only Gods
Love, but also Gods Image; therefore that the Plaster might be as broad as the
sore, he died not only to reconcile us, but also to sanctify us, that he
might sanctify the people with his own blood, he suffered without the Gate,
Heb. 13.12. Exodus 30.17, 18, 19, 20, 21
His blood was not only (...) a Price, but also (...) a Laver, wherein to wash
us, and make us clean; as under the Law there was both a Laver, and an Altar;
to show that we must be sanctified as well as justified. Christ came into the
world not only to abolish the guilt of sin, The Son of God appeared. (...) ut
dissolvat opera Diaboli. Si hodie quoque in Helvetiis Thermae Taberien. ses,
etc. valetudinarios ^eflituunt, id quidem divinae tribuendam est b^nignitati;
nam nullae res Terrenae vim in se habent saluta^em homin ^us, nisi effi^aces
r^d dantur per po ea^iam omnipotentis B^ling. in Joh. 5.4 Numb. 35 6, 25.
which makes against our Interest, Peace, and Comfort; but also to destroy the
power of sin, and cleanse us of the filth of sin, which makes against Christ's
Glory: Christ dyed that the Gospel, and all the precious Ordinances and
Promises of the same might be under a blessing and conduce to the advancement
of holiness, Ephesians. 5.26. That he might Sanctify us by the washing of water
through the Word.

Christ has procured a Treasure of Grace to be conveyed to the Church by the
spiritual use of Ord^nances, John 17.19. I Sanctify my self for their sakes
(says Christ) that they might be Sanctified through the Truth. That profane
Wretch Celsus, decries Christianity, as though it were a Nursery of wickedness,
and a Seminary of all looseness; such abom^nable thoughts he had of the
Doctrine of Free Grace. Origin wise y answers him: The Gospel is not an
Invitation of a Thief to debauch men, but the Invitation of a Physician to cure
men of their enormities: It Is an Hospital, to heal them of their Diseases, a
Fountain to cleanse them of their Filthiness When ever ye come to hear the Woe
d, or to the use of any Ordinance, expect then to re^p th: fruits of Christ's
purchase; look upon the Ordinances as sprinkled by Christ's blood, as influenced
by Christ's Spirit.

When ye come to this Pool of Bethesda there wait, and wait earnestly for the
Angels stirring of the waters, as the impotent folk did, John 5.2, 3, 4. the
Angel of the Covenant, Christ in his Prophetical Office, must stir in these
waters of the Sanctuary, manifest his Power and Presence in them, and stir in
thy heart also* Open thy immortal Gates, move and melt thy bowels for thee, if
ever they are effectual.

It Is very observable, that under the Law all the Cities of Refuge, were Cities
of Levites, and Schools of Instruction. And there the Manslayer must stay till
the death of the High Priest; So, in like manner, if ye fly from the Pa^s^er
of Blood, (the Law and Wrath of God) to Jesus Christ for Refuse, for
Reconciliation, for Justification, as your High Priest; you must come to Christ
also for teaching, as your Prophet, ye must learn the Trade of holiness in
Christ's School, as well as look for reconciliation by Christ's Cross. To
conclude, Your Head is holy, so must the members be, or else ye exceedingly
dishonor your Head, and disgrace his Glory.

3. It Is for the honor of God the holy Spirit; the Father and the Son have
committed the Saints to the Spirits charge, to this very end and purpose, that
they might be sanctified: Sanctification is made the Spirits personal
operation, 2 These. 2.14. 1 Pet. 1.2. The Spirit is to shape and fashion all the
Vessels of Mercy, and prepare them for Glory, he is to deck the Spouse of
Christ with the jewels of the Covenant. It Is the great advantage the Saints
have in the Economy or dispensation of Grace, that they have the Father, to
purpose it, the Son to purchase it, and the Spirit to work it, the Father,
Word, and Spirit are all one, and agree in one for our sanctification. Now it is
a great grief to the Spirit, when the work of Grace does not go on and prosper
in the soul; for, it is he that works us to this very thing, and therefore is
called the Spirit of holiness, It Is not for the Spirits honor, that Gods
Nursery or Plantation committed to his care and charge should not thrive and
flourish. It Is not for the Spirits honor to dwell in defiled Temples, nor to
let the people go naked without their Ornaments: It Is not for the Spirits
honor, that any committed by the Father and the Son to his charge, should
perish or miscarry, should fall away either totally from all Grace, finally for
all time, for ever, to miss of heaven in the end. The Father has left the Son
in charge to be the Captain of our salvation, Heb. 2.
and to bring many children to Glory. The Son has left the Spirit in charge
with all his Fathers children, to gu^de them by his Counsel, and to bring them
to his Glory. When Christ (as man) left earth, and went to Heaven, he comforts
his Disciples by sending another Comforter, and who he is, Christ tells ye, even
the Spirit of truth, to guide his people into all truth; for he shall not speak
from himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will
show you things to come, he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine,
and shall show it unto you; all things that the Father has are mine: therefore
said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you, John 16.13, 14,
15. The Spirit of Christ is Christ's Pro-rex, or Viceroy by Comm ssion from his
Father and himself, to rule and govern the affairs of his providential Kingdom,
Ezekiel. 1.20, 21. The spirit of the living creature was in the wheels: The Spirit
acts the Angels (called living Creatures), and the living creatures or Angels,
act and move the wheels, (that is) the Transactions of divine Providence in the
world, and Christ by the Spirit governs and guides his Subjects in his
spiritual Kingdom; (...), aux viae vobis erit in omnem veritatem. So Beza in
John 16.13.
the Spirit is Dux viae, the Captain of the way, to lead his people into all
truth, their Glorious Guest to dwell with them, and to abide with them for
ever, John 14.16, 17. and by his inhabitation and constant influence and
operation, to perfect his own work in them, and ripen their souls for Heaven.
Thus our sanctification is absolutely necessary for the honor of the Father,
Son, and Spirit.

2. Our sanctification is absolutely, and indispensibly needful, as for the
honor of God, so also for our attainment of true happiness: (...) the
masculine ^rticles must be refered to (...). Holi^ is. N^gat que^q^am poss
videre D^^m sine sanctimon a ^ moniam am (...) oculis (...) deb^mus Deum, quam
qui reformati fuerint ad ejus imaginem. Calv.
Grace and Glory, holiness and happiness, sanctification and salvation,
individuo nexu cohaerent, These are tied and twisted together with a knot
inseparable, and indissoluble. There is no going to Heaven, without holiness no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. Some there are, which ignorantly, and
fondly do restrein the word Saints, to the Saints departed; the Saints in
Heaven; but we must be Saints here, or else can never expect to be Saints
hereafter. The Apostle denies (says Calvin) that any one can see God without
holiness, because he shall see God with no other eyes, than those which shall
be renewed according to his Image; the Image of God, is b^ begun on earth, it is
perfectly and completely drawn by the Vision of God in Heaven. Be sure you are
real Saints sanctified in Christ Jesus, and not only nominal, and notional, as
too many are: your Saintship is all the evidence you have to show for your
inheritance: be sure then, you keep your evidence fair, and clear, without
blots and blurs: Unless ye are begotten again unto a lively hope; what have ye
to do with that inheritance, gilded with so many glorious Epithets? (...), etc.
Math. 5.8. (...).
1 Pet. 1.2, 3. How can they see God that have not a pure heart, nor a pure eye
(indeed, the pure heart is the pure eye) The Degree of Vision will be according
to the degree of sanctification; the more gracious we are in this, the more
glorious we shall be in the other world. The Apostle tells us, Col. 1.12. we
must be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light:
What should a carnal heart do with Heaven? that knows no other heaven, but to
eat, drink, and wallow in sensual delights: (as the Glutton at a feast cried,
There Is no heaven like to this); We must not look for a Turkish Paradise in
Heaven, but for a pure sin-less state, not to bathe our souls in carnal
pleasures, but to be Consorts of the immaculate Lamb; and Competitioners with
the Angels: Perfection of Grace, As one says, Consortes Agni, Angellorum
Candidati.
and fullness of joy in the presence of Gods Glory is the Saints heaven. Swine
know not what to do with Pearls, nor carnal creatures with the life and joys
above. Suppose that which is not to be supposed; were it possible an
unsanctified person should go to heaven, that holy place and holy Company would
be an hell to him, Coelum est altera Gehenna damnatorum.
he would be as weary of heaven, as ever water was of running, (according to
the Proverb:) If the faint Image of God in his Saints, if the glympse of Gods
presence in his Ordinances, be so irksome and unpleasant to an unholy soul
here, Oh how terrible and contrary to his spirit, would the most glorious
Presence of God in heaven be? where the Seraphims cry continually, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of Sabbath, etc. where God displayes his holiness in the
greatest splendour and glory. God is perfect light, Isa. 6.3. Revel. 4 8. 1 John
1.5.
the man is darkness, they could never agree together. An unsanctified person
indeed may desire Heaven, as a disproportionate good, as a place better to be
tolerated than the torments of hell: he may desire heaven as a privation of
suffering and misery, but not as a privation of all sin, nor as the perfection
of Grace and holiness; nor as it is the nearest union of the soul with God, and
the highest fruition of the chief good. Thus for him to desire, or long for
Heaven, is against the very grain and hair of his spirit, altogether
inconsistent with, and contrary to his old unrenewed nature. Now on the
contrary, the Saints, whose eyes are enlighted with the eye salve, and by the
prospective of Faith, Rev. 3.18.
have had a view of this King and Kingdom, Isa. 33.17.
these make a right Scheam or draught of Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in
Christ, he is a new Creature. Gloria quam habebunt conformem Christi corpori
incomprehensibilis est. Calv. in Phil. 3.21.
and their believing hopes of interest in this Kingdom, and of communion with
this Company that is above, do engage them to purification, 1 John 3.2, 3. He
that hopes and longs to see Christ, as he is, and to be like him, both for
constitution of soul and temper of body, he must ever labor to be holy, and he
will be trying, and practicing here on earth, to conform to Christ beforehand.

He that expects that his vile body shall be made like Christ's Glorious body,
(1) in spirituality, purity, clarity, strength, splendour and Glory, he will
possess his Vessel in sanctification and honor; he dares not use his body
merely as a streiner for meats and drinks, nor as an unclean channel for lusts
to pass through; but he will honor it, as a Temple of the holy Ghost; h^s mind
that shall see God, he will not fi^l with chafe and vanity, with worldly
cares, or unclean ^houghts, his affections that should cleave to God
intensively, and inseparably, he will not prostitute to every base object: he
will labor to keep his garments clean, to walk without spot, and blameless,
till the coming of the Lord.

Thus with respect to the fruition of our hopes, and the attainment of our
happiness, we are engaged, and not engaged only, but inclined, and sweetly
constrained also to habitual, and actual holiness, or as the Apostle
excellently phraseth it, to cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, 2 Cor. 7 1.
and perfect holiliness in the fear of the Lord.

Use 7. In the seventh place: This point informs us of the excellency of
Sanctification, or Holiness; ye have heard already much of its absolute
necessity, now something of its transcendent Excellency. Holiness is the Name
of God, the Will of God, the Work of God, the Seed of God, the Nature of God,
the Image of God, the life of God, the Glory of God, the luster and splendour of
the soul, the health and vigor of the soul, the soul of man is the Physical
Image of God, but the holiness of the soul is the Ethical or qualitative image
of God. It Is the seed of Glory, the beginning of Heaven, the first fruits and
forerunners of eternal Life. It Is a known Maxim, That which partakes of the
nature of the whole, Quicquid participat de natura totius, est pars totius.
is a part of the whole: the filings of Gold are Gold ramenta auri sunt
preciosa, Grace is very precious, true sanctifying saving grace is Glory; The
holy people are the most precious honorable people in the world; Isa. 43.4.
Since thou wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, and I have
loved thee, etc. Prove. 12.26.
The righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor.

See how many honorable Titles God does honor his Saints in Scripture with;
1. They are his portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. 2. They are his pleasant portion, Jer.
12.10. 3. They are his inheritance, Isa. 19.25. others are the works of his
hands, but the Saints are his inheritance. 4. They are the dearly beloved of
his soul, Jer. 12.7. 5. They are his Treasure, his peculiar treasure, Exodus
19.5. and his peculiar people, 1 Pet. Segallah, et (...), are the same.
2.9. Titus 2.14. 6. They are the Apple of his Eye, Zech. 2.8. whosoever touches
you, touches the Apple of mine Eye. 7. They are his Glory, Isa. 46.13. 8. They
are the house of Gods Glory, Isa. 60.7. 9. They are a Crown of Glory, Isa.
62.3. 10. They are the Throne of God, Exodus 17.16. the words may be read thus:
because the hand upon the Throne of the Lord, and so by many they are
translated. 11. The Throne of Glory, Jer. 4.21. 12. The Ornament of God, Exek.
7.20. 13. The Beauty of his Ornament, Exek. 7.20. 14. The Beauty of his
Ornament set in Majesty, Ezekiel. 7.20. 15. A Crown of Glory, Isa. 62.3. 16. A
Royal Diadem, Isa. 62.3. 17. Lastly, The excellent in the Earth, Psalm 16.3.
the Saints that are in the earth, are the excellent in the earth, the Jewels of
the world: you may enlarge in your own Thoughts.


This then serves to inform the mistaken and blind world, that Grace is no
disgrace, that holiness is no dis-enobling, but a most generous, princely and
glorious thing. Brave spirits (as the world accounts them) think preciseness,
an inglorious, and the power of Godliness a base thing, that takes off from
their Grandeur and Generosity. Coguntur esse mali, ne viles habeantur. Salvian.
Salvian complains that in his time, the Great Ones were detered from serious
holiness, because it was Contemptible. It was Gentleman-like to be wicked, but
Peasant, or Vassal-like to be Godly; whereas the service of God is the noblest
and sweetest liberty, but the service of sin the vilest slavery: Though your
jolly spirits think they are the freest men on earth; The Apostle nips their
Courage with that Cooling-Card, 2 Pet. 2.19. While they promise them liberty,
they themselves are the servants of Corruption; for of whom a man is overcome,
of the same is he brought in bondage. They are the slaves of Satan in the bonds
of lust: I wish that all Prodigals and presumptuous sinners, would seriously
mind that Text: But (my Brethren) I trust, that ye have otherwise learned
Christ; If so be, ye have heard him, and have been taught by him, as the truth
is in Jesus, then ye do put off, concerning the former conversation, the old
man, etc. ye do put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness, (...) in sanctitate veritatis. vulg.
or holiness of Truth, Ephesians. 4.22.23, 24.

I trust the Lord has given ye an understanding to know things that are
excellent, and to approve them, that ye may be sincere, and without offense
till the day of Christ; as the Apostles prays for the Phillippians, Phil. 1.9,
10. Many excellent Gifts the Father of Lights bestows upon his Children; indeed
every good and perfect gift comes from him. Jam. 1.17.
Christ himself is the first Best Gift of God; A Gift of Gifts, and
sanctification in, or by Christ Jesus, Joh. 1.10.
I take to be the next Best. Now you that are righteous with this inherent
Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.2.
hold on your way, and prosper, the Lord be with ye, The Angel of his presence
save ye, The Spirit of Jesus guide ye to the Hill of holiness, and help you to
perfect holiness in the fear of God. You are under the virtue of sure and sweet
promises for your great encouragement in Heavens way: The Righteous shall hold
on his way, and he that has clean bands shall be stronger and stronger, Job
17.9. The Lord strengthen your hearts, See these Texts: Isa. 40. 2 last verses.
Phil. 1.6. Heb. 12.2. Ezekiel. 36.27.
and quicken your speed, by these powerful and precious Promises: and give ye a
prosperous arrival at the fair Havens of rest and peace. Amen.

We come now to close the whole with these two uses:

1. By way of Conviction, 2. By way of Caution. Though I know the Rules of
Method, and the exigence of the Subject, Command me, yet I shall not proceed
directly by way of Examination, because that has been already done, from that
Text, Romans 1.7. To all that be at Rome, beloved of God called to be Saints:
from whence the doctrine of calling has been discussed, the nature of
Saintship, and the signs and trials of Sanctification have been largely shown.
We shall therefore (God willing) proceed to the next in order, viz. the Use of
Conviction.

Use 8. This Doctrine of Sanctification we have so long insisted on, serves
for Conviction. If those that are Gods, and Christ's, are sanctified in Christ
Jesus; if God the Father has given them Christ his Son for their
sanctification, to make them holy: Then this Point brings doleful news, sad
tidings in the mouth of it to three sorts of Persons: To the Profane, To the
Persecutors, To the Scorners.


1. The profane, who mock at sin and slight holiness, 1. The profane.
are hereby convicted and condemned. God has no Birthright for such profane
Esaus. The people, who are the Lords portion, are an holy Nation, washed from
their filthiness: If ye are converted, ye are washed and sanctified, in the
name and by the spirit of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 6.11. but profane ones have a
spot upon them, which is not the spot of Gods Children, Deuteronomy. 32.5. see what
St. John speaks of such kind of persons, as wallow in their filthiness. 1
John 3.8. He that commits sin, is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from
the beginning; he that tradeth in sin, (...) qui operam dat* peccato. So Beza.
and makes sin his constant business, work, or practice, as a workman does
his calling, and follows the same daily and deliberately. A godly man may
slip into sin through humane frailty, and in the hurry of temptation may be
overtaken with a fault: But it is the profane man that is a trader in sin, and
a constant worker of iniquity. Though such men may presume that they belong to
God, yet our Savior expressly speaks, they are the Devils Children, John 8.44.
Ye are of your father the Devil, for his works ye do, etc. These men have not
the least pretense of a claim to Heaven, they come exceeding short of
Hypocrites, who pretend to holiness, and seem to be so; but the profane are
neither civil, nor moral. Such gross sinners are called Dogs and Swine. They
are weltring in the gall of bitterness, and bound fast with the bond of
iniquity, as Peter told Simon Magus, Acts 8.23. All that such kind of sinners
have to say (for the most part) for themselves, is this, 1. That God is
merciful. 2. That their hearts are better than their lives.


To the first I answer, that God is holy, and just, as well as merciful and
gracious. The Lamb will turn a Lion, the Savior of the world will come as a
terrible Judge in flaming fire to render vengeance to the ignorant, and
disobedient, 2 These. 1.8. And if the righteous scarcely be saved, where shall
the wicked and ungodly appear? 1 Pet. 4.18. They shall appear indeed, but like
as chafe before the Whirlwind, and as stubble before the flames. All the
Attributes of God, as justice, mercy, etc. do run in the channel of his
Holiness.
Sinners do little think, that Gods mercy is an holy mercy, which in a saving
manner he will dispense to none out of Christ; Sinners do err exceedingly to
think, that God is prodigal either of his own mercy, or of his Sons Blood; it is
only the sanctified in Christ Jesus, exclusively, who shall be the objects of
his saving mercy, the mercy of God, and the merit of Christ, are most sacred
and precious things, 1 Pet. 1.18. The former is bestowed on none, the latter is
spilt for none but an holy and a peculiar people. Justice must be satisfied, 1
Pet. 2.9.
else mercy can be never dispensed: if the merit of Christ be thine, then the
mercy of the Father is thine, otherwise though the Ocean of Gods pardoning
mercy be boundless and bottomless, thou shall not taste one drop of it. Well
then, would thou know that God will be merciful to thy soul at the last day,
it highly concerns thee to know Christ, in the power of his Resurrection, and
in the fellowship of his sufferings in this thy Day. Phil. 3.10.


2. To the other Plea: That their hearts are better than their lives.

I answer, This is to appeal to a witness, that cannot be found; to a witness,
that is, (as to us) invisible: it is as if a man should lay claim to another
man's Land, and pretend he has lost the evidences; the guilt of the profane is
written in Capital legible letters, upon the frontispiece of his Conversation,
every eye may see it: Vita est index animi, index futuri, and index aterni.

See Mat. 12. from 34 to v. 37.

Cor instar Promptuarit est bonorum, and malorum. Pareus.


As a good tree brings forth good fruit, so a bad tree brings forth bad fruit:
Men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles. As a good man out of
the good treasure of his heart brings forth good things, so an evil man out
of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil things. A good man speaks
good words, and does good works; and the Apostle tells us, Romans 2.6. God will
reward every man according to his deeds. Your hearts can never be good, when
your tongues and lives be bad; Your Lord Christ speaks expressly, out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.

The doom of the profane is dreadful, to instance but in two particulars.

1. The unclean shall not enter into, or pass over the way of holiness, Isa.
35.8. And an high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way
of holiness; See the Dutch Annotat, on the place.
the unclean shall not pass over it, etc. The meaning of that place is this,
The true Church shall be no barren Wilderness, or untrodden Desert, but in it
shall be showed the true way to salvation by faith in Jesus Christ; who
cleanses us from all our sins, and gives us his holy Spirit, to regenerate,
and renew us to an holy life, but the unclean, or profane shall not pass in
this high way of Holiness; The dogs shall be without, out of the pale of the
true Church, Revel. 22.15.

2. The unclean shall not enter into the new Jerusalem. That most holy place,
and blessed state is an heavenly Mansion, and preferment for Doves; not for
Vultures; for sheep, not for Goats or Swine. not for the unclean, but for the
holy. Regnum coelosum clausum est incredul^s, blasphemis, execratis, and iis,
qui secundum carnem, ambu^ant, sed idem apertum est electis, and vocatis
sanctis. Pignet.
No Anathema must be there, Revel. 21.27. And there shall in no wise enter into
it any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or makes a
lie, but they which are written in the Lambs book of life. The inheritance
above is a possession for the sanctified, and none else, Acts 26.18. that
goodly Country the Eternal Canadn, is divided among the Saints, it is the
peculiar portion of an holy p^culiar people: but the Flaming Tophet, the Lake
that burns with fire and brimstone is the lot of the profane.

2. This Point brings sad tidings to the persecutors, that hate holy persons,
and holy things for the sake of holiness; 2. The Persecutors.
who labor to deface the Image, and spiritual worship of Christ, to pull down
the honor and glory of God in the world, and to root out holiness from the
earth. Christianos ad leones. Et pu^onos Deus Apostolos novissimos elegit
veluti Bestiarios. Tertul. John 19.12.
Whatsoever these men's pretenses are, as 1. State Policy, as Haman told King
Ahasuerus, when he thought to exterminate the whole Jewish Race; it is not for
the Kings profit that these men should live; Or 2. Fear of Rebellion, these are
no friends to Caesar; as has been the old Calumny: these are Enemies to
Government; This unjust charge the Jews insinuate against Christ before Pilate:
If thou let this man go, thou art not Cesars friend? whosoever makes himself a
King, speaks against Caesar. Whereas the Scepters and Crowns of Princes have
no better friends under heaven, than Religion, and religious men: Or 3.
Expediency of an uniformity in all modes in Religion: whereas it is as possible
for all men to come into the world with the self-same faces for figure and
feature, as for all men in the same Nation to agree in the same, and in all the
modes and circumstances of the same Religion: as the Emperor wisely told that
Satyrist, objecting, why he had so many men of so many opinions in his Army,
yet notwithstanding it is the white of holiness which they shoot at. The
shining luster of the Saints spiritual worship, and holy Conversation draws a
Cloud over theirs, and puts a check upon them: therefore they hate and
persecute.

The original moral cause of defaming the names, of spoiling the goods, of
confiscating the estates, of hating and persecuting the persons of the Saints,
is the inbred enmity in the seed of the Serpent against the seed of the woman,
Genesis 3.15. And the Apostle speaking of Isaac the Son of the Promise, and of
Ishmael the Son of the Bond Woman, has this expression, Gal. 4.29. But as
then, he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that was born after the
spirit, even so it is now. It Is said of the Panther, that he hates a man with
such antipathy, that he will run at the very picture of a man to tear it in
pieces; so vile ungodly wretches, acted by the Devil (the old murderer, John
8.44.) hate the very picture of Christ wherever they see it. These (beloved)
are very far off from the blessed estate of sanctification (of which we have
been speaking) that (were it in their power) they would not suffer a Saint to
breath, nor permit holiness to spring, and blossom in the earth: Oh that such
poor creatures were made sensible, what sad work they make, what a pitiful
trade they drive.

Persecution is, 1 A very wicked practice. 2 A very fruitless practice. 3 A
very dreadful practice.


1. A very wicked practice, condemned not only by Scriptures, Hanc veniam
petimusque, damusque vicissim.
by the light of Nature, by the Rules of common Equity, but also condemned by
the Ancient Fathers, and Councels.

First, we begin with Tertullian. See (says he) does not this amount to the
elogy of irreligiousnesse, Videte, ne, and hoc ad irreligiositatis elogium
concurrat, adimere libertatem Religionis, and interdicere optionem divinitatis,
ut non liceat mibi colere quod velim, sed cogar colere quod nolim. Tertul.
Apol. cap 23.
or may not we well call it, a most irreligious thing, to take away the liberty
of my Religion, and forbid me the choice of my Divinity, so that it may not be
lawful for me, to worship what I will, but I must be forced to worship what I
am unwilling to. And in many other places this external compulsion he ascribes
to profaneness. Lex nova non se vindicat ultore gladio. Clemens Alexand.
Stromat. 8.
Clemens Alexander, and Lactantius also consented to that Maxim of Tertullian,
The Law of Christ does not right it self with a punishing sword.

Athanasius, speaking of the Arians, who at first forced men to their Heresy
by prisons, Atque ita seipsam quam non sic pia, nec Dei cultrix manif^stat.
Athan. in his Ep. ad Solitar. (...). Epiphan.
and punishments, concludes of that Sect, it evidently declares it self thereby
to be neither pious, nor to have any reverence of God. Epiphanius gives this as
the Character of the semi-Arrians; they persecute them that teach the truth,
not confuting them with words, but delivering them that believe aright to
hatred, wars, and swords, having now brought destruction, not to one City, or
Country alone, but to many.

Again, The Council of Sardis Ep. ad Alexand. expressly affirms, that they
dissuaded the Emperor from interposing his secular power to compel them that
dissented: Praecipit sancta Synodus, Nemini deinceps, vim infer: Cui enim
vult, Deus miseretur, and quem vult indu, rat.
And the Council at Toledo, by one of their Canons condemned the ugly trade of
persecution. The holy Synod commands, that none hereafter shall by force be
compelled to the faith, for God has mercy, on whom he will have mercy, and
whom he will he hardneth.

These instances (among many more producible) I have named, whereby it is
evident, that persecution was long since condemned, as wicked, both by Fathers
and Councels. Ye shall ever find it the black mark of the Beast, and false
Prophet, to persecute the Image of Jesus.

2. As it is a wicked, so it is a fruitless Practice.

The silly persecutor does but beat the air, plow the sand, and kick against
the pricks: his work is senseless, and fruitless; though he may bring others
to the fire, he does but labor in the fire, (as the Prophet speaks:) his work
will be burnt up, and come to nothing, as with the Children of Israel in the
Land of Egypt, Exodus 1.12.
the more they were afflicted, the more they multiplied: So the more the Saints
are persecuted, the more they are augmented; this is a strange (yet a true)
Paradox; the more they are depressed, Depressa resa^go.
and oppressed, the more they grow (like Camomile) the more they rise up (like
the Palm Tree); it is apparent by all stories in all Ages, that the more
precious blood has been spilt, Sanguis Ma tyrum semen Ecclesiae.
the more precious seed (multiplying into an innumerable offspring) has been
sown. All along, the Blood of the Martyrs has been the seed of the Church.
This, not only the Pagan Emperors of old, notwithstanding all the havoc they
made of the Lambs of Christ; but also the mightiest Christian Emperor, that
ever sweyed the Western Scepter had experience of.

Charles the fifth son of Pepin, King of France, Emper^ur o^ Germany, after all
his Wars, Slaughters, stirs, and Buzzles in the world to extirpate the
Protestant faith, at last was weary, and le^t the matter much as he found it;
and betook himself to a private life. And when in his retirement, he came to
dye, he dep^^ted in the same faith, (as the renowned Historian Thuanus relates)
which in his lifetime he had persecuted; Se quidem in (...) prop^ (...) it, and
Patris haereditate, and passionis merito, alt to cont^ (...) terum sibi donare,
ex cujus dono, illud sibi merito v^^^iret; (...) fiducia fretus, minime
confundatur, etc. Thuan. Hist. lib. 21.
Casting himself with his whole soul upon God, he thus reasoned; That for his
part, he was on the account of any merits of his own, unworthy to obtain the
Kingdom of Heaven; but his Lord, and God, who had a double right unto it, one
by inheritance of his Father, the other by the merit of his own Passion,
Contented himself with the one Granted the other unto him; by whose Grant, he
rightly laid claim thereunto, and resting in this faith, or Confidence, he was
not confounded, etc.

Another instance is out of Sulpitias Severus, Non ^x pr^ss (...) co^si^^ and
(...) p. qui^ (...) foe^^ dissension h^^ ag^^tam (...) erat. Su p. Severus,
in the end of his second Book, Ithacius, w^^h some other Bishops his
Associates, procu ed Maximus the Tyrant, to put Priscillianus a Grostick, with
some others to death: and to banish some of their follow rs: w^^t follow
thereon? Hoc modo, (says the Histori^n) homines luce indignissimi, pessimo
exemplo necati, aut exiliis mulctati; O^ this manner, were those most unworthy
wretches, either slain, or punished by banishment, by a very bad precedent: and
what wa^ the success of this Fury? He tells us, the Heresy, was so far from
being expressed by it, that it was the more confirmed and propogated. And what
ensued hereupon in the Chu ch it self? the Author tells us in the end of hi E
clesiastical story. Amongst ours, a lasting war of discord was kindled; which
after, now it has been carried on for fifteen years with shameful
Contentions, could by no means be allayed.

Those that have read the Germane, French; and British Annals, will set to
their seals, that this is true, that persecution has ever been a vain
unprofitable Work, a beggarly, poor Trade, none have thriven by it, that have
followed it, yea, a most destructive Trade. How have Countries, and Kingdoms
been inveloped in blood and war, in confusion and distraction, where this
frenzy has reigned, and raged.

3. Persecution of the Saints of God for Conscience Sake, is not only a most
wicked, and fruitless, but also a most dreadful practice, and that for two
Reasons, (to name no more:)

1. Christ espouses his Saints injuries; he takes them as done unto himself:
Saul* Saul, why persecutest thou me? said Christ to Saul. As a Christian shares
with Christ in all his dishonours, Acts 9.4. Psalm 69.9. He that touches you,
touches the Apple of mine eye, Zech. 2.8.
The reproaches of them that reproach thee, are fallen upon me: so, Christ
partakes with Christians in all their persecutions, he accounts himself
concerned in all their injuries. Now, is it not dreadful to be an enemy to
Jesus Christ? Is it not dreadful to be found a fighter against God? Is it not
dreadful to war against Heaven? to pull down Almighty and eternal Vengeance on
a man's head?

2. As the Persecutors ordain their Arrows against the Saints, (their cruel
Laws, Edicts, Fines, Pains, Penalties, as they have done) in one part of the
world, or other in all Ages: so God has (by way of requital) ordained his
Arrows against the persecutors; (if they turn not) God has prepared for them
the instruments of Death, the Scripture speaks expressly, he ordains his
Arrows against the Persecutors, Psalm 7.13. And those Arrows, ( viz. divine
judgments) shall be sharp in the hearts of Christ's Enemies. It Is confessed, an
ignorant persecutor may be pardoned upon great Repentance; there is mercy for
such. Videtur innuere Paulus, nullum esse veniae locum, nisi ubi suppetit
ignorantiae excusatio. Calvin. his verbi^ neque Paulus piaculum suum extenuat,
neque innocentiae suae vocationem trihuit; sed aequitatem, and misericordiam
praedicat, quae miserta incredulitatis and insertiae, peccantem, (sed errore,
potius quam mal^volentia) revocavit. Bulinger. 1 Timothy 1.13.
Paul was a blasphemer, a persecutor, and injurious, and he obtained mercy,
because he did it ignorantly through unbelief; but a knowing persecutor,
convinced of the Truth he persecutes, and totally falling from it, and
maliciously hating the truth, and persecuting the professors of it unto the
death; This man's Crime is (I think) unpardonable. Satan has set the seal of
Hell upon him: or else I know not what to make of that Text, Heb. 10.26, 27.
For if we sin wilfully, after we have received the knowledge of the Truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful looking for
of Judgment, and fiery indignation* which shall devour the Adversaries.

3. This Point serves to convict and condemn the Scorner, that scoffs at
holiness, Prove 14.9.
Fools make a mock at sin, (and as the wise man speaks) that is, (as Expositors
upon the place) make a laughing stock, or a may game at it, they slight
Holiness the highest Excellency, and make nothing of it. But it is bad jesting
with edg-tools: ^^^^ulum est (...)
Scoffing is the overflowing of Gall and malice, and a black mark, let it be
found, where it will; especially, when Religion or holiness is made a byword,
or Reproach, to sit in the seat of the Scorner, is an high degree of
wickedn^ss, and utterly inconsistent with a godly state, and bespeak a man at
present to be in a cursed state, To sit in the Throne of the persecutor, Psalm.
1.1.
and in the Chair of the Scorner, are Diabolical preferments equally dreadful
and damnable. Indeed scorning seems to have some precedence, for it makes way
for persecuting. First, men hate and scorn the ways of God (which is the scum
of Rancor, and malice) and then they persecute them. Scorners do a sad work,
and they will have sad wages.

1. They do a sad work, when they deride men for their Holiness, they deride
men for that which is the express Image, and Glory of God, for God is Glorious
in Holiness, Exodus 15 11. yea, in so doing, they deride God in his highest
Excellency, and consequently sin against him with an high hand. Holy Brethren,
as the Saints are called, Heb. 3.1. should be no more a disgrace, than Holy
Father, as God himself (...), John 17.11. You hate God more than his Saints, if
you hate them for their holiness; for holiness in the Saints shines but wi^h a
faint and weak luster, Q^i f^cit (...)
but GoD being the fountain of Holiness, it must needs sh(...) with infinite
luster, and splendor, Holy, and reverend is thy Name, Psalm 111.9, Gods Name
is Reverend, because holy, so holiness ought to be matter of our greatest
respect and reverence, and not of reproach, and scorn. A word to Scorners.

Let all scorners return speedily, yet there may be mercy for them. The Spirit
of God bewails your condition, and calls upon ye to return; You that are the
worst sort of Sinners, hear what the Spirit says, Prove. 1.22, 23. How long
will scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? turn ye at my
reproof, etc. Now when God calls, Cum Deus loquitur cum risu, legas cum luctu.
if you refuse and will not regard his Counsel, he will laugh at your calamity,
and mock, when your fear comes. See Prove. 1.24, 25, 26, 27. You that make a
mock at holiness, God will make a mock of you, if ye turn not.

2. Scorners will have sad wages if they turn not. Prove. 3.34. Behold, he
scorneth the scorners, but gives grace to the lowly: as they scorn God
maliciously, so behold, (a note of Attention) God will scorn them with perfect
detestation and abhorrency. As it is the greatest mercy for God to accept a man's
person, to receive him into Grace and Favor; so it is the greatest misery for
God to refuse, and scorn a man's person with indignation.

3. As a Consequent of the former, the scoffing Ishmaels must be cast out: as
scorners cast themselves out of Gods love, so God will; cast them out of his
presence, and Kingdom Without are dogs, Revel. 22.15. the dogs not only, that
tear in pieces the Saints persons, but the dogs that bark at the shining
splendo of the Saints holiness; these are without, and shall without
repentance, be without for ever. These dogs bark not at the Moon so much, as
against the Sun of Righteousness.

Ejice Ancillam. etc.
The son of the Bondwoman was cast out, Genesis 21.9, 10. he must not be an Heir
with the son of Sarah, (the marrow of that Ejection Typical, was spiritual and
Eternal) no more must scorners that live, and die so, have any co-partnership
with the Saints in their inheritance. So much is more than intimated in that
Allegory, Gal. 4.30. Oh then, let none that ever intend to be sanctified, or
saved, presume to deride the Name of Holiness; but let them honor, and
reverence it, as the most honorable Title under Heaven, yea, as a Divine
thing: 2 Pet. 1 4.
for it is the sparkling forth of the Divine Nature.

Thus much for Conviction.

Now we are come to the last Use.

Lastly, in the ninth and last place. This Doctrine of Sanctification serves
for Caution, 9th. Use.
to prevent mistakes. I shall lay it thus:

If Jesus Christ be given of God for our sanctification, then it concerns us
all to look into our sanctification: let us all be sure that we are sanctified,
if we miscarry here, we miscarry irr^coverably, we miscarry everlastingly; and
to use the Apostles words: Let us therefore fear least a Promise being left us
of entering into his Rest, any of us should seem to come short of it, Heb. 4.1.
Let us all concern our selves to know this, that God has set apart him that is
godly for himself, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm 4.3. he is eternally set apart
in Election, and actually set apart for God in Vocation. As the Beasts
worshippers have the Beasts mark, so Gods Children have Gods seal, and impress,
2 Timothy 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord
knows who are his; and let every one that names the Name of the Lord, depart
from iniquity. Gods Seal has a double Motto, and noting his peoples
preservation, the Lord knows who are his; the other noting their
sanctification, they depart from iniquity. There are many wild flowers in the
Field, gay and beautiful; that look like right flowers in the Garden, but are
not the same. Some Metals, as Copper, and Brass, burnisht, look like Gold at a
distance: but though all Gold glisters, yet all is not Gold that glisters: so,
many things at a distance look like Sanctification, Omne simile non est idem.
but at a nearer view, and by an exacter trial, and scrutiny, they appear in
their colors, to be quite contrary, not only diversa, but adversa also. I
might mention many, but I shall name these four only, inclusive of all the
rest, which in my reading I have received from worthy hands: Civility.
Formality. Restreining Grace. Temporary, or Common Grace.


1. Civility, which is nothing else, but a fine, smooth demeanor in the world,
Gal. 6.12.
a fair show in the flesh, as the Apostle phraseth it, rather heathenish
strictness, than Christian holiness; it is something to be a Civilian, but much
more to be a Christian. Ye may descry it by these Notes:

As Alexander kept himself from Darius his Virgins, and Scipio from a most
beautiful Captive Lady.
Adulterers, no rude debauched persons, and yet grossly ignorant of spiritual
matters, as Nichodemus was, John 3.10. a Ruler in Israel, a strict Pharisee, a
civil Person, but a mere Ignoramus in the new birth,

Now spiritual life, or holiness, (wherever it is) begins with Knowledge;
Quarta expositio eorum est, qui putant allusisse Paulum ad mundi creationem,
etc. Buling. in 2 Cor. 4.6.
where is Life, there is Light: indeed the grace of God is the Light of Life.
As in the old, so in the new Creation: the beginning of the Creation of God is
Light, Genesis 1.3. 2 Cor. 4.6.

A sanctified person called out of darkness into Gods mavelous light, he sees
his way, and knows his Duty, he has received an Unction from the holy One; And
what he does, he does upon right Principles, 1 John 2.20. Omat bonum fit ex
integra^ Causa.
by a right Rule, and to a right End. Civil men live plausibly, but know not
the ground, nor end of their Actions. Faith in God through Jesus Christ is not
the Principle, the word of God is not the Rule, the Glory of God is not the End
of their Actings. They neither live to God, nor for God, not according to his
Will revealed in his Word, nor for the honor and glory of his Name. Ephesians.
1.17, 18.
The Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation has not enlightened their understanding,
to see into the mystery of his Will; they do not act out of faith in Christ,
and pure love to God in what they do.

2. Jesus Christ is little prized by civil men; All in All, the Author, Heb.
12.2.
and maintainer of his life, the Alpha and Omega of his happiness; the man
does not live so much, as Christ lives in him, and every day, Gal. 2.20.
he sees an indispensible need of Christ, and what abundant cause he has, to
bless God for Christ, who is made to him wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.

3. Usually some reigning lust keeps company are entangled: I have observed,
(commonly) this sin is Covetousness. The young man in the Gospel, was a civil
honest man, a fair Dealer in the world, and had kept all those sayings from his
youth (as to the letter of them); but his possessions were a snare unto him; at
the narrow Bridge of self-denial, Matthew. 19.22.
Christ and his soul parted: There is some sweet morsel rolled under the
Tongue, some delicate Dalilah lying in the Bosom, some reigning sin kept with
greater allowance from Conscience. Commonly this Viper is worldly-mindedness.

Paul complains of the law in his members, and of the motions of lust within
him, which fall not under the cognizance of the light of Nature; Romans 7.7, 23,
24, 25.
the first risings of sin, the least rebellion of Nature forbidden in the Tenth
Commandment, a true Saint is sensible of, and deeply humbled for. 1 King. 6.8.
But the affairs of the inward man, the workings of the heart, are not minded
by mere civil men, but the eyes of sound Christians, like the windows of the
Temple, are broad inwards, they look much within: they mourn over the sins of
their hearts, as well as over the sins of their lives.

2. Formality, or pretended grace. The Apostle speaks of true holiness, Ephesians.
4.24. in opposition to that which is feigned, and counterfeit. Ye may discover
it also by these four Marks:

1. False grace is acted from foreign considerations. He may be forma
assistens to him, but not forma informans in him.
The Spirit of God may assist an hypocrite in some duties, but he is not in
him, as an informing, quickening, renewing principle. But true Grace, in the
heart of the sanctified, is like a living Fountain naturally bubling up, and
working toward God, and heaven, out of his belly shall flow forth, Joh.
7.37.38.
Rivers of living Waters. True Grace has an inward propensity, a natural
tendency to comply with the will of God; The Law of God is written in his
heart, he delights in the Law, in the innerman, Romans 7.22. This is the
peculiar Character of a Saint, which no Formalist, or hypocrite in the world
can do.

2. False grace is shy of Gods sight and Hypocrita cupit videri justus.
Hypocrita in verbis sanctus, in cord vanus; intus Nero, foris Cato, etc.
nor do appeal to God for their sincerity, nor do they live, as in the eye of
his Omniscience and Omnipresence; but their chiefest care is to blind the
world, to seem, and not to be just, he converseth more with men than with God:
Yet the godly can appeal to God for their sincerity, though they tremble at
their defects, and impurity: like Peter, John 20.17. He appeals to Christ's
Omnisciency, Lord, thou know all things, and thou know that I love thee.
So holy Job expostulates the case thus: Let me be weighed in an even balance,
that God may know mine integrity, Job 31.6. He could appeal to God, the
un-erring Rule of Righteousness, in this matter: he knew his integrity would
hold weight. And at another time he has this self-abasing expression: Mine eye
sees thee, therefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes, Job 42.5.6. As he
could hold fast his integrity, so he could also loath and abhor himself in dust
and ashes, at the sight of Gods glorious Majesty and purity, and in the sense
of his own defects and failings.

Jer. 7.24. The Lord by the Prophet complains th^re, that his people hearkened
not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in the counsels, and in the
imaginations of their evil hearts, and went backward, and not forward; False
grace (like bad salt) grows worse and worse, til it be cast out into the
Dunghill: but true grace, from a grain grows unto a Tree, from a morning
glympse to a perfect Noon, Prove. 4.18. The path of the just, is as the shining
light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day; from smoking flax it
is blown up to fragrant flame. Nicodemus that came to Christ at first by night,
for fear of the Jews, afterward openly declares for him, and bestowed much
cost upon the dead body of our Lord. John 19.39.
Grace gets ground upon the flesh, and by degrees advances to a Victory. Now
examine your hearts whether ye increase, or decrease, whether ye go forward, or
backward, whether your faith, love, zeal, patience, Rev. ^.4.
heavenly-mindedness, etc. thrive, or not? If ye have left your first Love, if
ye have lost your care of Duty, sense of sin, and hungring, and thirsting
appetite after Christ, and his Righteousness, it is a sad sign.

Remember therefore from whence ye are fallen and repent, and do your first
works; be also watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that are ready
to dye. It Is Christ's Blessed Counsel, Revel. 2.5. Revel. 3.2.

4. False grace is not humble. Formalists Notare vero operae, pretium est,
nominem spiritu esse pauperem nisi qui in nihilum apud se redactus, in Dei
misericordiam recumbit. Calv. in Matthew. 5.3.
with true Grace there goes always a spiritual poverty, or a sense of
spiritual wants; the poor in spirit are first in order of the Beatitudes,
Matthew. 5.3.

The more knowledge the Saints have, the more they discern their ignorance, the
more faith, the more they bewail their unbelief? Lord, I believe, help thou
mine unbelief, Mark 9.24. The more they love him, the more they blame their
hearts, for loving him no more; they call upon their souls to love him most
intensively. Grace grows most, and thrives best in a low and humble soil; the
lowest Valleys are far more fruitful than the highest Mountains: it is a good
sign when the soul is kept hungry, and humble in the sense of its wants, amidst
the height of its enjoyments.

What restraining Grace is.
3. The next is Restraining Grace, which is nothing else but an awe, put by God
upon the Conscience, constraining a man to forbear sin, though he does not hate
it.

You may discern it by these signs:

Romans i2.1.
(viz.) Mercy. It Is our Duty to serve God with Reverence, and filial fear, but
not with a servile and distrustful fear: Heb. 12.2^.
a servile fear has little of Grace in it, much of Torment. We ought to fear
God much, but to love him more; Love is the very life and soul of all
Gospel-obedience.

Abimelechs lust was not mortified, when God withheld him from Sarah, Genesis
20.6. 'twas only suspended, not subdued, the heart was not renewed, though the
action was curbed; as Israel had an adulterous heart toward other Lovers, Hos.
2.6.
when their way was hedged up with thorns: But when the Spirit of holiness in
power comes, 2 Cor. 3.17.
he comes as a Spirit of Liberty. He frees the soul from the servitude of base
lusts, and mortifies them: and both strongly and sweetly turns, and enclines
the heart, to hate every false way, and to run the ways of Gods Commandments
with an enlarged heart. Psalm. 119.3^.


4. The fourth thing that looks like Sanctification, and yet is not, is common,
or temporary grace. This is a distinct thing from all the rest, it is higher
than all the former; it differs from Civility, because it is more Christian, and
Evangelical; it differs from Formality, because that is in show only, but this
is a real work on the soul. It Is better than restraining grace, because that
avoids sin, and performs Duties out of slavish fear, but this seems to have
some affection for Christ, his Word, and Kingdom; it is good in it self, but not
the best, not thoroughly sanctifying, and saving: this a man may have and yet
fall away, and depart from God, so it was with the stony and thorny ground,
Matthew. 13. This is the nearest to true Grace of all the former: of this the
Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.4, 5. which is called an enlightening, a taste of Christ,
and of the powers of the world to come, and a partaking of the Holy Ghost, (i.
e.) of the common gifts of the Spirit, abilities for holy duties, great parts,
etc. from whence I shall briefly note these three things.

1. That the Light here spoken of, Quam perniciosum sit inflare^ notitia sine
charitate in sacris legitur, Prove. 26.12. P.M.
is not humbling: 2. The taste is not ravishing. 3. Their gifts are not
renewing.
1. Their light is not humbling. Knowledge puffs up, love edifieth, 1 Cor.
8.1. Foundations sink, that are not laid deep enough; you can never magnify
Christ enough nor abase self enough, Christ is most magnified when self is most
abased: Isa. 2.19.
This Dagon must fall down before the Ark, sound humiliation brings sure and
solid Consolation; we must not rashly close with Christ in the pride of our
hearts, as they did, but be sure we have depth of earth, broken and contrite
spirits.

2. Their taste was not ravishing, nor increasing, they had but loose, and
slight desires after happiness, Glances upon the Glory of Heaven, and the
comforts of the Gospel, and no more; just as Balaam, Oh that I might die the
death of the Righteous, etc. and like that spiritual carnal Notion, (as a
learned man phraseth it), Dr. Fuller.
Lord, evermore give us of this bread, John 6.34. They were not serious
desires, not holy breathings after Christ, proceeding from a sound principle,
neither were they transforming, nor increasing; the Saints that have a taste,
groan for a full communion of Graces as well as Comforts: but in temporary
Believers, there is a loose assent, some slight affection, profession for a
while, rejoicing in the light for a season, etc. But all at last (like Blazing
Meteors) vanish, and come to nothing.

Vocat participationem Spiritus, quia is est, qui unicaique distribuit prout
vult, quicquid est lucis, ac intelligentia. Calv. Heb. 6.4
3. And lastly, In Heb. 6.4. it is said, they were made partakers of the Holy
Ghost, (i. e.) of some gifts of the Holy Ghost; yea, perhaps those eminent
Gifts, which in the Primitive times God imparted to his Disciples, 1 Cor. 12.4.
There are diversities of Gifts, but the same spirit. Var iis do nis spiritus
sancti Deus ornabat fideles in primitiva Ecclesi^; ut loquerentur linguis, ut
prophetarent. Cujusmodi enumerat Apostolus, 1 Cor. 12. and 14. Pareus in loc.


Now these gifts of the Holy Ghost that hypocrites partake of, are not
renewing, thoroughly sanctifying: they may have good abilites for the
edification, and comfort of others, but in the mean time being unsanctified,
they themselves may become Cast-awayes. 1 Cor. ^ 27.


Though a man could speak with the tongue of men, and Angels, yet having not
charity, (true love to God) he were but as sounding Brass, and as a tinkling
Cymbal, 1 Cor. 13.1. A man may pray sweetly, preach excellently, talk of the
things of God knowingly, and affectionately, yet All is but as tinkling with
God, if there be no saving Grace; Nay Beloved, it is possible, a man may have
the Spirit of God (in a sense), and yet be an Hypocrite, a Reprobate, and fall
short of Heaven.

Quer. May a man have the Spirit, and yet not thoroughly sanctified?

Answ. 1. A man, like Saul, or Balaam may have the Spirit transiently, but not
abidingly, He is in all per divinitatis praesentiam: in the Saints only per
inhabitationis gratiam.

P. Lumb. 1 sect. did. 17.


for a time, but not for ever: A Formalist may have some glympses of the
Spirit, like the glancing of the Sunbeams for a short time upon a
Glass-window, but a Saint enjoyes his in-dwelling presence: the Spirit is in
all, and so he may be in an hypocrite, by his divine presence, but not by
in-habitation, he is in all, but he dwells in his Saints only.

2. It Is possible a man may have the Spirit only as a spirit of Bondage, but a
Saint only, has the Spirit, as the spirit of Adoption, Gal. 4.5, 6. the legal
operation of the Spirit, working fear and horror was in Cain and Judas: the
Evangelical operation of the Spirit, working faith in God, love to God,
boldness before God, etc. this is in every sanctified soul, that shall be saved.

For further satisfaction, peruse Mr. Burgesses Refinings. M. Roberts Believers
Evidences. Mr. Meads Almost Christian, etc. John 3.5. 2 Cor. 3.18.
3. And lastly, To name no more, (for I judge in these three, lies the
Characteristical difference between the Saints having the Spirit, and the
unsanctified): an hypocrite may have the Spirit in some inferior operation,
but the Saint only in effectual Regeneration and spiritual Transformation: A
man may have the Spirit, and not be born of the Spirit; A man may have the
Spirit, as a spirit of sharp Conviction, but not as the spirit of complete
Conversion. The Spirit may be in a a man by way of common illumination, and yet
not, by way of saving Sanctification; renewing the whole man, Grace is
Conformitas cum Archetypa, a conformity of the soul with God; the Archetype (or
first pattern.) 2 Cor. 7.1. See Dr. Gorden's Child of Light, etc.
reforming the whole life, Conforming, and transforming both, into the likeness
of Jesus Christ.

This is the peculiar privilege of the Saints; no sinner shall share in this
favor; no stranger shall inter-meddle with this joy.

Finally (my Brethren) this Doctrine of Sanctification is not only essential
to, but is of the very essence of your happiness: And the great and constant
Duty you should be found in, is to perfect holiness in the fear of God. Some
truths belong ad been esse, to the well and comfortable being of a Christian,
as the doctrine of Assurance of Gods love, peace of Conscience, joy in the holy
Ghost, etc. but sanctification belongs ad esse, to the very being of
Christianity, it is your life both spiritual and eternal. If ye are not holy
men, (my Brethren, ye are dead men, and will be damned men: no grace, no glory,
no, Heb. 12.13.
nor the least comfortable vision of God, or Heaven: wherefore let all labor,
(as the wise King advises) to get wisdom, Prove. 4.7. Wisdom (Grace,
Holiness) is the principal thing, therefore get wisdom; and with all thy
getting, get understanding. This is the one thing needful, Luke 10. ult. And
let those that have received Grace, exercise and increase it: Grace grows by
its exercise, (...). suppeditate sufficite suggerite. Beza.
be daily adding to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, etc. and that
with all diligence, as ye are exhorted, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. be daily cleansing your
selves from all ^^thiness in the Fountain of Christ's blood, and in the Laver of
the Promises; and forgetting the things behind, Phil. 3.14.
be daily pressing on toward the mark for the prize of the High Calling of God
in Christ Jesus. And daily keep your Garments clean: and be always ready for
the coming of your Lord; that ye may be found of him without spot and
blameless, enwrapped in his holiness.

For Conclusion, that ye may all so be, and do in the fear of God: I commend ye
to God, Acts 20.32.
and to the word of his Grace, which is able to build ye up, and to give ye an
inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified. Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.
(...) OR, JESUS CHRIST Given of God the Father FOR OUR Justification.

Explained, Confirmed, and Applied (very briefly) in one Sermon to the
Satisfaction of some judicious Hearers, for whose sake chiefly, and at whose
earnest Request, it is made Public.

Jeremy 23.6. And this is His Name, whereby he shall be called THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS.

2 Cor. 5.21. For he (that is, God the Father) has made him (that is, Jesus
Christ) to be sin for us (that is, a sacrifice for sin) that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.

London, Printed for Thomas Passenger, at the Sign of the Bible on
London Bridge. 1667.

1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.


-- And Righteousness. --
AT the Request of some serious Friends, I have Adventured to make this
Discourse public, which otherwise (for ought I know) had never seen the light.
If any Illumination, Satisfaction, Confirmation, Consolation, or any spiritual
Good any way shall accrue to them that read it: I shall, and will rejoice,
Bless, and praise the Father of Lights for it.

This Argument of Justification is as substantial, necessary, comfortable, Ac
primum quidem de justificatione peccatoris little Deo: qui locus in Theologia
facile primarius, nobisque maxim salutaris est: quo obscurato, adulterato, vel
everso, fieri nequit, ut puritas doctrinae in aliis locis retineatur, aut vera
Ecclesia Consistat. Synop. Pur. Theol. P. 434.
and sweet a Doctrine, as any in the whole circuit of Divinity; for, whom he
has justified, them he has also glorified, Romans 8.30. that is, they are as
sure and certain of Heaven, as though they were already in it; Christus factus
est nobis sapientia, justitia, sanctificatio, and Redemptio, hoc est,
sapientes, nos and justos, and sanctos, and liberos effecit. Theophylact.
Justification being the next step, the next immediate link in that Golden
Chain to Glorification.

Who of God is made unto us Righteousness, (...), righteousness in the
Abstract, that is, (says Theophylact), who has made us righteous: who is made
unto us righteousness, etc. He is made to us (says Pareus) not by Creation, but
by Ordination: for Christ is not created or made as to his divine Essence, as
Heretics deprave this Scripture: but he is ordained, and bestowed upon us to
confer these benefits; he is therefore said to be made to us, according to
those expressions, Isa. 9.6. To us a Child is born, Factus est nobis, non
creatione, sed ordinatione neque enim Christus creatus aut factus est, quoad
Essentiam divinam, ut haeretici depravant scripturam hanc: sed ordinatus, and
donatus nobis, ad haec bona conferenda, ideo discitur factus nobis: sicut
Isaiah 9.6. puer natus est nobis, Luke 2. vobis natus est servator, id est,
nostro bono. Pareus in loc.
to us a Son is given; And Luke 2, To you is born a Savior, that is for our
good.

He is made of God to us, etc. that is, (says Factus est nobis sapientia a
Deo, etc. id est, qui datus est nobis a Deo, ut in ipso omnem sapientiam
Consequeremur, etc. idem de justitia, and sanctificatione statuendum est. Beza
in loc.
Beza) who is given to us of God, that we might obtain all wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, etc. in him, and by him. All these interpretations,
are significant and proper enough, but the last I best approve of, as the most
genuine and consonant to the scope of the Text, and to the sense of the
Apostle: only by the way note thus much, that by righteousness here, is, and
must be meant the righteousness of justification; for the Apostle immediately
annexeth to (...), importing the Righteousness of Sanctification, which is the
very next word. My observation shall be this: Jesus Christ was given of God to
be our Righteousness, (or for our justification.)

In the prosecution of this precious and weighty Doctrine. I shall endeavor,
1. To prove the Point. 2. To open the meaning of the word Justify. 3. To show
what the justification of a sinner before God, is. 4. What are the essential
parts of our justification. 5. The several Causes of our justification. 6. The
Fruits and Consequences of our justification. 7. And lastly, Close all with a
brief Application for proof.


1. Jesus Christ was decreed, designed, ordained, and determined to be his
peoples righteousness, propitiation, and redemption: the justification and
redemption of a sinner is according to Gods purpose, and grace, given us in
Christ Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. which according to the
immutability of his Counsel was in the fullness of time accomplished. That in
Daniel is very emphatical, Dan. 9:34. To bring in everlasting righteousness;
it is in the original, a Righteousness of Eternities: So in Heb. 9.12. it it
said, that Christ obtained eternal Redemption for us. Our Redemption, Eternal a
part ante, and a part post.
or Righteousness may be called Eternal, upon a double account:

1. Eternal, in reference to the eternal Decree of God, and so a Righteousness
from Eternity.

2. External, in reference to the everlasting duration of the virtue of it; the
great and glorious Benefits that accrue to Believers by virtue of this
Righteousness, extend their virtue, continue their influence throughout the
endless duration of Eternity. It Is a Righteousness from all Eternity, and a
Righteousness unto all Eternity, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth (from
everlasting, or fore-appointed) to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, (...)^ quem proposuit Deus propitiationem. Montan.
to declare his righteousness, etc. Christ was A Lamb slain from the beginning
of the world, Rev. 13.8. (viz.) in the eternal purpose and Decree of God.

2. Consider Christ's glorious Name. This is his Name wherewith he shall be
called, the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. This is like his other Name
Jesus, the same in substance with this, Matthew. 1.21. by the Oracle of an Angel,
his Name must be called Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins,
(i. e.) from the power, guilt, and condemnation of sin.

3. It Is the office of Jesus Christ as our High Priest, to be our
Righteousness. Jesus Christ was (...): he was our Redeemer, the price of our
Redemption, a Counter-price; our Redemption and revocation from Captivity, he
was both the propitiatory and propitiation; he was Priest, he was Altar, he was
Sacrifice, he was All in All, Jam fructum ostendit quem ex Christi sacrificio
consequuti sumus, nimirum ut justi coram Deo essemus, qui natura impuri, and
peccatores sumus. Marlo^at. in 2 Cor. 5.21.
to make us the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. that is, that we
who are impure sinners by nature, through the sacrifice of Christ, might become
righteous before God.

He is our Advocate, 1 John 2.2.
and propitiation Jesus Christ the Righteous; yea, he is our (...), our
propitiatory, or placatory, Romans 3.25.
alluding to the Mercy-seat. 1 Cor. 5.7.
He is our Passover sacrificed for us; he is the Lamb of God slain for us, 1
Pet. 1.18.
that the wrath of God might pass over, and pass away for ever from us, and not
fall down upon our heads: if your hearts and Consciences are sprinkled with the
blood of Christ, as the Door-posts of the Children of Israel were with the
blood of the Paschal-lamb, Exodus 12.7.
the wrath of God will for ever pass by you, and not pass upon you. Thus Jesus
Christ is a merciful and faithful High Priest, Heb. 2.17. merciful to us in
misery, pitying us in our guilt and blood, faithful to God, and to us also in
the faithful discharge of his Priestly Office for us; in being our Price, our
Ransom, in discharging our Bond, in pacifying the Fathers wrath, in satisfying
divine Justice, in finishing Transgression, in making an end of sin, in
bringing in everlasting Righteousness, and so in bringing us to God. 1 Pet.
3.18.
Now as he is our merciful and faithful High Priest: so he is our
Righteousness, (1) our Justifyer, Justitia, hoc est, justificator noster,
donaus nos vera justitia coram Deo per fidem. Ad sacerdotale munus Christi hoc
pertinet. Pareus in 1 Cor. 1.30.
endowing us with a perfect Righteousness before God through faith; this
belongs to the Priestly Office of Christ.

Jesus Christ is the Author, or the procuring cause of our justification, as he
is the Author of our eternal Salvation. Heb. 5 9.
And this he does two ways:

1. By making an Atonement for us on Earth.

2. By making intercession for us in Heaven: He has made reconciliation for us
by his blood upon the Cross, Romans 5.1^. and he does continue to make
intercession ^or us by the prevalent and loud cries of the same blood in
Heaven, Heb. 12.24. He is gone up to Heaven to appear in the presence of God
for us; Heb. 9.24.
just as Aaron (a type of Christ) Exodus 28.12, 29. and 30. verses, was to bear
the name of the children of Israel (a figure of all the Elect of God) engraven
in precious stones upon his Shoulders, and upon his Heart, when he went into
the holy Place, for a memorial before the Lord continually. So our Lord Christ
is entered into the Heavens, with red and glorious Garments, to appear in the
presence of God for us: there is not the least Believer but his name is (as it
were) engraven upon the Shoulders, Breast Plate, and Heart of Christ. Of all
cries the cries of blood are the strongest, the loudest, whether for, or
against a guilty person. Abels blood cried aloud to God for vengeance, Genesis
4.10.
but this blood of sprinkling speaks better things than that of Abels: it
pleads, sues, presses hard for a discharge from all thy sins, and enemies: it
cries aloud for mercy, peace and pardon. Lord (says Christ) here is my price,
and my purchase, my Redemption, and my redeemed Ones; here is my Righteousness,
and here are the persons justified by it: whatever charge or guilt lies upon
them, here are the shoulders that have sustained the weight of thy wrath, which
was their due, upon these shoulders, and in this heart, thou may behold all
their names engraven, acquit and absolve (...) for my sake; Father, I will that
they b^ ^^ghteous by my Righteousness, and glorious with my Glory; My tears, my
stripes, my wounds, my groans, my anguish, my Blood, the tortures of my Body,
the torments of my Soul do all pray, and plead prevailingly, that all believing
sinners be justified, and saved. Thus Christ appears in Heaven, with red
Garments, with Garments rolled in blood, and with the whites of peace, pardon,
justification, and absolution upon the red: with all the names of his
justified, sanctified ones engraven upon his shoulders, and upon his heart
before the Lord continually, to present his everlasting Righteousness to the
Father for us, to present our persons as righteous, and spotless, enwrap'd in
that glorious Robe of Righteousness, and to impropriate and apply his
everlasting Righteousness* to us.

Thus I have proved, that Christ is our Righteousness.

Vox justificandi (...) and inde justificationis, (...), proprie, and fere
semper forinseca, and forensis actio est, judicis, and judicii, scilicet in rei
absolutione, condemnationi opposita. Synop. Pur. Theol. p. 434. Justificare
absolvere a est, morte, non condemnare. Syntag. Polan. p. 455.
2. We come in the next place to open the meaning of the word (justify.)

Justification is a Law-state, and the words (...), and (...) (from (...)) are
verba forensia, or judicial, or Court-Terms, taken from Courts of Justice: It
imports the absolution of a guilty person, the word justification, is in holy
Writ opposed to condemnation. To justify, says Polanus is to absolve from
death, not to condemn.

Though justificare sometimes may note as much as justum facere: if you respect
the notation of the Latin word, as magnificare imports to magnify, or make
great; neither is it to be doubted, but that the Lord does constitute, or make
those just, whom he justifies, they are just, both by the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, which is out of them in Christ, as being his personal
righteousness, and by infusion of righteousness, as it were by influence into
them from Christ their Head; to the faithful belongs a twofold Righteousness,
the one of Justification, the other of Sanctification: I shall make it evident
(says the le^rned Bishop Downame) that the Hebrew Hir^diq, Reverend Downam's
Treatise of Justification. p. 2^3.
and the Greek (...) is, verbum forense, a judicial word taken from Courts of
justice, which being attributed to the Judge is opposed to Condemnation, and
signifies, to absolve, Justificare est justum rep^ta^e, justum pronunciare.
or to give sentence with the party questioned. Thus far he. So that to
justify both from Scriptures and the writings of the Fathers, is as much as to
absolve, or acquit a believing sinner from guilt, and condemnation, and to
accept him as righteous through the righteousness of Jesus Christ. To justify,
is to repute, and pronounce a man just or righteous. Justification is opposed
to Condemnation, Romans 8.33. it is God that justifies, (...) not one
condemnation to them that are in Christ J sus. Romans 8.1.
i. e. acquits, ab^olv^s, who shall condemn? so the word is taken, Deuteronomy. 25.1.
The Judges are commanded to justify the r^ghteous, and to condemn the wicked:
l kewise, Prove. 17.15. he that justifies the wicked* and condemns the
righteous, they are both an abomination to the Lord. So also is this w r taken
in a Law sense, Psalm 143.2. Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall no man be justified. Romans 5.16. Judgment was by one to
condemnation, but the free Gift is of many offenses to justification. Now the
Scripture speaks of a righteousness of the Cause, and of a righteousness of the
Person.

1. Of the Cause, 1. Justitia Causae.
When a man in other respects sinful, may be said in this, or that particular
cause, or matter to be innocent, or just: as in the case of Abimelech, Genesis
20.5.
touching the matter of Sarah; he pleads the integrity of his heart, and the
innocence of his hands, etc.

2. Of the Person. 2. Justitia Personae.
That is the universal conformity of the whole man, and of all his actions to
the holy Law of God, and this twofold: 1. Legal. 2. Evangelical.


1. Legal, By the Law and the works thereof, Hac justificatione Angeli sancti
fruuntur. Polan. Mat. 3.15. Romans 8.3, 4.
hereby the Man Christ Jesus, and none but he on earth, was in a strict sense
legally just and righteous, he only fulfilled all righteousness, even the
righteousness of the whole Law, and the Holy Angels are thus justified.

2. Evangelical, That (in short) is this: through faith in Christ's
righteousness a believing sinner is justified before God, in foro coeli, Romans
5.1. Finis perficiens non interficiens.
in the Court of Heaven: And Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes, Romans 10.4. we ought directly to go to Christ for
justification, and not to go back to Moses; by him all that believe, are
justified from all things, Acts 13.38, 39.
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses; a sense whereof a
believer has more or less, in foro Conscientiae, in his own conscience: Romans
14.17. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 5. from the 12. to the end, proves at large our
sole and whole justification by the righteousness of One, even Jesus Christ. In
a word, the Lord accepts, and reputeth a guilty unworthy sinner (yet
believing) as righteous, by the free imputation of the righteousness of Christ
unto him.

Thus much for the Terms (Justify) and (Justification.)

3. We come in the third place to the definition of Justification. I am not
ignorant, that the definitions thereof are many, but the most clear and
comprehensive I take to be this: What is Justification?

Answ. Justification is a most merciful and righteous Action of God as Judge,
whereby, Definition of justification.
imputing the righteousness of Christ to a believing sinner, he absolveth him
from his sins, and accepts of him as righteous in Christ, and as an heir of
eternal life, to the praise and glory of his own mercy and justice. All which
(at leastwise for the most part) is comprehended in, Romans 3.23, 24, 25, 26.

I do not intend at this time to prosecute the parts of this Definition at
large, but only speak to two things in transi^u:

1. The justification of a sinner is an Act of God, as Lord Lawgiver, and
Judge, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sun^ indivisa.
Romans 8, 33. it is God that justifies, the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and
Spirit, Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy:
none but the offended Majesty can pardon man's offenses; It Is the injured Deity
that says, I even, I am he, that blotteth out thy Transgressions, for mine own
sake, and will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43.25. O glorious and gracious Word!
He that will by no means clear the guilty, having received satisfaction in
his Son, by the imputation of his Sons righteousness justifies the ungodly,
acquits them from the guilt of sin, Romans 4.5.
and accepts them as righteous in his sight.

2. The righteousness of justification ( quatenus justification) works not a
real inherent change in us, which is done in sanctification, but makes a
relative change without us, and upon us, as it is a judicial act of God, an act
of God as Lawgiver and Judge, in opposition to Condemnation. Justification
makes a relative change or mutation, in respect of a man's estate or condition:
a guilty person is p^onounced righteous, the sinful Debtor is discharged; an
Enemy is now reconciled, a miserable captive is redeemed, a child of wrath is
made a Son of God, and an unworthy worm an heir of Glory. These are relative
mutations, though they that are justified, are also together sanctified; in
order of Time these acts of grace are wrought together, but in order of Nature
justification is the Antecedent, and sanctification is the Cons^quent; and mark
it, where justification changes a man's Relation (to God, and Eternity) there
sanctification changes a man's disposition, and renews the soul with inward
holiness: both are the sacred effluxes from Christ's righteousness; the first is
wrought by the righteousness of Christ imputed, the other by the righteousness
of Christ imparted; one by Christ's personal righteousness, the other by way of
influence, Christ is both caput eminentiae, and caput influentiae.
and infusion from Christ as Head. We ought to take great heed least we
confound justification with sanctification, as Bellarmine, and the Papists do.

4. In the fourth place, we come to show the essential parts of our
justification, and these are two: 1. Absolution from sin. 2. Acceptance as
righteous in Christ.


Both which, the Lord grants by the plenary, and perfect satisfaction made to
his Law and justice by Jesus Christ, both our Surety, and Mediator: by which
he satisfied the Law in both parts:

1. He satisfied the Law in respect of the penalty, by his Passion, or passive
righteousness, undergoing the Curse for us, Gal. 3.13.

2. He satisfied the Law in respect of the Precept by his perfect active
righteousness, habitual and actual: but neither of these can be severed any
where from the other: Rom 3.4.
And these which God has so indissolvably joined, let no man put assunder,
each has its proper interest in, and respective contribution toward the
satisfying the injured honor of Gods Law; for the honor of Gods Law is the
equity of both its parts, its Command, and its threatening. Christ's active
righteousness, the obedience of the Great God-man, has honored the equity of
the first, (viz.) repaired the honor of Gods Commandments, broken by sinful
man. And his passive righteousness in like manner, honors the equity of the
Threatening; Christ himself dies, to justify that the sinner is worthy of
Death; and by offering up himself as a sacrifice on the Cross, he proclaims to
all the world, that sin is exceeding sinful, and that God is exceeding jealous.
Again, Consider, See Wallebius his Body of Divinity, with the Notes of Mr.
Rosse. p. 109.
Christ's active Righteousness was every where passive, (the distinction of
active and passive is needless) an^ his passive righteousness every where
active.

1. His active Righteousness was every where passive, because all of it was
done in the form of a Servant: Christ's obedience is an active Passion, and a
passive Action. ibid.
in our nature he obeyed the Law, in his very incarnation he was passive, for
therein he suffered an ^clipse of the glory of his Godhead.

2. His Passive Righteousness was every where active; because what he suffered,
was not by constraini, or against his will, it was his own voluntary act and
deed, all along he eyed his Fathers Glory, and the good of mankind; Ah! take
that instance, the Greatest of his sufferings, his very dying was the product,
both of the freeness of his love, and of the majesty of his power, John 10.17,
18. Revel. 1.5. Read those melting Texts, and chew the Cud upon them. But to
return. The Law has two branches: 1. The Commination, or the Curse. 2. The
Precept, or Commandment: so there are two parts of justification.


1. Absolution from the Curse of the Law, this is done by Christ's sufferings:
the Prince of Life dyed, the Lord of Glory became a Curse for us.

2. Acceptance as righteous in Christ, this is done by the imputation of
Christ's perfect righteousness to us, Romans 8 3, 4 Romans 5.^7, 18.
both habitual and actual. Thus Jesus Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes, for to them that believe in him he
has fulfilled all righteousness: but I must confess, by reason of the most
strict Connection between* these two, (viz.) imputation of righteousness and
remission of sins, the one does comprehend or conclude the other: Propter
arctissimam (...), una alteram Complectitur (...); quamvis, justificatio (...)
in peccatorum remissione Constituatur. Synop. Pur. Theol. p. 436. justificatio
peccatoris, est remissio peccatorum, figurate nimirum and metonimice loquendo,
quia remissio peccatorum est causa formalis justificationis peccatoris, etc.
Syntag. Polan. p. 445.
as Romans 4.22. and justifification, (...) is oftentimes placed in the remission
of sins: as Psalm 32.1. Romans 4.7.

We are justified by Christ's obedience, both active and passive: but I confess
chiefly by the latter: The Scripture in many places seems to lay the stress
principally (or at least synechdochically) upon the Blood, the Death, the
Cross of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 9.12, 14. Romans 5.10 Ephesians. 2.13. Col. 2.13,
14. Revel. 1.5, 6. Romans 5.8, 9. Cum multis aliis, etc.

Before I proceed to the fifth General propounded to be spoken to, I think it
not unnecessary to enquire, Forma dat esse.
what is the form of Christ's satisfaction, which renders it satisfactory to
God, and justificatory to man? I answer, The infinite merit of what he did and
suffered: which infinite Merit stands.

1. In the dignity of his Person, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him
bodily, Col. 2.9, 14. Now for the work of a servant to be don by the Lord of
all, renders his active; and for him to suffer as a Malefactor between
Malefactors, who was God blessed for evermore, Renders his passive
righteousness infinitely meritorious; Acts 20, 28. 1 John 1.7.
No wonder the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, for it is the blood of
God, by the figure, called by the Ancients (...), Communication of properties:
the blood of the Man Christ Jesus, is called the blood of God. And this is the
reason, why the righteousness of one, redounds to all (the Elect) for the
justifi^ation of life, Romans 5.18, 19. The doings and sufferings of this
Glorious Person the Lord our righteousness, (though for a few years) were
in^^^it^ly ^ more value, than all, that all the creatu^^s in Heaven o^ Earth
could have done o^ ^uff^red to eternity; Heb. 1 6.
the very Man Christ Jesus is above all the Angels, for he is the Man Gods
fellow, an high Word. Zech. 13.7.
And this infinite worthiness of the Redeemers Person ye have excellently
described, as the irradiating and infinitely exalting all he did and suff^red.
Consult these Texts, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. The righteousness of Jesus Christ is of infinite merit, and a mere
supererogation of an infinitely Glorious Person.

1. His active Righteousness stood in his obedience to the Ceremonial and Moral
Law.

1. His obedience to the ceremonial Law, was a mere supererogation; What? for
the substance to comply with the shadows? for the Antitype to do homage to its
own Types? besides, he submitted to those Ordinances, the end and institution
whereof supposes Guilt, what ^ore-skin of iniquity had he to be cut off by
Circumcision? what filth to be washed away in Baptism? Luke 1.21.2^. Luke 3.21.
yet he was circumcised and baptized, and his Mother offered for her
purification.

2. His obedience to the moral Laws; Although it must be granted as man, it was
his duty, yet it was not his duty to become man; Gal. 4.4.
his incarnation was a work of supererogation, the Law did never command that
the eternal Son of the living God should take upon him the form of a Servant,
keep the Law, suffer and die. This cond scention of his was wholly free and
arbi^rary; what but his own infinite love could move the eternal Word to pitch
his Tent in our Nature? What else could move the Lord of the World to become a
servant? the Ancient of Days to become a Child? or the Son of God to be the
Son of Mary?

And as his Active, so also his passive righteousness was a meet
supererogation. What had divine Justice to do with the holy Child Jesus? Had
it not been for his own eternal compact with the Father: he was a sinlesse
Person, the Lamb of God without spot; he suffered not for himself, Dan. 9.26.
he that knew no sin was made sin for us, (i. e.) a sacrifice for our sins,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

3. The stamp of Gods Appointment highly dignifies (as to us) Christ's
righteousness, and renders it acceptable to God, and meritorious for our
benefit. The Assignment and appointment of God the Father sets a great value on
it; God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing to men
their trespasses, 2 Cor. 5.19. the reconciliation, or justification of a
sinner, is as much the Fathers as the Sons Act. Christ frequently declares in
the Gospel of John, John 6.
that he came into the world, to do the will of him that sent him. Christ
received his mission and Commission from the Father for our justification. Mark
that notable place, Heb. 10.6, 7, 9, 10. In burnt-offerings, and sacrifices for
sin, thou have had no pleasure (the Lord did not delight in the blood of Bulls,
Goats or Calves, those brutish sacrifices): verse. 7. then, said I, (the words
of Christ) Lo I come, (in the Volume of the Book it is written of me) to do
Thy Will, O God. Mark that, ver. 9. Then, said he, lo, I come to do thy will:
(O God) He takes away the first, the first sort of sacrifices, that he may
establish the second, (viz.) -- sacrifice of his Son, verse. 10. by the which
Will, we are sanctified, (i. e.) saved, through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once for all. Dr. Owen, in his Death of Deaths: and Mr. Caryl, in
his Lectures on Job.
Some of our Great Divines judiciously judge, that much of the merit of Christ's
Passion does arise from the eternal Compact, and assignment of the Father, (not
excluding the other considerations). Now we pass on.

5. To the fifth Query, and that is this, what are the several causes
concurring to our justification?

A. I answer, The causes of our justification are these four chiefly: 1. The
Efficient. 2. The Material. 3. The Formal. 4. The final Cause.


1. The Efficient cause, and that is twofold, either principal, or
instrumental.

1. The principal. God, the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit.
Justification being an outward action, ad extra, respecting the creatures, is
the common Act of the whole Trinity. God, (the whole Trinity) does justify as
Lawgiver, and Judge, Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver able to save, and to
destroy, he is the Judge of all the Earth; by sin we became Gods Doctors, and
owed him many thousand Talents, Christ our Surety pays our Debts, and God
discharges us; by sin we were enemies and ungodly, Christ our Mediato^^
reconciles us enemies, In summa, nemo ad fidei justitiam perveniet, nisi qui in
se erit impius. Calv. in Romans 4.5.
and just^fies us, by Nature ungodly, yea, God in Christ reconciles us to
himself, not imputing to us our tr^spasses, 2 Cor. 5.19. And this is both a
gracious, and a righteous Act of God;

1. A gracious act, Romans 3.25. we are justified freely by his Grace, 2 Timothy
1.9. Ephesians. 2.5. we are saved by Grace.

2. A righteous act of God: hereby he eminently declares his Righteousness,
Romans 3.26. the Apostle brings it in with an ingemination, to declare, I say,
his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus; the righteousness of Christ making plenary, yea redundant,
and superabundant satisfaction to offended justice; his justice being
satisfied, yea, honored with Christ's righteousness. Now, he is not only
merciful, but also faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.7. Now
there is a blessed Harmony between the divine Attributes: righteousness and
mercy do sweetly embrace and kiss each other, the Glory of both shine forth
most illustriously in, and by the bloody passion of the Son of God.

Now the Acts of God, the principal Efficient cause are to be distinguished
according to the distinction of the three persons.

1. The Father justifies, as the primary Cause and Author: he gave his only
begotten Son for our justification and salvation, John 3.16.

2. The Father justifies as Legislatour, enacting by his Sovereign Authority,
that sweet Law of the New Covenant, by virtue whereof, every believing sinner
is justified from the guilt of sin, from which he could not be justified by the
Law of Moses. This Law of justification by Faith is Gods own act and Deed, Acts
13.38.39.
the great Instrumentum pacis between God and man: the Tenor of the Gospel (our
Magna Charta) runs, that he that believes shall be saved.

3. The Father justifies as a Judge, in absolving those that believe, and in
pronouncing them just in Christ, and that in three respects:

1 God j^stifies upon believing actually.
1. God justifies a believing sinner upon his believing actually: by Faith we
are thus justified, Romans 5.1. Gal. 3.8. By believing he has a Title good in
Law, an indefesible right to all the promises of the Covenant, God then owns,
and approves of him as a person justified.

2. Particularly at Death. Heb. 12.23.
2. At the moment of dissolution God justifies a Believer particularly. (as the
Judge of all, and the Judge of all the Earth); passing a particular private
Sentence of everlasting life upon every believing Soul.

3. Eminently at the Day of Judgment, 3. Eminently at the day of judgment. God
justifies at the last day, by the man Christ Jesus. Act. 17.31.
when the Ancient of Days shall take the Throne, when the Son of Man appearing
in power and great Glory, shall in open Court before all the world by public
Sentence, for ever acquit and discharge Believers at that solemn and Great Day.

Thus the Father justifies.

2. Jesus Christ the Son justifies, as the Mediator and meritorious Cause of
our justification, and that in two respects:

1. As our Surety he paid our Debt, Christ is both (...), and (...), a Surety
and a Mediator. (...), redemptionis precium.
and as our Redeemer he laid down the price of our Redemption, Romans 3.23. we
are justified freely by the Grace of God, and yet through the redemption that
is in Christ. His blood was the (...), the price of our redemption, Ephesians. 1.7.
in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his Grace; he is the Mediator of reconciliation
between God and Man.

2. Christ justifies as our Advocate and Intercessor, presenting our persons,
pleading our cause, prevailing with his Father by the speakings of his blood,
that the virtue of his merits may be applied to us, Romans 8.34. It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen
again, who also makes intercession for us: there is a rather put upon the
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, 1 John 2.2. we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Thus Christ justifies.

3. The Spirit justifies as the Applicatory Cause, he does reveal and apply to
us the righteousness of Christ for our justification.

1. The Spirit, as the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation reveals, and discovers
this Robe of Glory to us, this Garment of Salvation: Though the Father has
given the Son, and the Son has given himself for our righteousness, yet it is
the Spirit that applies this righteousness: Revelation and Application is his
peculiar Office.

2. As the Spirit of Regeneration working in us the grace of Faith, Directly.
which is one of the fruits of the Spirit, whereby we receive and apprehend
Christ the Lord our righteousness, Causa Causae est etiam, causa Causati.
unto our justification in the Court of Heaven: the Spirit justifies as he is
the cause of the cause. the Author of Faith that justifies.

3. As a Spirit of Adoption, by confirming our Faith, Reflectively.
by working in us the assurance of our justification, by sealing us up unto the
day of Redemption, the Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we
are the children of God, Romans 8.16, 17. Thus the righteousness of God by the
revelation of the Spirit is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17.

Thus much for the principal efficient cause.

2. The instrumental or ministering causes are the Word of God, and Faith.

1. The ministry of the Word, is the instrumental cause on Gods part, The
Gospel is manus Dei ^fferentis,
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word, Romans 10.17. and in Gal. 3.2.
the Gospel is called the hearing of Faith. God in his Word by his Ministers,
does as it were beseech sinners to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. The
Word of God is the vehiculum spiritus, the Chariot of the Spirit, wherein he
rides: the Word is the Wardrope, Isa. 61.10. Matthew. 14.44.
wherein this glorious Robe of Righteousness is laid up, it is the goodly Field
wherein this heavenly treasure is to be found.

2. The second instrumental cause is Faith: Faith is manus accipientis.
Faith is the hand of the Soul, whereby we receive Christ, and apply his
righteousness, John 1.12. Faith justifies, Non (...) 1. Primo, and per se, ut
qualitas proprie aut motus, actio vel, vel passio, aut opus aliquod bonum, and
eximii precii, quasi ipsa sit justitia, aut ejus pars, aut etiam justitiae
loco, ex censu, and estimatione Dei, sed (...), secundario, and secundum aliud,
nempe ut modus medium and instrumentum ceu oculus and manus qua Christi,
ejusque participes reddimur, adeoque relative ad objectum Iesum ipsius
justitiam, and promissiones gratiae. Synop. Pur. Theol. p. 442.
Romans 5.1. But how does faith justify? Faith justifies, as one expresses it
vi legis latae, as it is our evangelical righteousness, or our keeping the
Gospel Law; Faith pretends to no merit, nor virtue of its own, but professedly
avows its dependence upon the merit of Christ's satisfaction, as our legal
righteousness, on which it lays hold; its excellency arises from Gods
Sanction, who made choice of this act of Believing to the honor of
Justification, because it lays the creature low, and so highly exalts
Christ. The Act of believing is as the Silver: Gods Authority in the
Gospel-Sanction, is as the Kings Image stamped upon it; which gives it all its
value as to justification, without this stamp, it could never have been
current. Faith does not justify as an habit, act, work, or quality, (as the
Papists say) but as an instrument or hand to receive Christ and his
righteousness; Unde fides impatatur ad justitiam, ut Paulus loquitur. Rom 4 5.
Non q^atenus est qualitas nobis inhaerens, nec quatenus est opus, multo minus
quatenus est meritum, sed metonymia adjuncti correlative intellecta per vocem
sidei justitia Christi, quam fides apprehendit, ut patet ex codem, cap. 4. v.
11, 13. And again, nec qu^tenus est cullus Dei, and radir omnium aliorum
bonorum o^erum: sed quatenus nos Christo conglutina: and un ^ cum illo f^cti,
pa^ti^ p^^iane j^st tiae ejus f uamur. Polan. p. 456
Faith is an empty and a naked thing without its Object. Faith puts on this
Robe of Glory, and wraps the Soul in it; but it is this glorious Robe, Christ's
righteousness that justifies. It Is very certain, that the (...) credere cannot,
does not justify, as Socinus, and Arminius teach, it d th: It Is true, 't s
said, Romans 4.5. Faith is imputed for righte^usnesse, and is accepted of God
through Christ for the performance of the whole Law: but this is to be
understood m^tonimically, and rel^tively in respect of Christ the object of
faith, who is the end and perfection of the Law to them that believe, by
fulfilling the righteousness of the Law for them. Faith invites a Soul to
Christ, brings it into Union with his Person, and so into communion of his
righteousness.

And then for works: what shall we say of them? The Apostle is peremptory and
absolute in his Conclusion Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. So also, Gal. 2.16 Knowing
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ, etc. that is, by the works which Christ has done in our stead, by the
obedience of Christ, which we apply to our selves by Faith alone: says
Polanus. (...) scripserit Paulus pro (...) sicut etia^ accipitur. Matthew. 12.4.
1 Cor 7.17. Beza in loc. sed ta^^um per fidem Jesus Christi: hoc e^ per opera
qua Christus loco nostro fecit, per obedientiam Christi quam sola side noble
applicamus. Polan


Faith justifies a sinner before God, and works justify Faith, and demonstrate
to the world, and to our own consciences that our faith is not dead and barren,
but ( Jam. 2.4.) Living, because fruitful; says as working, does not justify,
but sound justifying faith is a working faith.

2. We come to consider the essential material cause of our justification,
that very thing, which is our righteousness, which God imputes to us, and
accepts on our behalf.

To this I answer. 1. Negatively, 1. Negatively.
what it is not.

1. It cannot be our own righteousness inherent in us, because inchoate and
imperfect, Justitiam, qua-coram Tribunali Dei Consistimus, perfectam omnibus
numeris partibus, and gradibus esse necesse est. Quid enim ex se agere poterat,
ut semel amissam justitiam recuperaret, home servus peccati vinctus Diaboli?
assignata est proinde aliena qui caruit sua. Bernard.
and the righteousness of justification, must be most absolute and perfect, by
the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified, (1) no mere man, Romans 3.20.
We may therefore cry out with Bernard; what is man that is a servant of sin, a
Bondslave of the Devil, able of himself to do, for the recovery of
righteousness once lost? there is therefore the righteousness of another
assigned to him, who has lost his own.

2. Nor secondly is it the righteousness of Christ, merely and solely (as man)
considered: though that was pure and spotless, yet it was not infinite, and
meritorious; for Christ taking upon him an humane nature, was bound to keep the
the Law, being made of a woman, he was also made under the Law; under the
Covenant of Works: Gal. 4.3, 4
the obedience of Christ merely as man, had been no work of supererogation as
to us, it would have served to justify himself; but without the personal Union,
there would have been no redundancy, or overflowing of merit in it, to justify
those millions of guilty miscreants, Non propter seipsum, sed propter nostram
salutem, and ^b demolitionem mortis, and Condemnationem, Christus Advenit.
Athanas. Orat. Tertia contra Arrian.
who through the infinite grace of the Father by the blood of the Son are
justified. Wherefore Christ came not for himself, but for our salvation, etc.
says Athanasius.

Non est essentialis justitia Dei, ut Andreas O^^ander contendebat, cujus
errorem refutavit. Calvin. Institut. te^tio l^bro.
2. It is not the Essential Righteousness of the Godhead, not that
righteousness wherewith God is righteous, it is not the righteousness of Christ
as God solely, though it is called the righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans
1.17. and so called, because it is the righteousness of him, who is truly God,
as well as truly man, in one person: and it is the righteousness which God
appoints, and accepts for our justication. But it is not the Essential
uncreated righteousness of God, which being the Essence of God, cannot be
communicated to any creature, much less can it become the accidental
righteousness of any creature.

2. Posi^^v^ly.
2. Positively* that which is our righteousness for justification. It is the
most Adequate and perfect obedience of Jesus Christ the Mediator God-man to
the whole Law of God. Gonsisting in a most exact conformity of his whole humane
Nature with all its actions and passions thereunto: whereby, Justitia Jesus
Christi, per quam justificamur coram Deo, est perfectissima totius legis
divinae obedientia, consistens in exactissima totius naturae Humanae Christi,
omniumque Actionum, and passionum ejus internarum, and externarum conformitate,
cum tota lege Dei, quam loco nostro pe fectissime impl^vit, ut nobis a morte
aeterna liberationem, and jus vitae aeternae acquireret. Syntag Polan. p. 457.
both actively, and passively he fulfilled the Law most perfectly.

For proof you may please to read, Romans 8.3, 4. Gal. 4.3, 4. Romans 5.16, 17, 18,
19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience
of one shall many be made righteous, verse. 19. O Believers, this Garment of
Sunbeams wrought out for ye by the Sun of righteousness, must needs be
glorious: if ye consider,

1. That Christ's humane Nature was never stained neither with original, nor
actual sin: for by his divine Conception by the Holy Ghost, he received of his
Virgin Mother, a pure un-deflowred, Virgin Nature, which all along he kept
immaculate.

2. The Humane nature in him is dignified with Union to the Divine, to the
second person in the Trinity, in which it does subsist; as God descended to the
lowest to become man, so now man, (viz.) the humane Nature ascends to the
highest, to be personally one with God. It Is the righteousness of Christ the
Mediator (...) God-man, in one person, though inherent in the Humane Nature,
and performed by it. And this is that which, by communication of properties,
gives infinite value, virtue, and eternal efficacy to the obedience of Jesus
Christ; wherefore it is called the righteousness of God. This I must profess to
or the chief stay of my faith, and the principal foundation of my comfort, that
He is Jehovah our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. that he who is God blessed for
ever, Romans 9.5.
is the root and off spring of David; that it is the Prince of Life that died,
Acts 3.15. that the Lord of Glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. that, that blood,
which is the price of my redemption and justific^tion is the blood of God; that
he that was in the form of God, Acts 20.28.
and thought it no robbery to be equal with God did humble himself, and became
obedient to the death of the Cross for me, Phil. 2.6, 8 Gal. 2.20.
which whole humiliation of Jesus Christ God-man, from his conception to his
crucifixion, especially his bloody passion, Some say, it consists both in
applicatione and pronunciatione ipsius Dei. Justitia Dei est non peccare:
^ustitia bominis, est non impa^^ni peccarum. Bernard Sermon 23. ^ Cantic.
is the material cause of our justification.

Thus much for the essential material Cause of our justification.

3. What is the formal Cause of our justification?

I answer, It Is the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, because by imputing
and applying it to us, he is pleased to justify us, Romans 4.11. Psalm 32.1. Romans
4.8. 2 Cor. 5.19. Acts 10.43. Acts 13.28, 29. St. Ambrose, Bish p Downame and
others do express it by this simile; When Rebecca clothed her son Jacob with
the garmen^s of her elder son Esau, the matter of the action, was the garment
of Esau, which being applied to him did cover him; but the form of the action
was the applying it to him, the indution, or putting it upon him; so the matter
of our justification is Christ's righteousness, the formal cause of our
justification, is the Fathers imputing, or applying Christ's righteousness to
us. The Apostle most clearly argues, by way of comparison between Adam and
Christ; Romans 5.17, 18, 19.
how could the disobedience of Adam be made ours for condemnation? or the
obedience of Christ be made ours for justification unto life? but only by
imputation, seeing they are both transient Acts. A learned Philosopher tells
us, Motus non est, nisi dum fit, postquam factus est. non est. Jul. Scaliger.
That a motion, whether action, or passion, has no being, but while it is in
doing, or suffering, but after it is done, it has no being: the disobedience
of the one, and the obedience of the other; the transgression of Adam and the
righteousness of Christ, can be no way conveyed to us, but by imputation: which
term of imputation of Christ's righteousness, (notwithstanding the Papists
scoffing at it, and calling it putative righteousness) is used ten times in
Romans 4.

4. The End or final Cause for which God does justify a sinner by imputation
of Christ's righteousness, and that is either supreme, or subordinate. Utriusque
enim, and misericordiae, and justitiae admirabile hic temperamentum relucet.


1. The supreme End, is the manifestation of the Glory, both of his justice and
mercy, as both which concur in all his works: so chiefly in this great work of
Justification; The Lord is righteous in all his works, and holy in all his
ways, Ps. 145.17.

1. That his Justice might be fully Glorified: God sent and set forth his own
Son to be a propitiation for our sins, and has punished them in his humane
Nature; I say (says the Apostle) to declare his righteousness, that he might
be just, Romans 3.25, 26.
and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. 2. That his grace and mercy
also might eminently be magnified; he has sent his only begotten Son into the
World, that we might be justified freely by his Grace, through the redemption
that is in Christ, Deus Pater nos justificat, ut judex quidem, sed sedens in
Throno Gratiae, etc. Synops.
Romans 3.25. and that we should be to the praise of the glory of his Grace,
wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1, 6. Wherefore, not
unto us, not unto us, not to any works of righteousness that we have done, but
to the Father of Mercies, the Lord God omnipotent, and to the Lamb that sits
upon the Throne, be all Honor, and Glory, Blessing and praise for evermore,
Revel. 5.13. 2 Timothy 1.9.

2. The subordinate end is our Salvation, Romans 8.30. whom he has justified,
them also he Glorified, Tit. 3.7. That being justified by his Grace, we should
be made heirs of eternal life Though our salvation be our particular proper,
Our (...).
supreme end, or chief good, to which both justification, and sanctification
are referred; yet it is subordinate to Gods Glory, as to the Sovereign and
universal End: for such is the infinite goodness of God to believing sinners,
that he has subordinated their salvation to his own Glory.

The precious properties of this Righteousness; how it is a divine
righteousness, a temptation vanquishing, and a World-overcoming righteousness,
a Law fulfilling, and a justice satisfying righteousness, a most perfect
righteousness, a Glorious Robe of righteousness, an everlasting righteousness,
etc. Ye have heard at large discussed from another Text, therefore I shall
forbear to enlarge herein.

Lastly, What are the blessed fruits and consequences of Justification?

I answer, 1. Sanctification inherent, with good works apparent, which non
praecedunt justificandum, sed sequuntur justificatum, as Austin speaks; they do
not go before, but follow after a state of justification.

2. Peace with God; that is an holy Tranquillity, and sweet serenity of
conscience, Romans 5.1.

3. A free Access to God, Romans 5.2.

4. Certain hope of Glory, Romans 5.2, 5.

5. Consolation, yea Gloriation in, and over afflictions, Romans 5.3.

6. The shedding abroad the love of God into the hearts of the justified, Romans
5.5.

7. Conservation from wrath to come, To. 5.9.

8. Glorification and eternal life, Romans 8.30. Romans 5.21. that as sin has
reigned unto death, even so might Grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

A word or two at parting to the Justified, by way of Application.

1. Walk up to your Duty. 2. Live up to your Comfort.
1. Walk up to your Duty: Ye that are the redeemed of the Lord, the children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus, walk worthy of him who has called you to his
Kingdom and Glory; As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
him, Col. 2.6. Receive not this Grace of God in vain: this is a certain
evidence of your freedom from Condemnation, if ye walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. and herein is your father glorified, if ye
bring forth much fruit, John 15.6. As your Rece^pts are great, so give me leave
to tell you, your duty is, and your Account will be great also: so live, so
act, so work, that ye may give up your account with joy.

2. Live up to the Comfort of your state; ye are already the sons of God, and
it does not yet appear, what ye shall be, 1 John 3.1. who shall say any thing
to your charge? (whether men or Devils) it is God that justifies, it is Christ
that died, etc. To. 8.33. Behold thy Treasures, thy Comforts, thy Joys, thy
Portion, thy Privileges, laid up for thee in that precious Cabinet, Romans 5.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. Wherefore feed, nay feast thy Soul by faith upon them: wherefore,
in the worst of times, the righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and all the
upright in heart shall glory, Psalm 64, 10.

Thus, so far as one Exercise would permit, I have endeavored to give some
satisfaction in the great Argument of Justification. Consider what I have said,
and the Lord give ye understanding; 2 Timothy 2.7. (...).

FINIS.

