COMFORTABLE CORDIALS, AGAINST DISCOMFORTABLE Fears of Imprisonment, and other
sufferings in good causes. Containing some Latin Verses, Sentences, and Texts
of Scripture, written by Mr. WILLIAM PRYNNE on his Chamber walls in the Tower
of London, during his Imprisonment there; since Translated by him into English
VERSE.

2 CORINTHIANS 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Blessed be God, even the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all
comfort; who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to
comfort them which are in any troubles by the comfort wherewith we our selves
are comforted of God. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation also abounds by Christ. And whether we be afflicted, it is for
your consolation, and salvation, which is effectual in enduring of the same
sufferings, which we also suffered: or whether we be comforted, it is for
your consolation and salvation. And our hope of you is steadfast; knowing that
as you are partakers of the sufferings, so also you shall be of the
consolation. For we would not, Brethren, have you ignorant of our trouble which
came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure above strength, in so
much that we despaired even of life. But we had the sentence of death in our
selves, that we should not trust in our selves but in God which raises the
dead: who delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver; in whom we
trust, that he will yet deliver us: you also helping together by Prayer for us,
that for the gift bestowed upon us, by the means of many persons thanks may be
given by many on our behalf. Printed Anno. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful his very Noble and highly Honored good Friend, SIR
WILLIAM BALFORE Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower of LONDON.
SIR, it were Ingratitude and Injury,
For me in silence here to pass you by,
And not present these Cordialls unto you,
Since they, and all my service are your due,
For all your Noble Favors in the Tower,
Which have engaged me to my utmost power,
To be your eternally devoted poor Friend and servant, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

COMFORTABLE CORDIALLS, OR Latin Verses and Sentences, written by Mr. William
Prynne on his Chamber Walls in the Tower of London, during his Imprisonment
there; Since translated into English by him.
1.
TRanstulit in Coelum Christi praesentia Claustrum:
Quid faciet Coelo, quae Coelum jam creat Antro?
Christ's presence has my Prison turned into
A blessed Heaven; what then will it do
In Heaven hereafter, when it now creates
Heaven in a Dungeon? Goales, to Courts translates?
2.
Stigmata Christicolis, splendentia sidera; sanguis,
Purpura regalis; mutilataque Membra, Decorum;
Vincula, gemmatus Torques; Opprobria, plausus;
Vulnera, Martyrium; M^rs; Vita; Gravamina, Lucrum.
Optima cun^ba piis, Tristissima sola ministrant;
V^ica Crux sanctis, Via, Ianua, summa salutis.
Brands, unto Christians are bright Stars; Blood spent,
A Royal Purple; Maym'd Limbs, Ornament;
Bonds, Chains of Pearl; Reproaches, Praise (no stain)
Wounds, Martyrdom; Death, Life; Oppressions, Gain.
To godly men the saddest fates only
All best things bring, and their joys multiply;
The Cross alone to Saints is the high way,
Gate, sum of safety, Means of endless Joy:
3.
Christus ubique pium comitatur; Carceris Antrum
Ingreditur: Turres. Densissima M^enia, Rupes,
Fossas, Ferratas Portas Obstacula, Flammas
Permeat intrepidus; socius solamen, Amicus,
Omnia seclusis, solus; saturatque benignus
Deliciis superum sitientia Corda suorum, oan. 20. 19.

Discipulis foribus clusis intravit amaenus,
Christicolis clausis habitat conviva perennis.
O fortunatus cui Con-captivus Jesus,
Laetisicans radiis tristissima Claustra supernis;
Vincula non illum, Tormenta gravamina moestum
Efficient, animum retinentem utcunque sorenum.
Christ every where accompanies good Men;
He goes with them into the Prisons Den;
The Towers, thickest Walls broad ditches, Gates,
Of Iron, Barracadoes, Flames and Graces
Does boldly pass through; proves Companion,
Friend, solace, all things of himself alone;
Unto close Prisoners and fills plenteously
The thirsty souls of his, with heavenly
Delights. * John 20: 19.
He entered in the doors fast shut
To his Disciples, them to comfort; but
With godly prisoners he is a constant guess
Resides; O happic he who does possess
Christ for his Fellow-prisoner, who does glad
With heavenly Sunbeames, Goales that are most sad,
Bonds, Torments, Brisons, make not him sad; he
Retains a quiet mind how ere things be.
4.
Nullat o^us vinctus Christi virtute solutus;
Permanet immunis, clusus vel Carcore Vinclis.
Liber ubique, pius, placidus, benedictus, amoenus,
Indomitus; tacitum circumfert pectore Coelum:
Tristia Laetificans, Moestissima cuncta serenans;
Vincula disentiens, arctissima claustra recludens.
He is not bound whom CHRIST has made free; he
Though shut close Prisoner, chaind, remains still free,
A godly Man's at large in every place,
Still cheerful, well content, in blessed case,
Unconquered; he a secret Heaven still bears
About within his breast, which sad things cheares,
Dispells his blackest clouds of grief, off shakes
His chains; and closest prisons open makes.
5.
Vincula non Animam cohibent, haud carcere clusam:
Sidera transvolitat, Terram, Mare, cuncta pererrat
Alipes, immensi fines transcendit Olympi;
Limit is impations, arctari nescia Mundi
Cancellis; tantum requiescens Numine vaste;
Seeurus, placidusque Piis, vel turbine, Pertus;
No bands the soul of Man can once restrain;
No Prison it enclose, nor yet contain;
It soars above the Stars, and swiftly flies
Over Earth, Sea, all things; mounts beyond the skies,
And bounds of the vast Heavens, impatient
Of Limits, ignorant how to be pent
Within the Rayles of this whole world; only
Resting within the boundless Deity;
A secure, pleasant harbor to Godly
Men, even in a storm of Misery.
6.
Vincula quid trepidas? quid tela minantia? Flammas,
Vulnera? quid rabidi Tormenta, Crucesve Tyranni?
Aspera pro Christo, dulcissima; qui Diadema Rev. 2. 7. 11. 17. 21. c. 3. 5.
12. 21. c. 21. 7. 2 Timothy 1. 7. 8.

Vincenti Statuit, Lignique cruore paravit.
Scenicaturba Choros, spectacula, Tympana, Mimes,
Ludicra stuprosis celebret, spectetque Theatris;
Vincula Christicolae, Mutilatio, stigmata, Furcae
Gaudia plura ferunt, cumulataque Praemia condunt.
Histrio, Scena, Iocus, saltatio, Mascara, Cantus,
Risus Sardonicos generant, fictosque Cachinuos.
Cordolium verum, gemitus morsusque perennes:
Dulcia post tristant, peramara salute coronant.
Why fearst thou Bonds? why threatenings? Weapons? Fires?
Wounds? why the torments, Crosses or the Ires
Of raging Tyrants? since the sharpest things
We undergo for Christ, most sweetness brings.
who has prepared and purchased for him
Who Rev. 2. 7. 11. 17. 21. c. 3. 5. 12. 21. e 21. 7. 2 Timothy 4. 7. 8.
overcomes, a glorious Diadem
By the Blood of his Cross. Let then the Crew
Of stage Frequenters celebrate, and view
Plays, Dances, Pastimes, Players, sports in base
And filthy Theaters, where grows no grace.
Chains, Mutilations, Pillories, Brandes bring,
To godly Christians far more joys, heaping
Most large rewards upon them. Players, Plays,
Jests, Dancing, Maskes, Songs, generate always
But deadly Laughters, feigned shoutes; ^^m 4. 9. 1 c. 5. 1.
true grief,
Sighs, lasting gripes of Conscience, past relief.
Sweet worldly pleasures still in Pro. 14. 13.
sadness cease;
When 2 Cor. 4. 17. 2. Tim. 2. 12.
bitterest sufferings bring Crowns, safety, peace.
7.
Anlicus imbellis gemmis, Dominaeque Capillis
Auriculas onerat, magnoque decore venustat,
Stigma, Cicatrices, mutilatio pulchrius Aures
Christigenae decorant, radiisque micantibus ornant,
O Decus eximium referentia Vulnera Christum:
Talibus insignis superis peramatus abibis.
Th'unmanly Courtier with his Mistress Hair,
And Jewels, lades his ears, to make them fair.
When as Brands, Scarres, and Croppings sarre more dight
A Christians ears, and make them shine more bright.
O Matchless Glory, Wounds which Christ express!
Adorned with these, Gods love thou shall possess.
8.
Passio Coelipetis Alpha, at Solamen Omega:
Principium Lachrymis decoratur: Meta, Triumphis.
Suffering's their Alpha who to Heaven tend;
But Joy is their Omega final end;
Their Entrance is adorned with tears of Woe,
Their end with Triumphs, which then griefs outgo.
9.
Nil Crus sentit in Nervo, si Anima sit in Coelo.
The Leg feels nothing in the stocks, if the
Soul, mind, Affections in Heaven placed be.
10.
Non timet in carcerem qui scit contemnere Libertatem,
Vitam, voluptatem, Famam: cui Mundus Ergastulum,
Terra Exilium, Dens habitaeulum, Mors Solatium.
He fears no prison who knows to despise
Freedom, Life, pleasure, Fame, which others prise:
To whom this world's a prison; Earth, a place
Of Exile, God, a Mansion; Death, Solace.
11.
Servus Christi etiam in vinculis, Liber.
Servus Peccati etiam in summa Liberate captivus.
Christ's Servants even in prison are still free:
Sins, in the greatest freedom, captives be.
12.
Nil corpus patitur in Ergastulo, si Animus sit in Coelo.
The body suffers naught in prison, when
The mind it self is lodged in Heaven.
13.
Quid Coelum sine Deo, nisi Barathrum?
Quid Barathum cum Deo nisi Coelum?
What Is Heaven without God but a very Hell?
What Is Hell but a Heaven, if God once there dwell?
14.
Nullibi inearteratur, qui ubique in Christo liberatur:
Nunquam dejicitur, qui semper a Jehova sustentatur.
He in no place can once imprisoned be,
Who in all places is Joh. 8. 36. Gal. 5. 1.
by Christ set free:
He never is Psalm. 37. 24.
dejected, who always
Has great Jehovah for his prop and stay.
15.
Nusquam solus qui ubique cum Deo;
Nunquam Miser qui semper cum Christo,
He never is alone, who every where
Has God himself, him company to bear,
He never can be miserable, who
Is always with Christ, who does with him go.
16.
Vbi Deus adest. ibi non est Carcer, sed Paradisus; Non Ergastulum,
Sed Palatium; non Barathrum, sed Coelum.
Where God is present, there no Prison is,
But a sweet Paradise of Joy and bliss;
No Bridewell, but a Palace; no dark Cell,
But a bright Heaven, where all comforts dwell.
17.
Carcer probat Amicos, detegit Inimicos;
Excludit Mundum, includit Deum:
Alit virtutes, extinguit Libidines,
Edocet Temperantiam; cohibet Luxuriam;
Mortificat earnem, sanctificat hominem;
Ingenerat gratiam, the saurizat Gloriam.
A prison tries Men's friends, detects their Foes.
Shuts out the world, God to men does enclose;
Nourishes virtues, Lusts extinguisheth;
Temperance teaches, Riot restrains,
Quite kills the flesh, but makes the Man holy;
Ingenders Grace, 2 Cor. 4. 17. 2 Timothy 4. 8.
and treasures up glory.
18
Turris Christianos fideles ficte incarcerat, vere liberat, Vnicum Dulcissimum
Christi lugum, [cui subjugari est perfect manumitti] Imponendo: multiplicia
gravissimaque Carnis, peccati, Mundi, Diaboli vincula [quibus ill^ queari, est
certissime captivari,) discutiendo.

The Tower true faithful Christians feinedly
Imprisons, but them sets free verily,
By putting on them Christ's sweet yoke only,
To which to be subjected, is truly
To be enfranchised; by shaking off
The manifold, and most heavy chains of
The flesh, sin, World, Di'le; in which for to lie
Insnarde, is to be captived certainly.
19.
Turris plurimis Spectaculum, multis habitaculum: nonnullis Refugium; aliis
divers^rium; Regi Palatium; Regno Gazophylacium, Armamentarium, Propugnaculum,
Monetarium: Vinctis piis, Oratorium; Papisticis, Purgatorium; Clausis,
Monasterium; Innoxiis, Hospitium; Reis, Ergastulum; Literatis, Musaeum;
Ebriosis, Oenopolium; proditoriis, Macellum.

The Tower is to most, a Spectacle;
To many its a house, wherein they dwell;
To some a refuge; Others, a lodging;
A Royal Palace, it is to the King;
Unto the Kingdom it is a Treasury,
Armory, Bulwark, Mint: an Oratory
To Godly prisoners; but a purgatory
To popish; to close ones, a Monast'ry;
To guiltless ones, it is an Inn; to guilty
A Bridewell; to learned ones, it is a study;
To idle ones a Dormitory; to
Drunkards, a tipling-house them to undo;
To Traitors it is a shambles, where their head
And Quarters hang, when they are but chered.
On his Exile into Iersy Isle.
Why should this Exile me grieve, discontent, (1) Levil. 25. 23.

Si^h this whole World's a place of Banishment?
And men as truly Exiles are at home, Psalm. 39. 12. psalm. 119. 19 2 Chronicles: 29
15. Heb. 11. 13 1 pet. 2. 11.

As in the strangest Clime to which they come?
Are not God, Christ, Grace, Heaven to us as nigh
In foreign Parts, as in our own Country?
Yea; and often times more near: this true to be
By Genesis 12. 28. to 48. Act. 7. 3. to 17. Heb. 11. 8.
Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, all may see,
I will not then fly, fear my Banishment.
But in it joy, and take most sweet content,
Since God will me protect, Isay 41. 5. 6.
restore again,
Or else translate to Heaven, with him to reign,
Mine only Proper Heb. 11. 14. 16.
Country, wherein I
Shall live a Freeman for eternity,
In spite of my Arch-fees; whom I shall see.
Exild, Prove. 11. 8. c. 21 18. c. 12. 13.
imprisoned, and my self set free.
20. Dens Turris etiam in Turre:
Turris Libertatis Consolationis Quietis, Fa licitatis Honoris Splendoris
Securitatis Salutis Spei Gaudii Pacis Protectionis Gratiae Vitae Gloria
in Turre Angustiae; Tristitiae; Molestiae; Miseriae; Dedecoris, Obscuritatis
Perturbationis, Perditionis, Desperationis Afflictionis, Belli; Periculi,
Peccatl; Mortis, Perpessionis.


God is a Psalm. 18. 2. Psalm. 1. 3. Psalm. 144. 2.
Tower in the Tower.
A Tower of Lberty,
In the Tower of Restraint; a Tower
Of Comfort, Jollity
In the Tower of Sadness; a Tower
Of sweetest Quietness
In the Tower of Trouble; a Tower
Of blested Happiness,
In the Tower of Misery; a Tower
Of Honor, Dignity
In the Tower of disgrace; a Tower
Of bright Excellency
In the Tower of darkness; a Tower
Of strong security
In the Tower of danger; a Tower
Of health and true safety
In the Tower of Sickness; a Tower
Of hope and good success
In the Tower of Despair; a Tower
Of joy and cheerfulness
In the Tower of sorrow; a Tower
Of peace and union
In the Tower of fierce war: a Tower
Of safe Protection
In the Tower of peril; a Tower
Of Grace and Piety
In the Tower of vile Sin; a Tower
Of Life, eternity
In the Tower of grim death; a Tower
Of Glory and great praise,
In the Tower of suffering: such Tower
God proves to his always.
21. Deus Turris.
1.
Protegendo; A malis, In malis, Contra malos, Inter malos, Vbique, Tutissime,
Fortissime, Gratiosissime,
2.
Consolando, In Malis, Semper, Abundanter, Suavissime;
3.
Eripiendo, A Malis Cito Tempestive Potentissime
Mortalium proculdubio Beatissimus, qui Mundi Exul. Christique ^aptivus, Turri
isti tutissimae, jucundissimae, optimae, maximae perpetuo (dum vixerit)
adjuaicatur. Salvo certe custoditur, qui non solum a Deo, sed in Deo
conservatur: arctari non potest, qui ipsa Dei infinitate (incarceratus)
spatiatur. Ita eminatur Galielmas Prynne: Martij 3. 1633.

God is a Tower by protecting all
His Saints from Ills, in Ills which them befall;
Against, amidst ill men in every place,
Most safely, strongly out of his mere grace;
By comforting them in adversity
Always, most sweetly, most abundantly:
By fr^eing them from evils speedily,
In the best time, and that most potently:
No doubt he is the happiest man alive,
Who this worlds Exile, and Christ's dear Captive,
Is during life adjudg'd perpetually
In this most safe, sweet, best great'st Tower to lie.
He is truly kept safely, who both by
And in God is preserved continually:
He cannot straightened be, who walks freely
(Whiles prisoner) in Gods vast Infinity.
O this opinion WILLIAM PRYNNE was the
Third day of March, six hundred thirty three.
Sentences of Scripture there likewise written.
PSALM. 69. 33. The Lord hears the poor, and despises not his prisoners.
PSALM. 146. 7, 8. The Lord loses the prisoners; the Lord raises those that
are bowed down. PHIL. 4. 11, 12, 13. I have learned in whatsoever state I am,
therewith to be content, I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound: every where, and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and
to be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need: I can do all things through
Christ, which strengthens me. PSALM. 34. 17. 19. 22. The righteous cry, and
the Lord hears, and delivers them out of all their troubles. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers him out of them all; the
Lord redeemeth the soul of his Servants, and none of them that trust in him,
shall be desolate. PSALM. 37. 23, 24. 37, 38, 39, 40. The steps of a good man
are ordered by the Lord, and he delights in his way: Though he fall, he
shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord upholdeth him with his hand:
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: For the end of that man is
peace. But the transgressors shall be destroyed together, the end of the
wicked shall be cut off: But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord,
he is their strength in the time of trouble. And the Lord shall help them and
deliver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because
they trust in him. PSALM. 71. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Thy righteousness also O
God, is very high, who have done great things, O God who is like to thee? Thou
which have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and
shall bring me up again from the depthes of the earth. Thou shall increase my
greatness, and comfort me on every side. I will also praise thee, with the
Psaltery even thy truth: O my God unto thee will I sing with the Harp, O thou
holy one of Israel: My lips shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto thee: and my
soul which thou have redeemed: my tongue also shall talk of thy
righteousness all the day long: for they are confounded, for they are brought
unto shame that seek my hurt. MICAH: 7, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. A man's enemies are the
men of his own house: Therefore I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for
the God of my salvation, my God will hear me: Rejoice not against me o mine
enemy: when I fall, I shall arise: when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be
a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
finned against him, until he plead my cause and execute judgment for me,
He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.
Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said
unto me, where is the Lord thy God? mine eyes shall behold her, now shall she
be trodden down, as the mire of the streets. On his Sufferings on the Pillory.
Christ for I say 53. 4. 5. 6. 8. 10. Rom 4. 25. 1 Cor. 15. 3 1 Pet. 2. 24.
mysake, sins, and Redemption
From Hell and endless Torments; sufferedon
The Heb. 12. 2. c. 13. 12 12. Gal. 3. 13. Phil. 2. 8.
Cross, a shameful, cursed Death, with all
Alacrity, joy, promptitude: And shall
I not for his sake then most cheerfully
Both stand, and suffer on the Pillory,
Without all blush, or fear? since it is no shame,
But Phil. 1. 29 2 Timothy 2. 12. Rev. 7. 13. to 17.
Honor, thus to suffer for Christ's name.
Verses made by W. PRYNNE, as he returned by Water to the Tower after his last
sufferings, upon his Stigmatizing.
S. L. Stigmata Laudis.
Stigmata Maxillis referens, Insignia Laudis,
Exultans remeo, victima grata Deo.
Bearing Lands Stamps on my Cheeks, I retire
Triumphing, Gods sweet Sacrifice through fire.
On his return from Exile.
Foes sent me hence, but God, and his Saints cries
Have brought me back, it is wondrous in all Eyes.
No Exiles, Prisons, Chains, powers can detain
Those whom God will recall, free, raise again.
ISAY. 51. 11. 14. c. 41. 5, 6. The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and
come with singing unto Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their head; they
shall obtain gladness and joy; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away. The
CAPTIVE EXILE hastneth, that he may be loosed, and that he should not dye in
the pit, nor that his bread should fail. Fear not, for I am with thee, I will
bring thy seed from the East, and gather thee from the West, I will say to, the
North, Give up; and to the South, keep not back; bring my sons from far,
and my daughters from the ends of the Earth. FJNJS.
ERRATA.
IN the Epistle v. I. it were, r. it were p. 2. l. 32. The r. He p. 3. l. 8.
He Is, r he The verses p. 9. of his Exile into Jersy, should have come in p. 15.
after Stigmata Laudis.


