Psittacorum Regio. The LAND of PARROTS: Or, The She-lands.

WITH A Description of other strange adjacent Countries, in the Dominions of
PRINCE DEL' AMOVR, not hitherto found in any GEOGRAPHICAL MAP.

By one of the late most reputed Wits.

The Prophecy of Seneca in Medea*

-- Venient annis, etc.
-- When certain years are spent,
Hereafter shall the spumy Ocean show
His secret store, and open to Mortals view
A larger Continent. --
Licensed Nov. 9. 1668.

London, Printed for F. Kirkman, and are to be sold at his Shop under St.
Ethelboroughs Church in Bishops-gate-street. 1669.

Gluttonia Gurmond Hall.
Frolic Fatness here does dwell.
Keep Leanness out, and all goes well.


Quaffonia. Gulpers Court.
The house of youthful mirth and Lusty che^^
Peace, wine, short rest, have all their mansion (...)
The Land of Parrots Of the She-ands And ^^er Dominions of Prince del Amor.
Blackswanstack or Modestiana Shrewesbourg. Cockatrixi Blubberick Tatlingen
Gossipinga^ Scoldonna the Palace of Prince Del Amor the Prince Sliver
streams Flu: a Clawback Courtier Hermaphrodites



PREADMONITION To the READER.
Courteous Reader.
Only in one thing I must entreat your favorable censure, and that is in my
allusions here and there, unto the names of some Cities and places; assuring
you (as your ingenious examination of the particulars will persuade you better)
that I had no intent to intimate any Collation or Referenceof the State or
Manners of those I describe, unto theirs to which I allude. Let this
Protestation therefore clear me from si^ister Imputations, and you from all
unjust suppositions.

And know all you that have not yet seen these Lands, but do intend to take a
view of them hereafter; that you must first take one of the French Doctors
Pills, Despouilez vous dtout affection; and this will enable you fully to
endure the alteration of all Airs in this Clime. Secondly, you must not follow
my example to travel at the first single, but two or three in a company; for
one you know may apprehend more then another can; and I my self that thus
miscarried, give you this warning, having incurred my own misfortune only by
this my desperate neglect, which you may also occasion by your too much
conversing with the She-landers. Thirdly, you must go over the Country thrice,
ere you shall be able to make any exact platform of it: once for Strabo, who
^^^ay somewhat inform you for Geograp^^; once for Socrates, who may instruc^
you in the Morality; once for Merlin Cocaius, who perhaps may acquaint you with
the Language and Etymology. No more at this time, but aboard when you please,
and a good gale of Wit go along with you.

Psittacorum Regio; THE LAND of PARROTS; OR, The Shee-Lands: WITH A Description
of some other strange adjacent Countries in the Dominions OF Prince de l' Amor.
I Know not yet what Travel means, if he that leaves his Native soil, to pass
but into another Country, or over a Neighbour-river (admit it be the Rhine or
the Tweed) deserve the name (as vulgar opinion seems to allow) whereas he never
changes either Sky, Air, or Soil: I see not (if this be true) any profit, or
any worth in the World contained in Travel. My Parents and my friend at
Mount-auban have written very often for my return, as though were far from
them: whereas I (believe me) have imagined my self for two whole years there,
as if I ha^ been at home: for how little a way is it from Mount-auban to Paris
from Paris to Callis, from Callis to Dover! truly when I think of the Land, it
seems about an elle; in the Map, a fingers breadth; in the form of the Heavens,
just nothing. Not see I any reason why that England should be held my native
soil more then all Europe: for if you stand upon diversity of Language, how
many Languages differ from ours If the conditions of the Nation move ye, view
not Europe, but view the whole world, and every Province thereof, leaning to
the qualities of those that adjoyn to it; at the Polypus is said to change to
the color of every stone she comes near. Turn you therefore which way you
will, I cannot see how this half a foot travel can benefit us any way. Indeed I
hold, that our Drake and our Candish were Travelers, as also Sebastiano
Delcano the Portuguess, because their Voyages put girdles about the whole
World: nay, I will allow Christopher Collono that name also, for his discovery
of the West Indies; Francesco Piccaro, and Almagro, for Peru; Hernando
Magellano, for the Molucca's; and Sir Hugh Willoughby, for his Northern
discoveries; together with all such as have found out unknown Regions, or have
reduced them to order. And truly (I will tell you plainly) my mind did prompt
me to an enterprise of this kind, such a one as the world might gaze at, and
all posterity record with admiration. Heroic thoughts having ^ired my breast
full often, and whilst others neglected them, have kindled a bold attempt in
me, Methoughts I saw these unknown Lands, which no man s^ much as dreamed of;
which cause^ me as cheerfully to resolve to discover them, for I could not do
other wise then imagine but that they did lie toward the Cape of Good-Hope
Valiant Countrymen, we mus^ hope, and we must dare. Bug-bear^ of dangers are
only sit to frigh^ Babies, whereas they do but animate bolder spirits; if we
should stick at them, we should never look out at our own doors. This was the
cause that America was so long unknown; and had been still (for ought I see)
had not a Dove been sent as it were from Heaven, which plucking off the
Olive Branch from this Continent, taught us by that, that there was more Land,
and les^ Sea then we dreamed of. O how sacred shall his name be to all
posterity! his Statue shall be advanced for us to gaze upon, and to remain
whilst the Earth keeps her foundation. It is as great a glory (think I) to be
called The new Worlds Discoverer, as her Conqueror. And why may not we have the
same success, and the like glory? I am verily persuaded, that the large
Continent that Seneca prophesied of, is yet undiscovered, and remains to yield
us this honor, if we dare venture on it. I do not question but that there are
some will follow me in this my late famous enterprise; for whose greater
delight and encouragement, I have written this discovery, which I present to
the world in this following Relation.

After I had taken leave of my friends and acquaintance, I embarked at All
winds Port, in a Ship called the Fancy: we say led very prosperously for some
days; at length we fell into a Current which our Pilots were not acquainted
with; and being unable to resist its impetuosity, we were hurried to a Land
which had not yet been discovered. As soon as we had cast anchor there, it
being very secure riding all about, we sent Captain Young on shore, with two of
our best Soldiers, Merry man and Good fellow, to discover what they could of
the Country: from whom after a short space for their return, we had this
following Relation, That this new discovered part of the World was called
Psittacorum Regio, or, Womandecoia the she-lands, which are in the Dominions of
Prince de l' Amor, situated toward the Cape of Good Hope, looking toward
the Tropic of Capricorn^s; a Country replenished with many Fountains of Orange
flower water, and Trees whose heads are ever green; and such a great quantity
of Sweet William and Rosemary, that the very air is perfumed with it.

That the Grounds were fertile enough, but badly Husbanded (it being pity it
should be otherwise, the men being so shrewdly wived) yet nevertheless,
sometimes they are more fruitful then the inhabitants desire; for they bring
forth before their time; and the fruit falling so plentifully before it is
expected, does cause very great differences, to the detriment and disquiet of
the Public good.

They acquainted us also, that before we could arrive at the Shelands, we must
pass through several Provinces, both large and rich, yet all of several
Conditions, Habits and Languages.

We could not but rest satisfied with their intelligence; wherefore (after we
had taken care and well provided for our Ship) and refreshed our selves, we
resolved to try our various Adventures. For my part, I so depended upon their
relation, that I could not otherwise then believe that the Country was rather
pleasant then dangerous; in so much that I traveled so far into it without any
conduct, that I mistook my way, but at last fortunately discovered a strange
Province called Gluttonia (High diet being an introducer into Lasciviania)
which is also in Prince de l' Amors Dominions.

The soil of this Province is worthily admirable, the Air delicately temperate.
O how it pitied me, that so bad Husbandmen should possess so fruitful and
pleasant a habitation! In Latitude it lies full thirty two degrees, and in
Longitude forty four: it joins to Quaffonia, where they speak the same
language, and are situate in the same Longitude and Latitude: they have both
one Prince, one Law; and a happy Reformation (if there could be such a one)
would make them concur both in Prince, Law, Habit and Manners. The
She-Landresses of Woman-decoia traffic much hither, but more to Lasciviania,
where (when there is a truce between them and that Province) they use to make
exchange by bartering of Christalline Glasses for Unguents and Pomanders.

To avoid prolixity, I shall here chiefly discourse of the present customs and
manners of the Natives of this Country. Every Month they are bound by their Law
(and would be so, were there no Law) to celebrate a solemn Feast, where every
Aldergut of the whole Society must present himself, all excuses and delays
whatsoever set a part, to consult (after dinner; for before, it is unlawful for
any one to give his voice) about the public good. The place where they meet is
Gurmonds-Hall: every one knows his seat, and has his Jourdan or Chamber Pot
standing by him, in a little Coffer made for the purpose. Well, being met, and
having turned their Wine into Water, and their Oysters into Shells; every one
takes his Chair, and to dinner they go. Their daintiest dishes are evermore the
first sacrifices unto their stomachs: for they hold that the best meat meets
fittest with the best appetite. Now they do not count it convenient, as to
their appetites, in any case to have their Boars, Sheep, Goats, Lambs, etc.
served up in parcels and joints, as we of Europe use; but they must have all
whole, (the old Romans taught them that:) you shall see the Waiters come
sweating with a whole Hog, or an whole Calf, upon a great pewter Engine, you
would bless your self to behold it. He that rises before six hours are fully
run, incurs a most rigorous Fine: and after this, for a while they eat and
drink by little and little only (for that cause that made Aristotle's Parasite
Philoxenus wish himself the neck of a Crane) to take the more delight in the
delicacies. But for the breaking up of the Feast, they observe this order: They
have a door in their Hall, large enough for the greatest Gut-monger that lives,
take him fasting: at this door they all enter, when they come to the Feast;
which being ended, he that offers to pass the same way that he came, and cannot
get his belly through, is let forth another way: but he that passes as easily
as he came in, is staid by an Officer appointed for that purpose, called the
Sergeant of the Maw, and brought back again, (will he, nill he) where he must
settle himself to a new Collation, until his belly be able to kiss both the
cheeks of the door at once; and then he is dismissed. (I cannot be fully
persuaded, but the creeping through Saint Wilfrids Needle, which was whilom to
be seen in Bever-Castle, was a device brought by some ancient Pilgrim, from
this more ancient custom.) Nay, mark but whether these men have not a care of
the Cities credit. They have a common Hospital (and that I Will assure you a
large one) wherein all such as have got the Dropsy, the Gout, the Cough of the
Lungs, or any such malady by too much eating, are maintained at the public
charge. But all such as have lost their Teeth by age, or by supping their Broth
too hot, are forthwith provided for conveniently, and sent away into
Spoon-meat-Islands.

Most of these Citizens are of an unmeasurable grosness (and seemed to me when
I saw them, to walk much like so many tuns, moving each upon Pottle-pots:) nor
is that man worthy of their meanest salutation, that is not all cheeks to the
belly, and all belly to the feet; like him whose Epitath this was:

Here lies Sir John of Red-crossstreet:
He was beard to the belly, and belly to the feet.
And such shapes do the Women of this City walk in also: (the German Towns do
pretty well in imitation of these Great Bosses; but the Barbarians come very
near them) the young Women may not marry till such time, as before a Bench of
Matrons, they make a public demonstration to their Husbands that shall be,
that their Dugs and Chins may meet without any forcing of either. They go for
the most part all naked, only the Alder-guts may wear Gowns; marry, those must
be only the Skins of such Beasts as they are able to devour alone at one
sitting. Yet there is no Freeman of the Town, but wears a large Knife, and a
Spoon as big as a Ladle bound to his right arm. Before, upon his breasts, each
one wears a poke of Hair-cloth, to save what otherwise may fall besides, and
to wipe their mouths withal; but those they use so long in this greasy employ
meant, that whether their shining exceed their blackness, or their blackness
their shining, he had need to be well sighted that should distinguish. They are
naturally dull of wit, and slow of apprehension; and yet, notwithstanding, most
perfect in all the Arts they respect. Their Schools have no Lectures read in
them, but only Apicius his Institutions of the Art of Muncherie: and there all
the young Fry are taught the Sciences of Carving, Chewing and Swallowing: Oh
most profoundly! The Gluttonian Lecturer (when I was there) was one Doctor
Full-Gorge, a man most rare in his Profession; and instead of Grammar, he read
the first Section of the aforesaid Institutions of Apicius. Their Library is a
large room, ranked full of Pots, Kettles, Spits, and belly-Utensils of all
sorts, every sort being enseamed in their several Classes: the Scholars have
also each one his full Pot, and his laden Platter, for his book: the Freshmen
have lesser measures, the Sophisters larger, and so up to the Graduats. The
first, perhaps, has his Pint and his Pullet; the next, his Quart and his
Goose; the third, his Pottle and Quarter of Lamb, or his Gammon of Bacon; and
so upwards: nor may any leave his task, or have leave to play, till he have
made an end of what was enjoined him. If one stay seven years in these Schools,
and benefit nothing, he is, forsooth, banished for ever into Starveling-Isles,
to Hungerland is he sent immediately, to diet upon Spanish dinners, furnished
with half Pilchers. Thither also they thrust all Physicians and Prescribers of
dyets: if any of them are ill at ease (let Asclepiades swagger and hang if he
will) he presently eats a raw Radish, drinks a little hot Water, spews a while;
and within a quarter of an hour, Viah, he lets fly upon Ajax, and afterward
rises up as sound as a bell.

This Region abounds with Rivers, whose course is (most of them) uncertain,
because of the abundance of Ordure that stops them, sometimes here, and
sometimes there; but generally (take this for an infallible rule) at the
beginning of January, and the end of February, they are sure all of them to
overflow the Bancks, and (if the breaches be not stopped in time) to do much harm
in the Pastures adjoining.

Gourmonds-hall is a very fair large House, beautifully set forth with
Arched-bay-Windows; and upon the front of the entrance were written in Letters
of Gold, this gutling inscription.

Frolick-fatness here does dwell:
Keep leanness out, and all goes well.
And within there hung a Table chained to a Marble Pillar, containing these
inviolable Laws. Be it Enacted,

1. That eating but one meal a day, be henceforth held for a capital
transgression. 2. That he that overthrows a full dish or a cup rashly, be
forthwith by virtue of this Statute enjoined to stand up right on his feet, and
having a dish of Broth set between his heels, to eat it up with a Thimble. 3.
That none eat alone, nor violate the Laws of the Table by any private suppers:
but that every Citizen do eat either in the street, or in any open window, upon
pain of eating his next meal with his heels u^ wards. 4. That whosoever
forbeareth eat or sleep some hours together, ^ satisfy the State by eating two
Suppers. 5. If the Mouth be full, it sha^ be sufficient to give an answer
holding up the Finger. 6. That conspirators against ^^ State of Gluttonia, be
forthwi^^ starved to death; and other Mal^ factors punished with the loss of
Tooth. 7. That all Cooks that dress no their meat according to the judici^ ous
Palate, be immediately bo^^^ unto Stakes, and flesh half-roast^^ hung by them,
until some pittif^^ and hungry spectator take compass^ on upon them, so as to
eat it all up. 8. That to belch be held not one^ lawful, but honorable also:
and the the Government of the next following Feast be assigned to him, the
broke wind the strongest at the last. 9. That every man's weekly Maungery be
brought in a billa vera, by his fellow Gourmandizer, unto the Register to be
recorded; and withal, that if he have not fulfilled the Law in that case
enacted, he may accordly be fined.
Signed All-Paunch.

Those that are the least offenders, are put for four and twenty hours into the
Temple of Famine; a Prison directly contrary to our Bedlem, Beth-lehem in
Hebrew signifying bread. It stands without the City, as Aesculapius his Temple
stood without Rome: but not for healths sake, (as Plutarch says that did) but
only lest such as are condemned to that Gaol, should so much as once sent the
Air of the Kitchen. The Walls of it are painted about with all manner of good
Victuals, to excite the prisoners appetite, to his greater vexation by
tantalizing of him.

I next arrived at Quaffonia, o^ which I would have none to expe^^ any exact
description, for I dur^ not for my ears go into any City o^ the whole Province,
until it wa^ dark night, that all the Citizen were wrapped in Wine and war^
Clothes; and then (you cannot bu^ imagine) that it must be otherwise then very
unlikely, that I should discover many remarkable things you may perhaps say,
what should you fear? Faith I Will tell ye: harki^ your ear! I feared the
Bourgom^sters bounty; for their fashion is as soon as any one sets foot in at
the City-gate, to give him, by my troth as I was informed, not a few c^ rouses,
and lifts of Wine for hi^ welcome: Oh, they receive him i^ pomp; and all out of
the Common Purse of the City: He must pul^ all off, and drink fair to a pearl
on his Nail, or else he is held an ungrateful, unmannerly fellow; and which is
worse, a direct Foe to the common good of the City. Now I feared both this
honor and this danger; and therefore you cannot in the least question, but
that your scruple of Conscience is fully answered.

This Province is as large as Gluttonia; but if it were less, what that has in
wealth, this has in intemperance. There is no Country or Nation under the cope
of Heaven so fortunate in the abundant delicate juice of the Grape, as this is.
The peculiar Wines of all our Kingdoms of Europe; the Germains Rhenish; the
Frenchmans White and Claret; the Spaniards Xerez, Malaga, and the Canaries;
tush, they have them all in excess. The temperature of their bodies are
somewhat different from the Gluttonians, for they delight in the qualiti^ of
heat and drought; whereas the Quaffonians more especially affe^ heat and
moisture: But their body and their Wits hold both one Key in difference: for
the Fuddle landers, as they are more ingeniou^ then the Eat alians, so are they
more lascivious in their young years, a^ they are generally more quick witted;
but being come to a graver age, (especially old age) the^ grow so forgetful,
that one may cal^ them So^s; you shall nto have on^ amongst twenty of them that
can remember his own name.

There is not any River in the world comparable to that which runs through
this Province; Dan^w, Thames, Seyne, or, Sir Walter Rawleighs River in Guania,
put them all in, they are but kennels to this: For besides the pleasing
Meanders that he makes in his wanton course, the water is so sweet and
delicate, that neither the best Europes Wine, nor the Turks delicious Zerbeth
(though made of honey and water) can possibly go beyond it. This worthy Son of
the Ocean, has one peculiar Fish belongs unto it, called a Tappe; and this
Fish will sometimes lie by the Shore, and spout a great quantity of water aloft
(marry, the remaining of it in his belly has made it somewhat more pleasing to
the taste then it was before) and this the Inhabitants watch for in Boats; and
when they get it, they highly esteem of it. This River passes through
Turning-fry: Faith I had almost forgotten one Town, it goes from thence to
Celleridge, ere it comes to Broaching-ford, and so by Broaching-ford passes
directly unto Carousakannikin, the prime City of the whole Province. It is a
name that I understand not, further then I have a little light from the Germane
Tongue: but as for the City, it is built upon a Hill, and carries the form of
a T^nkard, from what Quarter soever you behold it. It i^ of ancient renown, and
one of the best seated Ports for traffic in all the whole Land. On the East
part it is strongly fortified with Barricadoes and Bulwarks of Barrels, and the
Roofs of the House are most of one and the same manner, covered with the boards
of broken Casks: In the entrance of the Gates, from morning until night, there
is placed a double Cannon of Pewter (for their Law commands this to be duly
observed) the Citizens call it the Flaggon of Hospitality; and round about it*
are these words engraven, Aut bibe, aut abi; Drink or be gone. He that arriveth
must either drink it all off, or else he is carried before the Magistrate, to
render an account of his Contumacy. The Arms of the City are advanced over the
Gate; and they are the three Horse-leaches upon three naked Feet in a bloody
Field; the word, Plaenae quiescimus; Being full we rest. Here by a fortunate
chance I met with a Lascivianian born, who was bound for the City, as well as
I; his name he told me was Cinciglion, an Italian would expressing the noise
that the Wine makes in running from the Tap. He (being acquainted with their
fashions) brought me secretly by night into the Town, and showed me such things
as I should never have discovered of my self. Their buildings are not much
unlike to the Gluttonians, but that the Fronts of their Houses are so wholly
hid with spreading Vines, that* had* I not seen the Signs hang out on every
side, I should have sworn I had been in a Vineyard, and not in a City: Believe
me, it was a pleasant spectacle. In the Marketplace are all the Measures hung
up in Chains, sealed with a stamp on their tops* The Inhabitants go naked, but
for a wreath of Vines about their foreheads; their skins are painted, some with
such ^ipling Figures as Nature breaths forth; others after the manner of the
Picts and ancient Britains: You shall have some painted so perfectly after a
Flaggon, that if he set but his hands on his sides, you would swear that it
were a living Flaggon. I did see one also, so directly in the shape of a Whale,
that when he vomited, no man in the world but would have taken him for a live
Whale, spewing up the Ocean.

I had a great desire to see the manner of their public Feasts, and yet not to
be seen by the Citizens. So my Comrade at last agreed to perform my request,
and to satisfy my longing; indeed he gave me withal certain cautions of
danger, that I might avoid, if I were discovered; and likewise he informed me
in some necessaty points of behavior: so having my instructions about me, he
being my conduct, we got us into the Town Hall, in the evening, unspyed of any.
By and by came the Quaffonians, just as the Glottonians do, only they had more
drink, and less meat. Every one had his purveyance, at either Elbow a Piss-pot
for his Urine on one side, and a Bowl for his Vomit on the other.

At first, they begin a sacrifice to Bacchus, their General God: not as the
Romans did of old, with pouring a little Wine upon the ground; no, no, far more
religiously, and with more stately Ceremonies. At the upper end of the Table
stands a stately Statue of Bacchus, holding in his right hand a mighty great
Goblet, of such weight, that (as Virgil said once) the left hand now and then,
as it were, endeavors to help her Sister. Into this Goblet, or standing Cup,
the Master of the Ceremonies, in the Name of the whole Company, p^^rs a ^undlet
of Wine, (it holds no^ le^^, if you will believe me) which passing in Pipes, as
if it were in Ve^^s, into his Mouth, when he pist, both at once made a pretty
show, as if he had both pis^ed Wine and spewed it, all in a moment. And this is
the Hour glass proportioning the continuance of the Feast; for when he leaves
pouring out* they must all leave pouring in* Then, Sirs, comes me up a Service
of Shooing-horns (do you see) of all sorts, Saltcakes, Red-herrings,
Pickled-herrings, Anchoves, and Gammons of Bacon, ( Westphalia may go pipe in
an Ivie-Leaf, if it seek to equal these) and abundance of such putters on. And
then begins the full Pots to go round about the Table, and the empty against
the Walls; so that you cannot tell whether they are* sooner filled to be
emptied, or emptified to be filled; but (as Plautus ^aith of one) the Drink is
sure to go off, be it out of Can, or Jourdan. Now when one of them will drink
to another, he first challength him with a solemn Ceremonial Song, the Relics
of some Tavern-Catch. And then they join hands fast together, and giving a
sound shake or two, the ^^^llenger advances his mo^^^ e^^^ Weapon, and blows
it dry: ^^ may puff a little, but the Pot is ^^^robed of his Liquor, ere it be
severed from his gripe: and then the other answers him at his own Weapon. The
second course is not very dainty; but how soever, they moisten it well with
redoubled Rouses. Then comes the Fruit with the third Course, and that in truth
is very rarely furnished; and being almost finished, and the Cloth being then
thrust on a heap, the Master of the Ceremonies cries Healths, three times with
a loud voice. I imagined this had been a summons to the breaking up of the
Company, and was going thence; when my Associate pulled me by the sleeve: Why,
how now you sleepy spectator (quoth he) would you be gone when the feast is
hardly begun? stay till the conclusion of it, I bescech ye: do you see how
fast God Bacchus his Hourglass runs? So I sat down again and stayed. Then
steps me out one of the Company, and taking off his wreath, down upon his knees
he places himself, (I thought he had been going to his prayers) and presently
calls for a Quart-pot; An health (quoth he) unto great Bousing-gut our
Tun-strider; and presently the Pot stops his Mouth: he drinks, he puffs, he
belches, he talks, until within a while he had gulped down as many Quarts, as
his Name had Letters; and when he had done, he falls a spewing, till all cried
twang again, and dies (as Horace said)

The Pavements where he stood,
With proud Lyaean blood.
Well, they all follow in order from the highest to the lowest, each one with
the same Port; execution, and ejection; proving himself hereby, also a faithful
Citizen, and (which is more) a strenuous Tossaffakan. This past, up starts
another, with this Catch:

A health to you and us, this day,
And a health to all Drink-alia:
Seasoning his Song with many a goodly belch (quoth he) it is a hot night,
let us drink and sleep; and so down upon his Marry Bo^^^; up he takes his Pot
hand* smooth, the Devil a bone finds he in the drink. After him they must all
follow; Woe be to him that hangs an arse. This shower overblown, out steps a
third, and he advances a quart of plump Lyaeus to the health of all
Quagmirists, (which is the general name of the most eminent persons of the
famous City of Carousakanikin: briefly, after him they go; and thus all of them
in order brings in his foundation of a new Round. Now every one having his
share, they must each of them, as they sat (pox on it, that madded me) go play
the Poet: of one of these might Horace have truly said, Aut insanit homo, aut
versus facit. The man is mad, or else he makes Verses. And these verily they
make out of the inspiration of Bacchus only (the Muses may go hang themselves
for any room they can find there:) and herein according to the old manner that
Plutarch speaks of, every one sings his Song, and instead of his Harp, he
had a Knife and a Quartpot; and truly they played fine music on it. One in his
Song commended his Mistress; another, the goodness of the Wine; a third,
related all the passages betwixt him and his wife at home; and so it made me
remember that old saying of Laberius:

Ebriulati mentem hilarem accipiunt. bind,
When Wine's effects the brain does
Then Mirth does caper in the mind.
Another rimed all in Satyr against one that was not at this drinkingbout: and
every one (me thoughts) kept Anacreons Measures: He was a drunken Poet, and
dyed of a Surfeit; if you will not believe me, it is but putting your selves to
the trouble to read Francis Meres, in his Wits Commonwealth (which perhaps you
will not esteem worth your time.) While these Songs were a singing, it was a
world of rare sport to see their several behaviors; every man had his humor
to himself: you should see one, for very pure love, weeping in his fellows
bosom; and another sit a kissing of his Companion: one setting his mouth on
the rack with laughter (wise were the men that could tell at what) another down
upon all four in devotion to Bacchus; a third swaggering and swearing, because
the Bowl of Wine was brought him no sooner; a fourth arguing of Religion, and
matters of State: And here in a corner, you should have a fifth sit nodding and
slavering, it would do a blind-mans heart good to see him, with several other
strange undecent postures, no less unfit then too tedious to insert. At the
beginning of their Feast, because they generally have (as has been said) very
slippery memories, quickly forgetting what they do, they have a public Notary,
whom they call Clerk of the Winde-pipe, who is appointed to Register every
particular Carouse, and so files them up for common Records, what each man has
drunk, and unto whom; which done, after the Feast he reads them to the Company,
(if any be awake to hear them.) Pottle-gulp Swol^e-gut Dry-mouth Draw-large Sup
it off
unto

Swoln-gut 4 Gallons Fuddle-deep 4 Gallons Lurch-cup 3 Pottles Broken-belt 7
Pottles Full-brink half an hogshead
Concordat cum Originali

P. Skinker.

If any have failed in the taking of his Liquor, he must forthwith make present
satisfaction (if he be able) otherwise, at the next meeting he is sure to pay
^ound interest for his forbearance. Well, the Roll being read, and the
Hourglass run all out: Marry, quoth I to my Comrade, but how will they get
home now? that marvel I at most. Oh, well enough, Sir, (quoth he) trouble not
your head for that. Do you not see those Ropes there in the Court, that have
fastened unto them Iron Rings? these the servants (who may not touch a drop of
Wine till the Feast be done) being so sober as to know every one his own Rope,
do take hold of, and the other end being fastened to their Masters Door, so draw
themselves and their Masters both in one Cart, directly home. It is like enough
that you say true (said I) but what if one should come in the mean time, and
tie the Ropes further end to a wrong door? Why do you think (answered he
smiling) that any one wakes this night? yet I have known it done, and the Cart
go to a wrong House, and the man to another man's wife; who perhaps being as
drunk as he, never discovers the matter until next day at noon; and then, that
which they ignorantly committed, they do wittingly laugh at: for it is a
Principle here, That a drunken man can never offend; for it is the offense of
Bacchus, that he is but an Instrument unto, and no otherwise. But I remembered
that place in Lucian's Dialogues, That Bacchus never bids them drink more then
what may suffice to exhilerate Nature. In the Town Hall, properly called
Gulpers Court, there hangs up that ancient Emblem of the Order of their
Knights of the Golden Tun: he that can drink this Vessel thrice off; and go his
ways without any indenting; for this good service he is presently knighted, and
has besides a chain of an extraordinary value bestowed on him. The Knights
have a large Charter, and are allowed many goodly privileges; they have
absolute command in all Taverns, and at all Tables. They may furnish so many
Soldiers in Pewter-coats out of any man's Cellar in the Town, Graiis: and
besides, they have full authority as concerning Brimmers, and to put what
limits they please unto every man's Pot-tipling. These hardy men have great
conflicts at every solemn meeting (as the Sword-players had in Rome, or as the
Helots had with the Lacedaemonians) their Weapons are full-charged Cups; and he
that carries most of them away clear, is Conqueror, and leads the rest about
the Town (if they can go) in triumph. And this is their trial of the Victory:
If he can put his Finger just into the flame of the Candle, without playing
hit-I-misse-I, let him spew whole Fishponds, he is a sober man.

Now Reader, I will present thee with the Laws of the City of Carousa-kanikin
in the Province of Quaffonia.

It is Decreed, and absolutely Enacted,
1. That all Promises, Oaths, Bills, Bonds, Indentures, or any other
conveyances whatsoever, made, or caused to be made in the afternoon, be utterly
void and of none effect.

2. That no man of what state or degree soever he be, have his Cups private to
himself, upon pain of drinking two days after in a Fireshovel.

3. That if any one cast away any snuff, but mere froath, he be forthwith
enjoined to fall down upon his knees, and so to lick up the otherwise perishing
Liquor.

4. That he that swears by Bacchus, and keeps not his word, be utterly
disabled from making any Will, and bearing any Witness.

5. That he that strikes with a Pot, and either spilleth the Wine, or breaks
the Pot, be enjoined to touch neither Pot nor Wine for four and twenty hours
after.

6. That he that mixeth Water with his Wine, be sent to sup with the Dogs.

7. That every one pledge his Challenger in the same Cup, and in the same
fashioned draught, upon pain of being debarred from drink for two days after.

8. That all that stay three days in the City, do offer sacrifice to Bacchus.

9. That ones calling of a Citizen Thief or Whore-master, bear no action; but
to call him Temperate or Abstainer, shall be liable to the Law.

10. That the Pots in Banquets be either always full, or empty: the Waiter that
presents a Pot half filled, and the person that takes it, shall be both guilty
of breach of Good-fellowship.

11. That he that being sober, shall strike him that is drunk, be immediately
disabled for giving testimony in any cause whatsoever: but the drunken man
striking the sober, shall be acquitted.

12. That he that being sober shall rob him that is drunk, be forbidden Wine
for ever; and if he kill him, he shall be put to death by thirst.

13. That he whom either Nature or Sickness has made abstinent, be banished
the Land.

14. That he that goes from any public meeting, without staggering, be
accounted a Malefactor in the highest degree.

Subscribed STILYARD.


Over the Portal of the Hall were these Verses written.
The House of youthful Mirth, and lusty Cheer;
Peace, Wine, Sport, Rest, have all their Mansions here.
That same night I was a Spectator of their more then rambling Revels: one of
the Carousa-kanikin Quagmirists, whose House was of some hight, being loose in
the breech, intending to go thither, where neither Pope nor Emperor can send
an Ambassador; and being truly cap-shackled, mistook the Window for the Door;
and so stepping rashly on, he came down with the wrong end forward, and in
plain English, broke his neck. His Funeral was very richly set forth, I can
tell you: Every Quassonian was dyed all over with black, and for that day wore
a Cypress Wreath instead of is Vines. The body was not laid in Coffin, nor upon
a Hearse, as we use; ^ut being put into a Cask half full of Wine, was so born to
the Grave; and when he came there, it was to lie rather in a Cistern of Sack,
then in a Grave of Earth, and to be drowned rather then buried. For whereas the
Romans used to cast balls of Frankincense upon the pit wherein the body was
burnt, they did not so here, but each one poured his Can of Wine into the
Grave; and biding thrice, Adieu most sweet and corpulent Countryman, put
finger in their eye, wept some Quarts of Rheum, and to it they went hand in
hand to the Tavern. This Quagmirist it seems was well esteemed of them; for he
had a Statue afterward erected to him in Bacchus his Court, and under it these
two Lines in fair Roman Letters.

Although he took his window for his door,
His valiant death shall make his honor more.
And upon his Grave they set up a pretty Obelisk, a brazen Flaggon on the top
of it, with these Rimes carved about it; questionless such Epitaphs in Latin
are to be seen at Siena, two in San-Domingo, and one in S. Spirito:

By Wine I lived, and Wine me killed men say:
For being sober, I could nere see day.
Gone is my flesh, yet thirst lies in my bone:
Give me one Rouse my friend, and get thee gone.
Farewell fellow toss-pots.

Now had I stayed two days in this Town, without ever being demanded what I
was; but then my Com^nion came and told me, My friend, ^ou have had a fair
reign; if you ^ay one day longer, you must per^orce do sacrifice to God
Bacchus: I may not conceal you further, unless you would have me forsworn. No,
said I, what custom is that I pray you, that you are so strictly bound unto?
tell me the course, and I Will either perform it, and stay longer; or else I Will
get me presently gone, and rid us both from future danger. Well, Sir, said he,
saw you not the Statue of Bacchus yesterday in Gulper^ Court, and the large
Goblet ^e holds, wherein they poured the Wine that runs out at two passages?
I answered, Yes that I did. Well then, said he, you must set your mouth to one
of them (choose you which) and suck until you be able to stand no longer, but
fall flat to the ground, and so must you lie under the Spout, wallowing in the
Wine, until all be (...) out upon you. How like you this Faith, said I, it is
not altogether (...) delightful; but I beseech you te^^ me, was there ever any
strange that offered this sacrifice? All, all quoth he, and not a man's tail
that escaped it, but to it he must, maugr^ his Beard: some will come
spiritfully to it, but others are fain to be haled to their teat, like a Bear
to the Stake.

Well, Sir, said I, I Will be jogging hence: only I would entreat you to inform
me which Country in this Tract is next in Dignity to this, and the worthiest of
travel. So faith he told me, Hot-watrea, or Licorardente, which is under the
government of Sir Limbeck Stillitory, a Knight of the Noble Family of Take off
your dose: and so led me forwards, and showed me the way, as plain as Dunstable
Rode; and then courteously gave me the Bascio los manos. I thankt him heartily
for his Valienado, and so we parted.

Now I all alone took my way toward the North, leaving the River of Froath
behind me, until I came at Spewersbury, the silthiest Town that ever I saw
since my Mother cradled my head: only this I must tell the Reader by the way,
(for I promise ye it put me often to a shrewd pother) I was as much troubled
with Pots and Flaggous in my journey, as a Clerk of the Market, or as the
Traveller that has far to go, is with the Spanish and Italian crosses: I could
never trace it three Miles to an end, but I should find a bouncing Tankard
placed under an Arch, and drink I must needs, no gainsaying of the Lands
Hospitality: at last I overtock a Traveller in an old tattered Ca^^ock of
Haircloth, baresoored, and bareheaded. I demanded w^^^ he went so fast? Sir,
quoth he, I have undertaken a long Pilgrimage unto Saint Borachio of
Bottlesbrook.

I wondered at this new name, and this as yet undiscovered Pilgrimage; so I
questioned him at large of the Country, of this Towns situation and discipline;
and finally, of the Virtues of this Borachio. Bottlesbrook, Sir, said he, is
seated in the confines of Hot-watrea, and Lasciviania, and is of great fame
throughout both the Soyls. Besides diverse other ancient Monuments in the Town,
there is a Temple of Bacchus Fiery face, they call it the Cappel-Ardent, where
a rich and rare Statue of his is erected, not like a grown man, but very
youthful, just as his Father took him from the burning Womb of Semele; so it
is, having been long ago so cut out of the hard Rock of Rubies. The top of this
Temple is all set with Carbuncles, and golden Sparks, most rich to behold; and
from the embowed Arch there drops, they say, a kind of hot fuming Liquor (as
Cataracts do in some places of Mardelzur, as Hackluit affirms in his Voyages,
and is received into a Borachio that stands placed accordingly; whose Virtue is
such, that if one drink a large draught of it with good devotion, he shall
never in his life after be either drunk before noon, or athirst before
midnight: both which helps may do me much good; for I am a man so employed in
my Country, that I can never lie in my bed until midnight for thirst; nor never
rise before noon, but I am drunk and fast a sleep again. Therefore have I gone
these three days without drinking at all (save that I drunk one dish of water
this morning) because I would merit the more of this holy St. Borachio, when I
come there; nor dares any man importune me to drink, or any in my company, as
long as I wear this Weed. Bir-Lady, Sirs, you must think I was not a little
glad of so great a privilege; and therefore ^ entreated both his company and
patronage. Well, we went chatting on until I observed the Soil altered;
wherefore I asked him, where we now were. This Country, quoth he, ever since we
came over the Lake Metheglin, is called the Country of Usquebah, as there is an
ordinary pass to Ireland through Wales, being the first Shire of Hot-watrea: It
is not so well husbanded, but it is far more fertile then our Country of
Wine-cester, exceeding both in fatness of Soil, and pureness of Air. So when ^
heard the name, I understood presently both the Original and the Definition
thereof; Usquebathia, because they drink Usque ad, even to the bottom: There
are other derivations thereof, but those I leave to the six Wits to censure of.
The^ quoth I, being very weary, Whither go we now? is not this Bottlesbrook? O
Lord, no, he replied; but cheer up your self, we have but, in comparison, a
foot of ground till we are there; we are only to trample a little over the
pleasant shores of Hot-watrea, and we shall presently arrive at Bottlesbrook.
But whence, said I, is that smoke? he replied, It comes out of Mount Denis,
wherein the souls of such as either lived too soberly, or killed themselves
desperately, are purified by fire; and there they burn, until some of their
living friends go in Pilgrimage to Chappel-Ardent for a Bottle of Saint
Borachio's water; and pouring that upon their Tomb, they are freed. I smiled at
this, and thought now surely I have found the Original of Purgatory: let Abbot
Odilo, and his Monks of Coruna tell me never so many tales of Mount Aetna, and
so many good-morrows, it is here thought I, or it is nowhere.

Well, at length we arrived at Bottlesbrook: in truth I found it to be a pretty
sweet Town; marry it was both paved with Bottles, and roofed with
Lethern-bougets. I do not remember that I saw any Artificer in all the Town,
but Lethern Jack-makers. The reason is, the men of this Country use no pure
Wine, as the other Drink-alls do, but certain distilled waters mixed with the
strongest Grapes they can get; which are so violently hot, that the brittle
Glass cannot hold them, and therefore they are forced to fortisie their Bottles
with Lethern Jerkins, rivited together with Pitch and Rozen.

We traveled on through many craggy and fenny passages, till at last we
arrived at a Port called Puerto d' Aqua forte, the Inhabitants of which place
drink Brandfireal, by most of them for brevity called Brandewine, squezed from
the sowrest Grapes, which the French (rather then they would throw away)
thought it more convenient to make a more profitable trastique of. Some say the
Dutchlanders, to disperse the unwholesome Fogs which arise from their Seas,
strengthen and fortify their stomachs with this tipple, which I also found
here, (how they came by it in these parts I know not) but this I am sure, that
it is with them A-la-modo, lustily quaft off. The Yeomen of these
Brandy-bottles here are fiery faced, choleric of condition, of a staggering
manner of pace in their going: but that which is most terrible of all, they
drink, and they breath nothing but elemental sire, mere flames. As much cold,
or scargut, as one of us will drink, so much fire will one of them take: that a
man would verily imagine when he saw them, that they were so many fire-darts,
or as one might call them, St. George^ Flap-dragons. I was in danger of water
before, but now I feared nothing but that I should be fired or stifled with the
smoke of an Herb called Tobacco, which they took in at their mouths, and gave
out at their Noses, resembling the ^ume^ of so many Brewers Chimnies. It is
reported, that one Rollo Waralador, an ungodly fellow, one of this Country,
taught this wicked vapor by an Indian Devil, first brought it hither into
these parts; so what for fire and smoke, I thought it necessary to make my
escape. I left my companion at his Orison to Bacchus (I loved him well, but I
loved my self better:) the next morning I hastened out of this Vulcans Shop; for
so it was a very Cyclops* Forge, rather then a City of Bacchus.

I traveled on so far, that at last I approached the Verges of Lasciviana
(some give it another name, which I am very willing to forget.) Being extreme
weary, I set me down on a delicate ^^rot of Nature, (somewhat out of the way)
on which finding my self drowsy, and inclining to sleep, I might the more
freely take a nap. I had not been long at my quietus, but that I was awakened
with a most sweet voice; I made no inquiry to know who the Singer was, lest my
appearance (as I thought) might bereave me of such a melodious happiness; my
sense of hearing keeping a right intelligence with the pleasant measures of the
Verse: to my best remembrance, these were the words of the Song:

Under our climate Nature shows
Her beauties naked to each eye,
Feeding the sight inchantingly,
With rich treasures which there grows.
Upon the Flowers we glittering spy
Tears, or (rather) Pearls to lie,
Fallen from the eyes of fair Aurora,
With which she, to whom Zephyrus makes vows and prayers,
Does beautify each morn, her neck and curled Hairs:
There amongst the smiles, and the caresses,
The little frolic Loves inspired,
Dance on the ennamel'd grass till tired,
With their fair Mistresses the Graces;
And still when they desired to kiss,
They came to rest themselves (O b^^ss)
Betwixt fair Venus snowy breasts,
Where they created thousand new and fresh delights;
Whose charms no language can express,
For every moment life or death was in their mights.
Sometimes we see a Satyr come,
Who sitting in an Oaks fresh shade,
Upon his Pipe complaints he made
Of his delightful Martyrdom:
Then go we to a Wood apart,
Where but on^ beam the Sun can dart,
To find out solitariness;
And meeting peaceful rest, which there with it was courting,
We banished all unquietness,
Lest we should have disturbed his sullen sporting.
There under a straight Myrtle-Tree,
Which Fairies holy do esteem,
Where engraved by Venus hand has been
Her Trophies, and each Mystery;
Our solemn Vows betwixt us past,
That those our flames should ever last,
Nor should their ardour weaker grow:
Then offering up those Oaths of Victory we'll sing,
We wrote them on the bark below,
They Are printed deeper in our hearts, and there they spring.
Sure there is no pen that is so lascivious,
Were it plucked from a Sparrows Wing,
Can ere describe so sweet a thing
As this same Love that dwells in us.
Never tho with clothes unlaced
Adonis Venus naked embraced,
Were such various sports invented;
Nor ere did Love and's Psyche fair withhim,
Taste such delights, were so contemed
As when our glutted Veins with flowing pleasures swim.
The Song was no sooner ended, but those which I took then for Sirens, rushed
in upon me from an Ambush; whom I afterward found to be neither better nor
worse, then some of the armed She-landeresses (you heard of them of the
Shelands before) who took and carried me prisoner (the more unfortunate I) a
long and ^oylsome journey, even to their chief City, called Gossipingoa.
Thither I was brought, and detained a great while longer then stood with my
good liking. I will here discover the whole progress of their dealing with me,
and then I will go on with the description and conditions of these new
undiscovered people.

As soon as these cruel Conqueresses had taken me upon the Borders of
Lasciviania, they brought me away (as I have said) to this their chief City,
where they towl'd a Bell, and presently all the Petticoat-Inhabitants came
flocking thither in a trice, and began to pry more narrowly upon me, who stood
bound sure enough (God wot) for offering them any false measure. At length one
of the rout, (their Captainness it seems she was) gave a sign to the rest to be
silent (as she had need) and then she thus bespake the Company; What, or of
whence this fellow is, I do not know, only we took him in the confines of
yonder damned Country of our Enemies, Lasciviania; and seeing they have offered
us so much injury, I hold it very fit now (if it be not too late) to take
revenge of them, and first with this prisoner. Now she having made an end of
her learned Speech, I got leave (with much ado for noise) to speak, and so
declared my Nation, and the cause of my wandering, as well as I could; and told
then Womanships, that for my part I had not any acquaintance at all in
Lasciviania; I was one that wished their Madamhoods, and all their Sex, all the
good I could; and that it would derogate much from their Natures, Clemency and
from their Honor and just Government, to condemn an innocent Pilgrim, and one
that had not in the least offended, without hearing of his cause. Well, these
good words, I can tell you, wrought so handsomely with them, that the poor
young Wenches began many of them to weep: yet the old Countesses were not so
much oversway'd with my Oration, but that I must to prison, to a great house in
the Marketplace, called Cold and comfortless, until my Country and cause of my
travel were truly manifested to the She-council. Well, to Ward I went; and but
for that my Countries name is the true Paradise of Women, (as it is the Proverb
in France, that England is the Paradise of Women, the Purgatory of Servants,
and the Hell of Horses) which pleaded for me; I had never come out alive: for
all the Lascivianians that they take, they either fairly hang them up, or else
put them to most slavish offices in this prison; which they do to plague them
for their injuries offered: for the people of that Province, as they are most
of them wanton, run madding after Whores, out of their beastiality neglecting
their Wives, or else through their mad-brain'd jealousy keep them in continual
slavery* Oh how many Noble Captains did I see in this prison wearing out their
lives in Spinning, Carding of Wool, and Knitting! Faith at length, for my
Countries sake, I had my liberty restored, but not without an Oath; for I was
brought to Juno's Altar, and there laying my hand on the same, I was forced to
take a solemn Oath to observe all these conditions following:

1. That I should never go about to injure their noble Sex by word or deed. 2.
That I should never interrupt ^ Woman in her tale. 3. That wheresoever I lived,
I should leave the rule of the House to my Wife. 4. That I should never more
come to Lasciviania; for it is the common phrase here, Many go thither good
men, but come away from thence evil Husbands. 5. That I should never aim at
more then the love of one. 6. That I should never betray my wives secrets. 7.
That I should never deny my wife any woman's ornaments. 8. That I should
continually give women the -- and the praise for Beauty, Wit and Eloquence, and
defend them against all men.
This Oath I willingly took, but believe me, Sirs, not without a little
equivocation; though rather then fail I would have taken one ten times
stricter. So therefore you see my Tongue is tied by my Oath, not to tell the
sine Conundrums that I saw among these mad Wenches. Somewhat I may say, but no
harm; no more I would, in truth, if I had not at all been sworn.

I shall now according to my promise make it my next enterprise to go on with
the description, conditions, customs, and forms of Government of this Newfound
Land. As touching the situation of the Shalands, or Womandecoia, it lies in
that part of the Southern continent, over against Morleture and Beach, called
Psittaccorum Regio, the Land of Parrots; it bordereth on the Dominions of
Prince De l' Amor: on the North side it boundeth on Lasciviania (a Nation, as
we have said, that is a great enemy to it;) on the South, upon Thrivingois; on
the East, upon the two Foppianians, the Fickle and Fat. The Soil whereof is
very fruitful: it is divided into many Provinces, both large and wealthy: The
principal of them are these: Fattingen, Scoldonna, Blubberick, Giglot-angir,
the high and low; Cockatrixia, Shrewesbourg, and Blackswanstack, otherwise
called Modestiana. Not far from these is an Island, called Hermaphrodite, or
Double-Sex: many of these Provinces I did pass through, when I was carried
Prisoner to Gossipingoa. But to speak truth, Fattingen, or the Land of Parrots,
is the best Country of them all, and has many fair Cities in it, as
Pratingople, Talesborne, and Lipswagg; through the last of which there runs
a great River, called Silver Streams, which sometimes will overflow the banks,
and drown all the lower parts of the Country, which they call Chinnedale; but
the Countrymen have now devised very strong Rampires to keep it from breaking
out any more, but when they list to let it out a little now and then for
clearing of the Channel.

As touching their forms of Government, they are allowed of for a Free State by
Prince de l' Amor (questionless the kindest Prince of the world to Women, and
the most unlikeliest to debar them of their liberties) their Government being
ruder and differing from his, the women in his Country being more courtly and
civilized; and if otherwise, upon any dislike sent hither, where they need not
to question their welcome entertainment: For here, for ought I could perceive,
each one seeks Superiority, and would be so popular, as to avoid obedience.
They have no Laws at all, doing every thing by the numbers of Voices. But the
giving up of their Voices, struck me into a wonder, being unacquainted
therewith, for they set up a cry all together; none gives ^ar, but each one
yells, as if she were horn-mad; and is not this able to abash a mild man's
spirit? They hold a continual Parliament (if the word signifies so, as it is
rendered in their consultations) only to prattle about their affairs of State;
so that Erasmus, as he had in part already done in his Colloquies, would be
able to give a stronger testimony of Women's turning Suitors. Now this
continuance is necessary, because of their Laws uncertainty: for the decrees of
this day, are altered or disanulled to morrow; but the same day they cannot,
lest their Law*givers should seem to be inconstant in their Edicts. Every ones
voice is alike in worth, the City of Gossipingoa through, but not every ones
dignity, for they have a set number of chosen women, they call them Gravesses;
and these have the Authority of most Honor in each particular City: but they
are not born to this dignity, but are elected, either for their Beauty, or
their Eloquence; for by these two are all Elections ordered. They had once a
custom to elect these Gravesses by voices, but afterward every one giving her
voice but only for her self, it bred a confusion, and so made them to abolish
that manner of Election: and then they drew a Decree, that those only should
have the sway in this same envious contention, who would profess themselves
neither to be Fair nor Eloquent: But this brought all to such a pass, that in
the whole Multitude of them, you should not find one that would be
Electresses; the elder sort holding that they had the Eloquence, and the
younger standing as firm in it that they had the Beauty. At length they all
agreed to pass over these places of Electresses unto twelve of the most aged
Matrons of old Mumpington (a ruinous Village hard by) and so they did, giving
them the most glorious Titles of Electresses Gravesial: The chief of whom, when
I was there were these, the Duchess of Cackletout, the Countess of Banne
alleyla, the Arch-presbyteress of Slaverspreg, the Palatine of
Twittle-comtattle, and eight more subordinate Electresses. To set them the more
agog to their charges, they are strangely adored, and wonderfully cursified.
And besides this honorable style, The reverend of the age, wealth and
abundance comes in flowing continually upon them; for the ambitious young
Wenches will so bribe and ply them with gifts, to have their voices at the day
of Election, that I hold that there is not a Court more corrupt in giving
voices, or more wealthy in getting of riches. Instead of Scepters and Swords,
the Gravesses have Fans and Glasses born before them, huge Crystal Glasses;
and still as they pass through the streets, they prank up their attires by the
said Glasses, (and loose no time) but set all their gew-gaws in order as they
go along.

There are a few Shee*landresses born in this Nation, but most of them being,
as we said, of the unciviler sort of Females, are excluded out of Prince de l'
Amors Dominions; such as will either wear their Husbands Breeches, or else
such as their Husbands jealousy will banish, those are sent in flocks hither.
Now all such as are their Husbands Masters, and are therefore banished upon the
unjust claim unto Sovereignty; these are assigned to inhabit the Frontiers of
the Shee-lands, especially in the Countries of Shrewesbourg; and there they are
all put in Garrison. But as for those that are voluntary Exiles, they are
generally of meek and unmanly spirits; and these are seated in the heart of the
Land, to become Votaresses to Peace and Beauty; and yet you need never dream
that this Weal-publick (however weakly founded) should go to ruin for want of
particular Members: and I will tell you why, there are so many Volunteers,
(especially freewomen) come to this Camp, that the fear is rather that there
will want room for the new Inhabitants, then otherwise. Truly, I am in great
perplexity lest my Countrywomen (though they are used so well here) should have
any understanding of this State: for if they have, we may go snick-up for any
Female that will abide amongst us; but all will away, we should not have one
big belly left to lay the Foundation for a future age by.

At Gossipingoa, I got (besides my Freedom) the Cities Letters for my
Passport; and so from thence I took my way toward G^glot-angyr, a Country
lying upon the South part of Womandecoia, toward Lasciviania; the Land of it
self in this part is the worlds Paradise. I was not many Leagues from Lovesden,
the first Town of this Country, when I entered into an Air as delicately seated,
as if the Perfumers in England had lately played their prizes therefore eternal
Sovereignty; the whole Country round about it is so stufft with Apothecaries
and Pomandrificoes: The rest I omit, as I look upon these as the chief
Magnificoes of this State. The women of this Country are generally tall,
gracefully adorned; and (were it not that they practice the Art of Sneek-oyling
over much) we might imagine them handsome. They wear nothing on their faces,
nor on their breasts: as for the rest of their habit, it is fair in show, light
in weight, and easy to mount. I traveled hard, till at last I arrived at a
Province named Shamesgrave, (for so they call the Shire-town of Giglot-angyr,
where it is reported that the Sepulcher of Modesty lies. Here their houses are
made all of Muscovia Glasses, as transparent as Air: where it is labor lost to
seek any of them at home, unless you make your inquest immediately upon their
dressing time, or somewhat before: But lay your plot to seek them in a
Playhouse, or in a Tavern, or so, and it stands upon a good Foundation: for
there you are sure to find your Female, either a laughing, a singing, or some
extraordinary employment. You never saw Spider contrive a more artificial Net
for a Fly, then these women do for the Lascivianians (however their Countries
deadly Enemies) yet some of these men serve their desires as Volunteers for
provant and preferment. Others they lay their Ambushes for, and fetch them in
first by loose Allurements, then by prayers, and then by pence; and if none of
these means will work, they compel them to serve their wanton desires by force.
And when they have done so, just as your Stallion Horses are kept for breed, so
are they stowed into custody, dieted with Eringo's, Potato's, Cullisses, and
other devised dishes, until Venus sends her second summons. This I no sooner
heard, but I hated; and no sooner hated it, but I avoided it, as neither daring
to presume of my learning, nor policy; but as I knew my self neither to be a
proper young man, nor for a fine Gentleman (none dispraised) I durst not hazard
my honesty upon so slight Foundations. But you may perceive, it is sometimes
convenient to want a good faee: and those things which at other times a man
does blame Nature for most, may at one time or other stand him in more stead
then her greatest benefits in ordinary estimations.

Not far from Guaon, the last Isle, between Cape Hermose and Cape Beach, lies
Double-sex-Isles, much like to our Isle of Man on the coast of Lancashire. In
this Isle Nature has so orderly disposed all things to one form, that I could
find no one plant in all the Soil, but was of a double kind of Fruits, or one
Fruit of two several kinds and names: there was your Bear-apple, your
Cherry-damson, your Date-almond, your Chestnut-filberd; and a thousand of these
conclusions of Nature: yea, insomuch, that the very Inhabitants of the whole
Island wore all their Habits as Indices of a Co-aptation of both Sexes in one.
Those that bare the most man about them, wore Spurs, Boots, and Breeches, from
the heels to the hanshes; and Bodies, Rebatoes, and Periwigs, from the Crupper
to the Crown: And for those that were the better sharers in Womankinde, they
wore Doublets to the Rump, and Skirts to the remainder: nay, their very names
bare notes of their participation of either side; there was Mary Philip, Peter
Alice, Jane Andrew, and George Audry, and many more that I cannot remember. And
all their own Nation that have not shown themselves perfect, both in begetting,
and bringing forth, are made slaves to the rest: and when they take any that
are but simply of one Sex, you would admire what a coyl they keep about them,
as Prodigies and Monsters, as we do those that are born double-headed, or other
such deformed births. Their only glory which they esteem most, is, that in
their conceit they have the perfection of Nature alone amongst them from all
the world besides: For seeing Nature, say they, has bestowed two hands, two
feet, two eyes, two ears, and two nostrils to every man's perfect body; why
should not the most perfect Creature of all be perfect in two Sexes also? And
again, Cybele, and the Pathiques of old Rome, were fain to use forced means for
that which we have given us by Nature. Thus are they wont to perfect their
deformities: and truly you may observe in them all, besides their shapes, both
man's wit, and a woman's craft. They have no Cattle in this Country, but Mules;
nor any wild Beasts, but Hares: as the Mule is held both to conceive and
beget; and some hold the like of the Hare. They live most upon Shellfish, for
that is their best and most ordinary sustenance.

In my return from the confines of Giglot-angyr, being now upon the Western
Angle of the same, I did light (just as my staff fell) into the Country of
Shrewesbourg, the only Garrison of this Feminine Government, and the only
defense it has against Foreign Incursions. Now this Country fearing no Foe
but the Lascivianians (for the Thrivingois are a quiet Nation, and never will
offer to molest them; and the Foppianians cannot, though they would) therefore
they place their Forces or Towns of Garrison, only upon the Eastern Frontiers
of Lasciviania.

Here was I sweetly gulled; for espying persons in the Habits of men, Marry,
thought I, this is good luck, I am now gotten out of Womandecoia: but when all
came to all, I was nearly cozened with a borrowed shape: for in this Country
women wear Breeches, and long Beards; and the men go with their Chins all
naked, in Kirtles and Peticoats; spinning and carding Wool, whilst their Wives
discharge the main affairs of the State.

In this tract is an ancient and ample Town, generally called Pepuzian and I do
not think but Pepuzian Heritiques were of this Original, who held that women
should be both Princes and Priests, as well as men* The Barbarians in
Aristotle's time never used the women half so imperiously as the men are used
here: I had great compassion of their slavery; yes verily had I; the poor
Snakes dare not so much as wipe their mouths unless their Wives bid them; nor
so much as (saving your presence) go piss, nor pass a word with their best
Friend, but they must first come to their Wives with a writ of Quaeso Magistra,
good Mistress give me leave to go, etc. I observed this custom to be more
strictly looked unto upon one certain day whilst I was there, then at other
times by far; and the reason of it was, because that some of the
better-spirited Husbands disdaining to be chained in this unmanly subjection by
their Wives, had laid a plot amongst themselves to rise up on an appointed
night (as it might be this night) in open arms upon the sudden against their
Wives, and so to shake off their infamous and disgraceful servitude. This plot
had taken a very good effect, had not misfortune crossed it: for one cowardly
fellow of their confederacy, being threatened by his Wife to be soundly
cudgelled for some other private escape that he had made; to procure himself a
pardon, went and revealed all the whole platform of the conspiracy, just the
evening before the night appointed.

The women sit at meat, and the men attend; the women sleep when they please,
and the men watch; so do they scold and fight, whilst the men are fain to bear
off, with ears, head and shoulders.

Happy may they call that day wherein one Mrs. Disquiet or other does not
Lamb-baste them before night. I imagined my self amongst the Turkish slaves;
but that these distinctions of Habits assured me this was a more abject kind
of Captivity.

Ah what a base sight was it to see a Distaff and a Spindle in a man's hand, and
a Sword and a Buckler in a woman's! Yet I concealed my dislike, as well as I
could, desiring for to see without suffering.

If any woman use her Husband somewhat gentlier then ordinary, (as some of them
were more tender hearted then others) she is presently informed against, and
cited to appear before the Parliament of Shrewesbourg, and there indicted of
High Treason against the State. Her next Neighbors give evidence against her
with such noise and fury, that it is strange to see how far they are overborn
with impatience. If she be convicted by the smallest evidence that is, she is
condemned to this punishment: She must first change attire with her Husband,
and then shave off her Hair; and so being led through the Marketplace, must
stand for one whole day upon the Pillory, as an object unto all the fleering
scoffers and beholders: nor shall the man escape scot-free, for being so
audacious, as to take the favors offered by his Wife without a modest refusal:
but when that the woman comes home (she shall be all covered with dirt, grains,
rotten eggs, etc.) she must not put off her Vesture until she bring a cudgel
into the Court, all dyed with the fresh blood of her Husbands broken-pate. He
that out-liveth his Wife, must either marry his Maid, and be sworn to her
service, as he was to his former Wives; or else he must become a slave to the
next Neighbors Wife: For no man may be the Ruler of his own House. In this
Country, when the Wife goes forth, either to Wars, Consultations, or for
pleasure, she leaves her Keys, and therewithal her Government, unto her Maid,
or her Daughter: either of which if the Husband once mutter against, his
shoulders are sure to pay for it soundly at his Wives return, unless he can beg
or buy the silence of the Deputie-Governess. They never lie with their
Husbands, but when provinder pricks them: (for they hold that it would procure
too much familiarity) notwithstanding, if the Husband arise not out of his
Cabin in the entry*, before the Wife be warm in her bed; and coming up stairs
barefooted^, do not knock thrice gently at her Chamber Door, and offer her his
service with a soft low voice, he is sure to have a great deal of pains and
labor bestowed on his ribsthe next day.

The Women of this Country observe a fashion contrary to ours; for they clip
their hair, and let their nails grow long: it is supposed that they do thus,
that there may be less hold taken by the assailants, and more by themselves.
There are also certain amongst them that profess the Trade of the Noble
Science, and keep Free-Schools, wherein the rest are taught all the Wards of
Offensive and Defensive, both of Heels, Nails and Teeth; as also the most exact
and judicial method of clawing off the skin of men's Faces, putting out eyes,
biting of arms, wringing of ears, and tearing of beards: these Lectures they
are instructed in, both by precept and practice.

The men are all their drudges, to wash, wipe, scour, and (...) all that is to
do in the House, is expected from them; yea, even to dr^^^ all the meat: so
that I imagine it i^* ^^ a man's esteem of the undecencie of such businesses,
(not any unableness of his to discharge them) that makes him eschew such
employments. Believe me, there are no foul spots to be found in any place in
the Houses here, saving on the men's Clothes; but these are so filthy, that they
are certain remarques how they neglect themselves, as much as the Women neglect
them; notwithstanding, go but abroad into the Fields (which are the women's
charge to see to) there you shall find the hedges broken down all at six and
sevens, unlookt to, in a most careless, ruinous and destructive manner. The
very Walls of their Cities are half down; and that which stands is so
disgracefully framed, that the very stones seem to beg to be at man's disposure,
and to abhor the ordering of womankinde.

Thus I traveled, as I have already given the Reader an account, through most
parts of the Sheelands; but perhaps he may not for all this rest satisfied,
till he ask me a question, which I am confident will be, Why I passed not
through that part of the Modestianians, where the Women of Black-swanmark had
their Habitations? Truly, I hold my self unfortunate in that one thing alone,
that I could not be so happy as to describe that State as well as the others,
seeing that my mind presageth unto me, that it excels all the rest of the
forenamed. For the present, I can say no more then thus: that there is such a
people, my Friend, I Will assure thee; but the Region wherein they inhabit I
could never come to discover, only the name I brought from the ancient
Chronicles of other States; and that, as I said, should be Black-swan-^ark,
because a chaste and rare woman is, as Juvenal writes, Rara avis in terris,
nigroque simillima cygno. Indeed there are some of them that live as
Anchoresses, and Hermetesses, in the craggy Deserts, in some other part^ of the
Shee-lands; but these ^nhabitants are generally unknown, and almost
inaccessable; ^^^^^, notwithstanding, are the Mo^^steries, whither (as it is
reported) the ^a^^est, chastest, and most zealous of the Sheelandresses do
^^l^^^^ily retire themselves: he that will take the pains to search those vast
Deserts, may questionless meet with some of those holy Votaresses: I did light
in my solitary wanderings by chance of one or two of them, whose variety of
Virtues, Beauties, Behaviors, have left me in an ecstasy to this very hour:
but our young Travelers are too idle to venture upon so hardan inquest; that
is the cause why they have no other color to cover their slothfulness by, but
by unjustly alleging the smalness of the number of modest and honest women.
Indeed, considering how dangerously rude those places were that I passed, I
know that my Reader cannot but admire and inquire how I got safely through
them: Faith I Will tell thee truly how, mine age, my habit, and good advice,
were my Patrons and Conductors in all this perilous adventure. My habit was
manlike, and my face womanlike (for I had yet no beard:) and besides, in some
places I found some of my own Comerades undertakers in the same Voyage with me;
and these, like true Friends at need, gave such discreet directions, that (as
Aeneas did by Sybilla) I following their advices, got me at length, as I have
informed you, through the She-lands; first passing through all the dirty Fens
of Blubberick, where the women will fall a weeping upon any wager when they
list; and so through the Mushrumpalian Mountains, till finally I came into the
confines of Prince de l' Amor. In this following relation I shall pursue the
same course as I have all this while done, only to take notice of the most
remarkable passages and places. In the Eastern parts of these Dominions are two
famous Castles of great importance, Idleness, the School of Prince de l' Amor;
or Libertinism, or Licentiousness, the Paradise of Venus, where the men are
ordinarily obliged to take the Governors to task, to gain free and favorable
access to the Court; and toward the (...) parts there are two houses, called
Beggars* bush, and the Lovers-^olly, like our Bedlam and Bridewel; to the
which, most that follow this Court are forced to go seek for attestation of
their life and manners.

Prince de l' Amor, who Reigns over all the people of this Country, is a young
Prince that never grows old, nor does he easily admit of any ancient people to
dwell in his Land, except it be to serve for Buffoons in the Play: all his
designs are taken at random; for he never consults or takes counsel in any
thing: It Is thought he is Loves Brother, the Sovereign of all Monarchs; but he
must then be his bastard - Brother, the Child of Nature and of disorder, who
has unluckily usurped his Name and Arms; and it is certain, that his affairs
are mingled more with interest then affection, and the irregularities of
debauchments are ever more there, then the right rule and conduct of Reason.

At the entrance of this Court there is a place called Cajolery, open on all
sides, which has been made very spacious by the ruin of another ancient
Temple of Modesty, which also otherwhile stood in that place; which when I was
acquainted with, I sadly resented, as plainly perceiving that I should never
approach Modestiana, or the Island of S^ame-stead, till I returned into my
native Country of England. To this place of Cajolery, every day all the hired
whisperers, the greatest admirers of little-nothing^, and many animated Idols,
which must be worshipped right or wrong, do constantly repair: whatsoever
strangers arrive amongst them, they presently entertain them with all the
pleasures that their Houses and Tables can afford: come to any of them with a
dust - licking - Congee, and some three or four Vostra Signiora's,
Spaniard-like, and either commend his good Face, his Perriwig, his new Clothes,
his fair Hand, his fine House, or season but his affection with an admiring
applause; and this your obsequiousness shall purchase you an Host, whose
courtesy will imagine nothing too dear for you: good words and fair promises
are the moneys that these people use. This place may be called Clawback, or
Soothing-court, it being peopled with the strangest Monsters that ever man
beheld* ^hey bea^ every one two Faces, and speak with two Tongues, as they know
how to sooth and backbite: they carry the shapes of Apes upon their foremost
parts, and all behind of Dogs; so that they seem ^^ be a confused composition
of Man, Ape and Dog. That there are such Monsters, let reverend Munster in his
Cosmography serve for a testimony, who describes certain Indian people that
are partly thus formed.

They make themselves as voluntary slaves to the Magnifi^oes, as if they were
born to servitude. And albeit they are so ^ot^ish, that of their own heads they
can enterprise nothing praiseworthy; yet can they imitate and counterfeit any
action that they see done before them; the World has not the like for forging
such ^^^^^ resemblances.

They never wear attire, never speak word, never do deed, but they see and hear
the like. Whilst I was there, they halted all upon one leg, and went spitting
and spawling all the day long, because that Signior Tickle-ear, their
Governor, of late had hurt his foot, and withal was troubled with an old
pockie Catarrhe. They are most of them Barbers, Tailors, Panders and Procurers,
Parasites and Lick-spittles: There are also by report some gallant Courtiers
amongst them. But however, your Spanish Mimick is a mere Ninni-hammer to these
Clawback-Courtiers; speak but, or look but upon one of them, and ye shall
presently have him kiss his hand, cringe in his ham, stroke with his foot two
yards of dust; and with a laborious Congee, like an Echo, bandy the last word
you spoke all the Room about; and with an applauding ^leere, return upon you
with all the gracious terms that his invention can possibly vent; together with
a whole Heralds-office of titles, and top-beauty Excellentiaes; and then
putting his Lips together with another Bascio delli mani, stand hovering at
your next speech, to hear how his last stood to your liking. Then do but you
approve him, and talk on, and whatsoever you say (be it scarcely sense) shall
into his Table Book, as an Oracle, for a more then humane conceit. Then will he
stand with his eyes fixed on the Skies, and adore you (as a Drunkard does
Bacchus) on all four.

Such Fellows acknowledge no God, but the man that they make choice of to
serve; and him they observe with more prayers, sacrifices and adoration then
any Idol could exact. Now all this they do with one of their Mouths only:
marry there is not a word comes out of this mouth, but the other (their Dogs
mouth) does forthwith secretly retract, and disclaim; for if they say to your
face, God save you; when you turn about, they mumble to themselves a backside -
complement, that is, either The round pox take you, (which is twenty poxes
beaten into one) or else The Devil take you, which with them is twice farewell.

In this place one may also behold walking Shops well enough furnished, but
that the Wares are heaped together in confusion, and great disorder; the
Merchants also sell Praises and Incomiums, on all manner of Subjects, for
nothing; only with this condition, not to examine the goodness of the
Commodities, as the truth of their protestations of friendship, the sincerity
of their oaths of fidelity, and the reali^^, of their idle wishes to interested
persons. They have also their complaints for non-acknowledgements, their
seeming despairs, and a multitude of ^ine words that these Court-Parrots are
ever furnished with, and carry about them; sweet expressions they have indeed,
and affected regrets at your departure, together with a thousand dainty
complements for a four hours tedious absence. They are permitted to deal in
Masks of what kind soever, and are to be found at Jealousies Quarters, where
they commonly make use of them to deceive Rivals, and spoil sports.

This City of Prince de l' Amors is the Venus, the Eye and Luster of all
Cities Terrestial, (for the beautiful women that inhabit there) it being by
some called ^ivit^s A^gelorum. There are in the whole circumference of the
Walls just sixteen Gates: The Geometrical form thereof is neither Circular nor
Oval, but of a mean proportion between a Cylinder, and a reversed Pyramid, just
like unto the pourtraiture of a man's body: your understandings cannot be
unacquainted with such a general draught as this, except you are only
Scioccoes, and never saw Belgia in the form of a Lion; Italy, of a Leg; Morea,
of a plain Leaf; Spain, of an Ox Hide; the West Indies, of a Fishes Lungs; all
Europe in the shape of an Empress. He that has but seen these, and shall but
view this Town, must needs avow directly, that he beholds the lineament either
of some Collossus, laid all along; or else of Prometheus, as he lies bound
upon the Mount Alazar. In this City is a place called, the Palace of good
Fortunes, where Prince de l' Amor receives his Courtiers most secret homage.
This Palace of good Fortunes is a house of pleasure, whose Foundations were
laid by Nature; upon which Art has since raised very handsome Edifices and
Decorations. The Gates are all made of false pleasures, and the rooms furnished
with lost shame; and the most secret passages may all be called a scandalous
Mystery. Silence commands there sometimes, but for the most part Indiscretion,
and sometimes Distaste does let in false reports, which are Fames forerunners;
upon whose least buz, she must needs sound an Alarm with her Jews trump, and
make a tatling with her hundred Tongues. This Palace stands in a Valley so
closely barricadoed with Trees, Hedges and Bank^, that it is neither facile to
epsy or approach it; those only that are free can have the privilege to
enter at pleasure, though ^ be the utmost aims of all the A^oroso's; and so
ambitious they are of honor, that many will often persuade people they have
come from thence, when indeed they could never get in there.

They are all well acquainted both where it is, and know the ways which lead
thither; but as there are many several Paths, and those very differing and
distant one from another; each one takes that course which he finds most
convenient, and best to agree with his own fancy and condition.

Some walk the plain way of delighting and pleasing; which is indeed the
fairest, and the least perilous of all.

Others choose the Golden path; which without doubt is the most certain, and in
which one goes farthest in a short time: but all the World cannot go this way,
it being only reserved for rich men, (the Golden Calves of this Age) and
others of the like gang.

There are some that tread in the road of Opportunity, which is none of the
worst ways; but they must be careful to look often on their Watches, lest they
loose their Tide and Market-hour; for Take a Lady in her humor, etc. Others
there are that rely upon the Path of Obligation; but this is the farthest way
about, most troublesome, and more uncertain then all the rest.

Last of all, there are some that make their passage through the Fort of
Enterprises; which is the shortest cut of all indeed, but it is dangerous; and
because of Countermines, it being so inaccessible a place, ofttimes the
Traveller is constrained to return back the same way that he came.

Not far from this Palace of good Fortunes, on the top of a Mountain there
stands a Castle of all Ghristal, not wrought by any Art of humane power, say
the Inhabitanrs, but by the Goddess Fortune (Fortuna favet fatuis, is a saying
not so old as true) she being (upon some distaste of the gods) banished from
Heaven, her blind Ladyship set up her rest here, and built this her second
Terrestrial Heaven. And from hence she spreads her goodness through the World:
here she sits giving all abundance, that the most credulous servant she has
can possibly expect: nay, be his expectation constant, it is believed he cannot
choose but obtain it: Hither do men and women flock, but especially from
Foppiania and Coxcombia; there is not one (almost) high or low, in those parts
of the World, but have seen this Mount (and others upon a further discovery
will ascend it.) Men talk of Saint James of Compostella, our Lady of
Walsingam-Hall and Sichem, etc. they are, or will be, desert and desolate
places in respect of this: Here the Pilgrim lies prostrate in the Valley, in
devout expectation of the Goddesses call; here the people are as thick as ever
Hailstones lie in the highway after a frosty storm: yet may not any person
living approach the ascent of the Hill, until such time as the Priests of the
Castle do hang out the White Banner, and that is a sign that the Goddess is
pleased that they shall ascend: and then they all cry with one voice, making
the Skies rebound again, Madona Scoperta (the Italians cry so, unveiling the
Picture of the Lady of Loretto) and then, run that run may, one over another;
every one crying out of the straitness of the passage up: Nor will the worst
man there give place unto the best; so that sometimes you shall have them scold
one with another, like so many disagreeing Neighbors in an Alley; and
sometimes to it by the ears with dry blows, every one in the company thrusting
on him that was before him, and flouting them that are behind. Here did I see
certain of them that durst not venture on the crowd, grown even hoary with
expectation, and yet had not means to get up the Hill. But what do they that
get up? Faith, desire to have themselves called together; nevertheless each one
begged that it would be the Goddess pleasure to grant him his desires first.

You shall have one praying for the attainment of his way-ward Love; another,
only that it should please Fortune to send him a Wife that was no shrew; a
third, for Honor; a fourth for Riches; every man as he liked and had occasion:
and there you should have twenty beseeching for such a wealthy man's death; and
as many for the burial of so many Churchmen, that they might pass from
reversions to the possession of this or that fat Benefice: there sat a crew of
ill-faced-Wenches, and their snir was for beauty: there was an old Wife also,
with as many Oak Trees in her Mouth as Teeth, and she expected to be restored
to her youth again: and as many more Suitors (you must think more then I can
now well remember.) Now the sign of admission being given (as I said) up Hill
go all that can go up, not on their feet (for that were, as it is esteemed
there, too much presumption) but upon hands and knees: and with great
reverence, I warrant you: being gotten on the midway, one of the Priests
entertains them courteously, and inquires every particular man's name and
Country; which when that he hears, he proclaims with a loud voice as ever
had Stenior, a fellow that in Homer had a voice as loud as five voices, who was
appointed partly to give notice to his fellows, and (as some think) to the
Goddess her self, what guests were arrived; and partly by this means inquiring
the piety of them, to know ere that they came any nearer, whether they address
with the faith and purity that is required: for if they approach thither guilty
of any crime, she hangs out her Red Banner, as a sign that they must be removed
into the Cloisters, where they must be kept till they are able to salute her
with a purer soul, and pass the residue of their journey with a lighter purse.
But if the Goddess likes them at the first, the Priest without any Ticket
admits them, and so lets them pass, with these words, Believe, expect and Hope;
and so God b'w'ye. On go they as cheerful as Pies, until they come to an
Ironthreshold, a little below the steps that ascend to the Castle-gate: Upon
which Iron this Distick is written.

Fortunam si avide vorare pergas,
Illam ut male concoquas necesse est.
Who swalloweth Fortune, ere he chew it,
Through ill digestion needs must rue it.
The Castle-gates are kept by a rigorous Porter; yet Money will make him to do
any thing: the entry is so narrow, that it seems to be rather a hole then a
gate: but after you are crept once in, then shall you see a house more like a
heavenly then an earthly; all Pearl and Gold, whose luster dazles the eye to
look upon it, and whose external view promises no less then the height of
happiness. I omit to speak of the form of the Temple, the Priests Habits,
Orders and Offices; these, for brevities sake, I wittingly over-pass. At
length, when you have viewed all (for you must needs bestow a little time to
gaze upon this Pile of admiration) comes another of the Flamines to you, and
taking you by the hand (having first blindfolded you with a Linen Cloth) he
leads you through a hundred turnings, indeed whither he lists; but as fond men
believe, unto the Temple of this good Goddess, whom mortal eyes must not
behold; and therefore you are muffled: now you must couch, and kiss the sacred
pavement; and lie so without once moving, until that the Goddess call you by
your name; and then ask boldly what you please: do but effect what she commands
without delay or distrust, and were your request (say they) never so hard, it
shall be fulfilled. Well, but (you will ask) what is the end of all this
ceremonious observation? By my troth a ridiculous one, able to move the
gentlest spleen alive; they are all singularly and ingeniously Coneycatcht, men
and women, rarely fetched over, and with Arts quintessence: and yet for all
that, this Art is so secret, that though no man pass this trial, that is not
made an Ass; yet every one had rather blame his own slothfulness and
incredulity, or else believe that he had committed some mistake, rather then so
much as once to glance at any imperfection in the power of the Goddess. Well,
having propounded your petition, (suppose it be Honor) the Goddess assents to
it most graciously, commanding the suppliant first, after some hours, to take a
potion, whereby his spirit may be the better adapted to the ensuing felicity;
and then to lay him down again until she call him the second time: which if he
do but rightly observe, he shall assuredly (as they say) be crowned with his
full wishes, to continue enstalled in happiness for ever, and to have always
the same cause to be grateful to the Goddess for her heavenly benificence.

It passes; the suppliant takes the cup, and drinks it all off, praising in
his own thoughts the drinks delicious taste; being utterly ignorant, that it is
but only a potion compounded of Poppy, Opium, Lettuce, and other such
procurers of sleep ^ but the effect is the trial; he falls asleep, ye may turn
the house out at the Window (if you can) and never awake him: and then is he
haled up and down the room like a dead Carcass, by the Villains that officiate;
and when they have laughed at him till they are weary, they lay him in a rich
Bed, in a Chamber like a Kings, cieled with Ivory, and arched with Golden
Pillars, where all the Tables spread with rich coverings, the Arras of
Compania, and the Tapestrie of Alexandria, are but Sackcloth to them.

About the door stands a company of attendants all bare-headed, each in his
Golden Chain at least, and all Courtier-like accoutred, expecting when this
Endymion junior will awake: that Minion of the Moon is said to have slept
forty years together ere he 'wak'd (this Moon-calf sleeps commonly not above
three days after he has taken the poti^n) who then lifting up his head,
^eholds all the room with amaze^ent (as well he may;) and seeing all this fair
company of shining attendants, is wholly transformed with wonder^s whilst they
in the meantime approach all in order with a ceremonious revarence to salute
the awaked great person, to whom they wish health and fortunate days: Mass
thinks he (taking more then ordinary state on him) this is brave. They humbly
approaching him, ask him what apparel his Highness will be pleased to wear to
day: your suit of Goldsmiths work? your suit of Tissue, imbrodered with
Rubies? your Cloth of Gold Doublet with the Carbuncle-buttons, or your
Pearl-powdred-Vest? Tissues, Rubies, Carbuncles, Vests? Hey da! (he could not
remember that in all his life he was concerned with Tailors for any such
Apparel) howsoever he was so well pleased and valiantly contented (as he
imagined the Goddess Fortune had made him already such a Courtier) as that he
resolved never to pay any Taylo^ bills; he is an Endymion indeed now, and will
not change states with the Man in the Moon, for all his fulgid glittering
Throne that he sits in. Well, rich Clothes are brought him indeed; every man
helps this mighty person on with them, as one says,

Dant digitis gemmas, dant long monilio collo.

His hands with sparking gems they deck,
And hang rich Chains about his neck.
Set a Diadem upon his head adorned with Pearls of incredible greatness and
luster. All this goes well on still, thinks he; yet would dinner were ready, he
wished, and whispered it privately to himself: for (though he found his own
Highness very hungry) he could not, if one had told him so, believe that he had
eaten no meat for three days. He no sooner thought thus (for he imagined that
it did not concern his greatness to speak to his attendants of so ordinary an
affair which would follow in course:) as I said before, he no sooner thought
it, but immediately dinner was prepared and served up all in state; such
raritie of services, such brave attendants, such ravishing Music, such Mirth!
Pho, nineteen Muses cannot give a man words to describe it. And thus the whole
day was spent, as time ye know will pass: his fine Holiness thought all his own
still. Well, night comes up with supper, and up supper comes, with as rich,
nay, richer purveyance and attendance then waited on the Dinner: and for a
conclusion to the ^east, his i^^gined Highness has the ^other draught given
him of the same holy potion, which presently locked up his senses, in a sleep as
profound as the former: and then his poor twelve hours greatness, being, as
Virgil says,

I am simul expletus, dapibus, vinoque sepultus,

Gorged with good cheer, and wrapped in sleepy wine.

Is carried out at a Postern, stripped out of his Tissues, his Rubies, and all
his Goldsmiths work, and re-invested in his old clothes, (which with his being
dragged about, were made somewhat durtier then they were before) and so laid
out in the Highway for passengers to gaze upon; where when he awakes, he falls
into as great amazement as before; and remembering how gloririous a bliss he was
enthroned in but yesterday; and finding himself now utterly deprived of all, he
falls a lamenting with a heu quo decidimus, miserably deploring, and bitterly
^ursing either his own sloth, or deafness, that he did not give ear (as the
Goddess had charged him) to the second call: Oh, how he cursed himself for his
gross ingratitude^ who being placed in so high a felicity, that he should
neglect to pay the Goddess her high tribute of thankfulness! So away he goes
weeping and wayling, with this word continually in his mouth, Fuimus Troes; I
was whilom a brave fellow! exhorting all persons to take example by him (as
they use to say at the Gallows) he desired them never to be negligent, never
thankless, but to proceed though confidently, yet withal warily, to obey what
the Goddess enjoined; and then they could not fail of felicity. Such had I
once (said he) been, but now by mine only folly, I have lost it all, every
part and parcel of my former greatness. Now every one that hears him, thinks
this; I hope to take better heed then so; and they hoodwinck themselves ere
ever they come there. It Is strange that the people of these parts having two
such strings to their ^ow, should so many of them neither get preferment at the
Court or Palace, nor at the Castle of the Goddess Fortune, being served at both
in the same manner; so that many of them precipitate themselves into the Abyss
of Despair, which i^ some distance of place, both from the Palace and Castle of
the Goddess Fortune: but the wiser sort of them take sanctuary in a place
called Turn-again Chapel: this Chapel is built on firm ground, separate from
the other places by an Isthmus very dfficult to pass over; it is under the
Tuition and Government of Captain Repentance, who alone has the power to give
a free passage; he is a melancholy, but very wise person, pious and charitable
to those which address themselves to him. He does not use to give ear to the
first complaints of such as only sigh for their misfortunes, or curse the
disorder of their lives; but he penetrates and pierces the bottom of the heart*
and will examine the sincerity of it; and never assists any but those which
fix upon a constant and firm resolution to quit their impertinent, covetous and
ambitious fancies; and then he conducts them safely into that miraculous
Chapel, where as soon as they are arrived, their eyes are unsealed and opened,
so that they clearly and evidently perceive how blind they were; and discover
that all what before they had beheld in their fancies; was but imposture; that
all the sweetnesses of changeable Fortune, are but sugared poisons; that the
false pleasures of this life do ever produce real pains; that the happiest of
them are continually on the rack, that these outward enjoyments are only vails
cast over the troubles and sorrows which await them inevitably; and that there
is no place more unhappy and bad then that which is called the Palace of Good
Fortune; that in truth it is the Trap for wanton and impudent youth. Thus
taking better resolutions and desires, some walking a quite contrary Path to
that which before they had strayed in, they enjoy a true and happy peace and
satisfaction, which before, in the greedy prosecution of their Fortunes, they
had in vain sought after; and so by this means are restored to their perfect
minds.

It Is true, that behind the Palace of Good Fortunes, there is a Garden of a
fair extent, which is called the Court of Recompense or Reward. At this word
there are few but will imagine and fancy that here is a Terrestial Paradise:
but though Art does every day strive to embellish it, yet it seems to be a
place where Nature brings forth nothing but troubles and miserles; the hedges
are Thornie and Bryerie; there are no Flowers but blasted ^Pans^y^, weeping
Daffadills, and worm-eaten fool-coats; and no plants but Ru^^, Worm-word, and
Floreamour; no^ any Fruits but choak-Pears: the Fountains indeed flow on both
sides, but the waters are for the most part bitter; but set them be bitter or
sweet, I am resolved no longer to tire out my Reader with this tedious
preachment, but to go on jovially with my following description.

In this Court of Prince de l' Amor, are persons of all degrees, conditions,
qualities and sizes.

Not that the Subjects of this State are considered under their diverse titles;
for they are distinguished by other qualities far more illustrious.

Some are the sighers, ever clothed with anxietie, and care of a deep sad
thought-colour.

Then the wantons are always roabed with Gew-gaws, Nets, Gins, Weather-cocks,
and such pretty Traps and Devices.

The Adventurers are in Habits of changeable Taffatie; these run in all roads,
and yet never stray far from the Castle of Enterprise.

The glittering Gallants fair without and foul within, are considerable only
for their gay Trappings: these spend very much to little purpose, they are the
only make Flyalls under the Moon; Dogs, Dice, Hawks, or Kites for a need, etc.
are their Objects; they do nothing in the world (next to their hatred of
learning) but invent how to spend: thus they fly out their Patrimonies (their
Fathers were born before them) and when all is gone but their Clothes, then
farewell to them also. These are those that call one another Dick, Tom, Jaok:
and whither do thou go to day? to a Playhouse? to an Ordinary? to a Wench,
etc? Alas poor Gentlemen! what is a man but his pleasure?

When these new Inhabitants have cast all their whole Estate overboard, then
they do either retire to other men's Tables, or else are maintained at the
public charge in that same place, where stands that ancient model of
Cole-harbour, bearing the name of the Prodigals Promontory, which is appointed
as a Sanctuary to Banckrupt Debtors: thither flee all those for refuge that are
cast at law, or feel themselves unsufficient to satisfy their deluded
Creditors; any of whom, if they pursue their Debtors hither, and force them
from their protection whether they will or no, they are immediately accused as
guilty of sa^^iledge, and so are thrown headlong down from the highest Tower
in all the Territory.

Those of this Country that have any Sons, assign them their full Patrimony
^re Nature allow them any Beard: and in case they dye before this time (if ^^^
can believ (...)) they leave all their Estate unto their Wives to dispose as
the^ list afterward, without any (...) of progeni^: But if they have the
fortune to bury their Wives, then do they lavishout more upon their Funerals,
then would serve for* Dow^ie to the ill favoure^st of their Daughters*

Every man here a^ouches* himself to be at least a Gentlem^n born: and pretend
most of them to show a Pedigree of ten thousand years before the world was
created (which is somewhat beyond the descent of the Shentlemen of Wales) you
shall have them show you Galleries all drawn with their Lineal and Collateral
descents; and yet when all comes to all, their Neighbors (without going to any
Heralds-Office) are able to prove, that they had Cobblers, Carters, Botchers,
and Costermongers ^^to their Grandfathers. Nor is there any of their more
select Gentility, but has his Country Farms, three or four, leased out to his
Villia^oes, his retainers, and those are commonly Clawhack-Courtiers;
otherwise, as their Progenitors did before them, they might have whistled for
their Estates.

The ^abble are of all hairs, conditions and understandings; Buffoons,
Upstarts, Braggadochioes, Powdered Heads, and Pickled Tails, which, some say*
of Millers are become Gentlemen; others affirm, that of Gentlemen they are
turned Millers: I know not whether is the ^ruest, since they wear the Millers
Liverie on the Head, and the Gentleman's Badge at the Heel.

There are some others that in respect of any valiant use they make of it,
might be armed with Tin only. These style themselves stout men, and strong
wits; whereas, indeed, at the first encounter with any man of Mettle (though
the Ladies have wept that Achilles was too hard for Hector) they are pierced to
the quick without making any resistance. Let them swear all manner of oaths, no
wise man will ever believe them to be valiant. As to their wits, they never
speak but only to show themselves Critics, and are only much esteemed by
themselves, though they are as much scorned by others; conceiving that they
know all things (whereas, any thing but vice is above their capacities)
omitting to learn that which is fittest for them, they would erect themselves
(what should I call them otherwise?) as much as in them lies (if they could do
more then what was done before) general deformers of Prince de l' Amour's Court.

These fellows, when they have strutted to their uttermost extent, the Ladies
do but hate them. They do so much want ordering of themselves, though they
would pretend to regulate others, that they are the most impertinent, and will
be ever held (but to little purpose) the most importunate presumers that attend
that Court. They are so valiant (as I told you before) that none of them stir
abroad unarmed: the Cutlers trust them for Swords; and therefore (as they
intend never to pay for them) they give them as freely away to their
fellow-Cowards, whom one may disarm (though they swore, and stood upon terms)
with one single well-managed Tobacco-pipe: For though they have their
Ammunition hung about them, they are but only hired, as so many Porters by
Mars, who has no other occasion for them: Yet one of these Braggadochioes will
be always so accoutred, let him go but to my Neighbor John's, he will have his
moveable about him. If he meet any man that will not give him the Wall, Catzo
del Diablo, it is presently slave draw, or else prepare thy self to kiss my
pump, for the refarciation of my honor. They never make any journies forth,
but they always bring blows home; but very seldom it is that they leave any
behind them; for they run on foreright, and dare not so much as look backwards.
If any one of them chance to kill his enemy (it is so rare an accident for him
to have such a stomach) that you need not to question, but that he turns
Canibal, and feeds presently on him. They have no Laws, but all goes (when they
are valiant) by might and main. He that is so courageous, if he be wronged,
must be his own evenger, or else he may go home like a Fool as he came; for his
Sa^acen-faced, Swash-buckler-companions, out of a pale almost dead fear, leave
him to shift for himself; they will be sure to run without a ^ear or wound safe
to the next Tavern, where they fortisie themselves, and build a sconce of a
victorious never payment: and these are the height of their Achievements.

The fairest place of all the City is the Market, called Royal, both for its
excellency, and for that the Prince is lodged in the middle of it, that so he
may at one view behold the Rendezvous of his Courtiers; so as at least to keep
those (if it were possible) that are most enormons in awe.

This City is environed with an infinite number of re^iring places, where the
chiefest appointed Assemblies and Meetings are kept, which are so many
magnificent Temples consecrated to the new Deities of the Country: in the midst
of a great many Portals, Stair-cases, Cells, Galleries, and Closets richly
flourished and set forth, there is always one place respected like a Sanctuary,
wherein there is an Altar made after the fashion of those beds dedicated to the
Pagan Gods, where, for the most part, lies a Lady exposed to the public view;
handsome, and richly adorned; noble, but accounted vain; sometimes wise, but
still sufficient: and thither at her feet does the most illustrious of the
Court resort to burn their Incense, offer their Prayers, and solicit her
favor to Prince de l' Amor, that they may obtain entrance into the Palace of
Good Fortunes.

The people of this Country have no true settled Religion; they have many
Temples indeed, but they do not go there to pray, but only to see and to be
seen, to scoff and jest, smile, wink, cavil, make matches, take assignations
for debauches; and so they make the Cloak of Piety a cover of their Drollery.

In this City there also is a great Obelisk of black Marble, on which all the
Fundamental Laws of this State are written in Letters of Gold, of which these
few following are the least considerable.

1. That Modesty, Discretion, and Reservedness, shall have no admittance into
this State, unless they may be useful to such as are obliged to play
under-board. 2. He that has not wherewith to bestow, must provide himself of
some rich Gull to defray all his charges. 3. After a long stay at the Park, or
elsewhere, a good Husband that waits at home for his wife, may drink one glass
of Wine to drive away Melancholy, but is absolutely debarred from cutting off^*
one bit to stay his appetite till his Lady brings home her Gallants with her to
supper. 4. Whoever maked profession of Fidelity, shall be bound to justify,
that he is of the Race of Am^dis, or of the descent of Celadon; and in case
that he cannot, he shall pass for an Idiot. 5. That the Husbands shall be
obliged to keep those Children which themselves have not gotten, without
troubling of their brains to know what the right father gives underhand toward
their maintenance.
And though Prince de l'Amour receives no homage, nor grants any considerable
privileges, but only to the Natives; yet nevertheless, for the benefit and
advancement of Trade, and enriching of his subjects, he suffers these four
sorts of strangers to abide there.

1. The Begulled ones, which are a people so cunningly flattered and soothed up
by their Wives, that they cannot believe any other participates with them in
their delights.

2. The Cravens, which are in doubt, but dare not complain for fear of
correction.

3. The Hard to be shod, thus named, because like Mad-colts they kick and
fling, and play the Devils, to shun those knocks, which nevertheless they are
sure to feel; but the difference is this: the one is shod with the Half Moon on
the Head, and the other at the Heel.

4. The fourth and last are the Jobelins, who know they are dubbed, but had
rather quietly conceal their Horns in their Pockets, then have them in the view
of all the world; besides the fear of the loss of their worshipful office, if
they should understand, or the sad shipwreck of those profits and incomes
maintained by their Wives industry, and the favorites benevolence.

They marry Wives, and love them pestilently well for a while, keeping
themselves truly loyal to their espousals, until they take some occasion of
dislike with their old bed-fellows, or chance to behold another fairer then
she: and then farewell Wife, and farewell with all my heart Husband (says she)
there is no love lost; for the Wife is commonly as willing for to make an
exchange, as the man is: assure your selves that she is as ready to take a
dislike, if her Husband be any way declining: just as our Citizens use a man;
as long as he has cash, you have him brow and bosom; but that failing, my
Master is not within, Sir.

The current coin of this Country is stamped with a City-hen on the one side,
and a Cuckoo on the other reverse.

There are here some that are mighty courteous, many of them will use a
stranger the first day, as if he were their own brother (though they never saw
him before:) Marry the next they will pass him by, and forget that ever they
saw him. They seldom or never proffer any thing which they do not call back at
the next breath (you must take them at the first rebound:) Nor do they ever
promise, but they afterward forswear it; you are never sure till it be
performed: nor do they for the most part perform any thing which they do not
afterward (though too late) recant and be very sorrowful for. They will not
sell you any commodity to day, but that they think they might have sold it
dearer to morrow. They are as inconstant in the management of their Edicts, as
the She-landers, for some Laws they alter every year: For it is not fit (thus
they defend it) seeing all man's life is mutable, that the rules of life should
not be mutable also, as well as the effects: besides, man's second cogitations
being generally more perfect, it were a strange slaverie to be tied to a first
Decree, that although the afterwi^ be disliked never so much, it must not be
altered.

But that which ought to gain Prince de l'Amour a greater renown, is, that
having given Tax-gatherers liberty to negotiate in his Dominions, yet he never
suffers them to propound any new impositions to his Council, being still
contented with the ancient duties; for in this City, he exacts nothing but
frequent visits, deeps sighs, and fond (but well dissembled) desires, which are
esteemed common duties, and a general homage to all comers; and in these
things wherein his vassals are the oftest pressed, they expose or tender only
the lips or the hands, except in some particular places where they add the
breast: but in this Palace of Good Fortunes, tribute is taken of all, both of
Nature and of Art; of all kinds, handsome and homely; and of all sorts of
Animals young or old; of all Offices and Employments, both in City and
Country; keeping the Courts always open to receive their payments both night
and day.

The most eminent and most inaccessible place, is the grand Magazin, fraught
and filled with all sorts of Curling-Irons, Boxes* with Black-patches,
Sweet-powders, Looking glasses, Masks, Ribbans, Hair-Bracelets,
Pocket-Tortoise-Combs, Beard-irons, Essences, Cordials, Gums, Pomatums, and
other like necessary Utensils: and round about this Magazin are the workmen,
some of which are employed to cut Patches, and lay platforms how hese Murderers
must be planted for the best advantages, and to do the greatest execution;
which only the Master-workmen dare undertake, to compose artificial Beauties,
to slabber over the Nose, and blanch the hands; to make all kinds of
new-fashioned Trimmings, colored Plumes, and sweet Nose-gayes of all sorts of
Flowers, and those in all seasons of the year, etc.

Some make profession of a new art of moulding and fashioning of Ladies
breasts, undertaking to conceal those which are over-big, and to add a just
proportion to those that are less perceptible. But their best workmen are the
new-fashion mongers, Screen-fan-makers, expeditioners of Sweetmeats, and
Collations, Introducers to Plays, and Plotters for private Walks; and nothing
is more dearly bought, or further fetched then a crafty cloak to hide a wanton
visie, or a quaint excuse to lie alone one night, when to be sure some stinging
Flea creeps in, and if discovered, then handsomely to pretend some rash
mistake, or some other such like peticoat-slight, as the wit of a Chambermaid
is always furnished withal.

A little without the City there are Public Schools for the industry of the
young Fry, where of the seven liberal Sciences they observe two only; to Say
well, and to Do ill. Here you may go whistle and save your labor, as well as
to come to meet with the shadow of a Philosopher, or to hear any Lectures read.
And for the Laws of Nations, they make use only of the rights of Nature, and
common customs Nor do they much care to be great Doctors: every peculiar man
here, is both his own Teacher, and his own Auditor. There are some few
Gewgawiasters, who give themselves wholly to the invention of Novelties, in
Games, Buildings, or A ^a-mode Fashions; he whose device is the most exqui^ite
amongst them, according to his invention has a place assigned him. He that
first devised to blow out bubbles of Soap and Spittle forth of a Wall-nut
shell, is of as great renown amongst them, as ever was the first Printer or
Gun-founder amongst us of Europe. These Gewgawiaster are in great esteem there,
yea and amongst the meaner sort also; insomuch, that many of them will not put
out some new A-lamode whimsical devises without their directions; yet these are
counted Scholars indeed, for the wisest of them spend all their time in great
licentiousness: but that which is most honorable amongst them, is, that they
have given the Authority of Regencie to persons of Quality, who (how ignorant
soever they are) sit in the Chair. The Women also keep the Academies, where all
run a Tilt, and are very skilful to run at the Heart; they find the Rings, and
the men the Lances, and all other the like expenses.

There are certain-hangers on, who would ^ain get some allowance out of these
public Schools: These Fellows are like your Italian Mountebanks, who draw the
people together to see the effects of some rare Unguento, distilled water, or
some other strange Engines: these cheats and impostures would make these
Academians understand (which as fond as they are) they are resolved (that as
they cannot, so they will not) that out of the basest Metals, by a secret Art
(and that by St. Patrick a gainful one too) can draw the purest Gold. But in
faith they did but laugh at them, and let wiser men but see and consider the
toylsome folly of these extractors: they are gulled, and gulled, and terribly
gulled themselves; yet can they not find in their hearts to give over. A sort
of them of late (as I was there informed) would needs go to the Oracle of the
Castle of the Goddess Fortune, to know the event of that weighty business they
had in hand. The Oracle presently gave them this answer, Travailez; that is,
Take pains. Pho, home they come, as if they had gotten their God Mamm^n in a
Box: and forward they went with their Circulations, their Sublimations, their
Conjunctions, their Fermentations, (their hard words) till all this headless
action ended in put refaction, until Reputation and Revenues were both dead and
rotten; whereas Libanius, one of their Authors, if these Fellows were in their
right wits, has set them down the true definition of Alchimy: Alchimi^ est ars
sine art, cujus scire est pars ^um part, medium est strenue mentiri, finis;
mendicatum iri. And A^rosto, that excellent Italian Poet deals as plainly with
them in his Orlando Furioso:

Thus each man seeks to be an Al^^ymist,
Till all be gone, and be his number mist.
Whereas indeed, the Oracle gave them better counsel then they could
comprehend, Travailez, Take pains, that is,

A Ma^^ock and a Spade will get you gold
So^ner then Chimistry a thousand-fold.
These Accademians are so unfortunate to have some* amongst them also which are
called Poets, who are never here likely to be crowned with Laurel, (because
that ^re^ is an enemy to the Vine:) nor yet with Ivy, for they are none of
Mi^ervaes Birds. These drunken Rimers here with their Trade, are not able to
purchase Ale, much less Sack. They are the very off-scum of the basest rabble
on the surface of the Earth; I was grieved to the vary heart, to hear that any
should give them that sacred name of Poet, as Antigenides in his Apuleius was,
that Horn winders should be called Corneteirs. They are the veryest Lack
latins, and the most unalphabetical Rakeshames that ever bred Louse: they
cannot make two doughty rythmes in their Mother tongue in two hours; and yet
these cocking, narrowbrim'd, tinder-cloakt-shagrags, confederates with
Tale-tellers, Jestbreakers, made a shift to live by other men's Trenchers; these
Flies are drunk in every man's Glass; every Country is thwackt with them, as an
Orange is stuck close with Cloves; they fill all Ordinaries, Alehouses,
Coffee-houses, and intrude into Taverns with their Epistles, Encomiums,
Stanzaes, Anagrams, Acrosticks, Epigrams, Epithalamiums, Madrigals, Elegies,
Epitaphs, (the Devil in Buckrom knows what) all the Pedlary ware of Parnassus,
such as would make you blind, if you were to see them, and would blister your
ears, and make you deaf to hear them read: these are those that have the
managing of Masks at boarding and petty Schools, and dispose of the Pageants
at the Lord Mayors Shows, and do also bear the sway, and usurpover the new
Ballad-singers.

Having thus given you an account of their public Schools, I shall now
acquaint you with another place, frequented with the bravest Wits amongst them:
it is a noble Edifice which serves for a public Library for the Amoroso's and
Amoretta's; it is built of ridiculous imaginations, seldom accomplished wishes,
and furnished with several Manuscripts, hitherto unknown in our vulgar
language, as Canting, whereof these are the chief and the most studied.

The Mystery of Folly in three Volumes; the first is the Simpletons address;
the second is the Introduction to the Bedside; and the last is the Idiots
behavior there.

The Observations of the Heavens, to know the just time and tide of Opportunity.

The trick to frizzle and curle the hair according to the features of the face.

An Epitome of such Amoretta's as repented before the latter Season, with a
recital of their disgraces who have been constrained to do so to their great
regret.

The invention how with a little cost to gain much honor.

A Receipt book to cure long and troublesome Tumors and swellings.

The Misfortunes of an admirable Lady whom none ever courted without a Jeer.

The Contrasto of a pair of Amoretta's upon the question, whether it were
better to have a discreet or an adventurous lover, resolved in favor of the
last.

The Master - piece or Formulary of familiar Declarations to be made in secret,
and the different tones of the voices to be used, with an exact observation of
the when and where most convenient for the important Mystery.

The troubles of a perplexed Virgin, who having her choice of two Amorosoes,
fainted at the difficulty of the Election, and after resolved to make use of
both, that she might no more endanger life.

The disguised Barod, wherein is discovered the Mystery of negotiating without
being suspected, either by old Mothers or young Husbands.

The Mediation of the Waiting-Maids, with instructions how to cajole them
handsomely, and gain any servants good will and assistance.

The Art of Cheating on both sides, first to pick the pocket, and then deny the
pleasure.

These Manuscripts and Books were written by several Authors; they are to be
seen and perused in no other place but in this Library, where they are all of
them chained, and not to be removed from thence: be that travels thither, and
comes off generously with the Bibliothecary, may satisfy himself further, as
concerning their more secret contents.

Within this City there are places ordained for Fine Petticoat-Skirmishes, and
gilded Chariot-Turnaments. Now fine Petticoats are certain kind of Animals
that have neither feet nor teeth, but yet are very costly. There are some
Petticoats which are only of puff-work: these are subject with the least gale
or gust of temptation, seconded with a fit opportunity, easily to be blown
about their ears. There are other Petticoat-Emissaries which are the only
News-carriers from the Palace of Good Fortunes, but in favor only of such as
will be conducted by them. Some likewise are Crossgrain'd Liveries, which a
Husband never sees, but that these displeasing objects make him to have sore
eyes; howsoever (he saves nothing by it) he must perform his duty unaskt-for,
he must nevertheless bestow them against his Will. As for gilded Chariots and
Coaches, they are pretty Engines to trundle wealthy Amoroso's and Amoretta's
about in. These have sometimes four Beasts to draw them without, and half a
dozen Butter-Flies riding within. The first that enter Maiae's Park, are not
always the happiest, but rather the last; for these being freed from the
throng, they may the better execute their brave designs, advance, retreat,
thrust forward, cast flaming Darts without burning, discharge Pistols without
noise; amongst which many other of the City-Coaches are suffered to exercise,
which though they make not so much noise, do as good execution, and many times
come off and on with as great applause. In fine, amongst all their ordinary
divertisements, this Mystery is the most public, and yet the least understood;
and those which cannot unriddle their winks and nods, and the Stenography of
their black patches, their smiles and other subtle gesticulations, will take
it only for a confused noise and throng of Coaches, able to cause the Meagri^
in ones head.

Nor is it more facile to find out the nocturnal secret of their invisible
Music, which serves often but for a vail for their more private occasions, and
is but a kind of a troublesome confused noise to all that live nigh them,
though it be a pleasing occupation for those who love to make merry at others
costs; whereas, those which some Gallants call the Evaporared Ladies, will
dance in any place without a Fiddle, sing good Prick-song without Book, and
speak all things without fear or wit; nor do such harbor any malice, if you
will believe them.

The Ladies of this Court, as of others, do not all of them affect the same
ways; for some climb over the Mountains of Advancement, others creep under the
Hedge of Liberty and Toleration; but most love the close way of secret
solitude, and ^ favorable opportunity.

There are some of this Sex likewise, that now and then also choose the Golden
Path; but that is for the most part when they are absolutely necessitated, and
led into it, by those two bad Guides, old Age and small desires.

But the best way for them, is a ^ittle of the one, and a little of the other;
half Water, and half Wine; and will be a great advantage to all such as can
undergo a little, please a little, expect sometimes, and undertake other times,
like Dutchmen, sail with every wind; and indeed such as these are ever most
welcome to Prince de l' Amour's Court.

The Lady that is most cherished in the whole Court, and whose counsel is most
followed, is the Mode; she is originally of France, a little wanton, but not
unpleasing; her humor is fantastical, and very various; she condemns easily
without any cause, that which she esteemed without a reason, and makes the
Caprichios of some renowned Amoretta, become a Law to all the Kingdom: she is
Controuler of all newfashioned Stuffs and Colors; and as Women cannot confine
themselves within their just bounds and limits, but desire willingly to extend
the same; so she undertakes for all things, yea, to their very language,
insomuch, that none dare either do or say any thing, but it must be Ala-mode;
yea, she has so great a Vogue, and is become so puissant, that having stripped
all other Amoroso's and Amoretta's, of whatsoever they possessed, to
appropriate it to her self, if you ask any of them now what Hair have you? what
Ribbands? what Head-tyes? or the like; they answer all, it is A-la-mode; nay,
even their smiles and their gate is A-la-mode: In fine, it is a general
obligation to have nothing of their own, all must be A-lamode.

But the most active person in this Court is an old Italian, named Intrigue;
she is of an obscure birth, and hitherto Historians cannot discover either her
Father or her Mother: she always goes Masked, whether for the deformity of her
Vi^^ge, or to keep her self the most concealed she can, is uncertain. One
cannot truly tell how she is habited, by reason she is so disguised: sometimes
she adorns her self like a great Person, sometimes she dresses her self like a
Beggar; yea, sometimes she hides her self under a Frock of as many different
colors as a Painters Apron, getting by this means free entrance into those
places, where otherwise she would become suspected. Sometimes she is like a
Gypsy or Fortune teller; at other times she acts the part of a Pedlaress, and
trades in Pins and Needles, Cut-works, Fanders-Laces, with all manner of such
like bables. She walks more by night then by day, and oftener rides in a Coach
then she goes on Foot: she never speaks but softly, and most commonly whispers
in the ear: she vents nothing but deceipts, troubles, brawls, separation of
body and goods, all manner of horned mischiefs. In fine, this good woman is a
dissembling, ill-wishing, and the most wicked Beldam in the World, who
nevertheless has free access into the stateliest Closets, Bed-chambers; yea,
even into Hermits Cells, and other places, both profane and holy.

Besides these two already-discovered great Mysteries, those that are most
welcome, and most sought for in all this Court, are the illmatch'd ones, not so
called for any defect of Grace or Ornament, but beause they are young beauties
condemned to suffer under the Tyranny of some old, doting, impotent, jealous
sot; these seek for redress from the Privy Council of Prince de l' Amor, where
(Justice taking place) they obtained a dispensation, either to maintain a lusty
Gentleman Usher at home, or to wander abroad; and according to the dictates of
their Consciences to enjoy all their own Liberties.

Besides these strange Cattle, there were those that would force you (whether
you would or no) to look and gaze upon them; these were called the besmeared
ones, of which there are three sorts; the White-Plaisterers, the Red-Painters,
and the Varnish-Daubers, which last Fly the Sun as much as the other shun the
Rain. Some of these their naked parts are so crossed over with over-gross
paintings (as they use in M^scovia) that you would imagine you saw some Statue
or Westminster-Tomb, rather then a living Creature; such a Cart-load of false
colors ensconce their fairest beauties.

To draw to a conclusion; amongst these Ladies there are the Admirable ones,
which nevertheless have nothing to be admired of them, but the name. And then
the Precious ones, which at present were very common and cheap.

The Ravishing ones, that commit more rapes upon the purse then the hearts.

There are also the Perplexed ones, that have still ten plots in their heads,
and twenty Gallants at their heels. Together with the little Mincing Minions,
which ordinarily have as slender wits as wastes.

There were some also that have the titles of Saints, right Saint- touchme-not,
that would seem to be mere Platonic Idea's, which refuse all before the World,
and deny nothing in a corner; Cum multis aliis.

The Air of this Country is so temperate and wholesome, that one seldom hears
of any great maladies there; and if an Amoretta finds but the least change in
her complexion, as any apparent redness, or the like, she makes her complaints
to all the World, as if it were a most grievous outrage that Nature had
committed against Love: nor are they hindered from keeping their beds, provided
that it be for some advantage to diversifie their game, or any other interest,
which experience alone can teach them.

But indeed there is nothing more delightful to behold in all this City, then
the Flying-hearts, of which it is very full: they are covered with Flames and
large Wings; and it is to be admired their Flames are so moderate, they do not
scorch their Plumes: they court all the Ladies they meet, and tell them fine
things in their ears; but are not much sollieitious, whether they be respected
or disdained: these are a Sect by themselves, whose Founder, it is said, was one
certain Hylas; they have taken the History of Inconstant Lovers for their
Directory, and their Motto is, Qui plus en aim, plus aim: in one and the same
conversation, they perch upon one Ladies shoulders, on another head, in a
thirds lap; and are so tame, that they may easily be taken by any fair ones
hand: they do homage to this Ladies Eyes, to that Ladies Hair, and pay tribute
to their lips and breasts: they fly at all, and stay with none; laugh at every
Lady, and are scofft at again; for these Flying-hearts can laugh as well as
speak.

Expect not here (gentle Reader) any exacter description of this Country,
either of how I found it, or how I left it: you may better inform your selves,
if you please but to take pains to give it such a visit as I did: if at your
arrival there you do not sinde these Countries, as I described them to you,
blame not any defect in me: for their forms of Government are so continually
altered, that one may describe ye the shape of Proteus, or the color of a
Chamaelion, or tell ye what weather it will be to morrow, sooner then tender
you any true knowledge of their discipline. For my part, I give the Portugals
free leave to brag of their travels and large discoveries; I reached to the
hight of my ambition, when with safety I saluted my Native Soil. Farewell.

FINIS.
^^oks lately Printed for Francis Kirkman, and are to be sold at his Shop
tender St. Ethelboroughs Church within Bishops-gate, London. 1669.
THE English Rogue; described in the Life of Meriton Latroon a Witty
Extravagant, being a complete Di^^very of the most Eminent Cheats of both
Sexes. The ^^rst Part.

The English Rogue; continued in the Life of Meriton Latroon, and other
Extravagants, comprehending the most ^minent Cheats of most Trades and
Professions. The ^econd Part.

Poor Robin's Jests: or, The Complete Iester; being a Collection of several
Jests not heretofore published, now ^wly composed and written by Poor Robin,
Knight of the ^urnt-Island, and Well-willer to the Mathematics. The ^^rst,
Second, and Third Parts.

Venus Looking-glass, or a Rich Storehouse of Choice ^rollery, in Pro^e and
Verse.

Psitta^orum Regio; or, The She-Lands, with a De^^iption of other strange
adjacent Countries in the Domi^^ons of Prince de l'Amour, not hitherto found in
any Geo^^aphical Map. By one of the late most reputed Wits.

Poems of diverse sorts, and three New Plays; viz.

The Obstiuate Lady, a Comedy.

Trappo^^^ supposed a Prince, a Tragi-Comedy.

The Tragedy of Ovid.

The Spightfull Sister, a Comedy.

Money's an Ass, a Comedy.

All these are newly Printed, and to be sold as aforesaid; ^ere you may be
furnished with all the Plays that were ^r yet Printed, and all sorts of
Histories and Romances, ^^ch you may buy or have lent you to read on reasonable
^nsiderations. Also you may have ready Money for any ^^ary, or other parcel of
Books.


