THE MOST NOBLE ROBERT ^ EARL ^ OF ESSEX ^ AND LO:GEN:OF THE FORCES FOR K:
andPARL ^



THE SAINTS Support in these sad TIMES, Delivered in a Sermon at Tiverton in
Devonshire, in the time his Excellencies army raised for King and Parliament)
quartered there.

By Tho. Palmer, Minister to the Honorable Major General Skippons Regiment.

Imprimater, Joseph Carrill.

LONDON, Printed by M. Oaks for William Ley, and are to be sold at his shop at
Paul's Chain, 1644.

To His EXCELLENCY, Robert, Earl of Essex, Viscount Herreford, Barron Ferrars
of Cha^tly, Lord Bourcher and Lovaine, one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel, and General of the Army raised by the Parliament in defense of
the true Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Person, the Laws and Liberties of
the Kingdom, and the Privileges of Parliament.
Great General.
I Take the boldness to style you, what God himself has certainly made you;
Surely, as yet God never honored any man with so great a prize, as he has
now entrusted your Excellency with. God has put you into his own place; God
has graced you with his own Name, Lord of Hosts, Gene^all of Armies. God (in
our appearance) has committed unto your care, what is preci^us to himself. A
precious Gospel, precious Ordinances, a precious Parliament, and a precious
people. God has called forth your Excellency as a choice worthy to be his
General, and the Champion of Jesus Christ to fight the great and last Battle
with Antichrist in this your Native Kingdom. Rev. 19.
La^ confident your Excellency is not so little read in Divine history, or such
a stranger to the worlds experience, as to think this Church-work^, this thing
called Reformation, will be found a matter of ease and pleasure. No, it is a
business of the greatest difficvl^y in the world. Antichrist w^l engage the
Kings of the earth, Rev. 16.^4 Rev 12.12
and set the whole world in a combustion, before he will leave his hold. It is
the nature of the devil to rage horribly toward his end. It is the property
of a dying Beast to give one great struggle when life is departing; why may not
God now make this Good in this Roman Beast amongst us? Great General, think
not less of God, ^r worse of this Cause, for one foil. Josh. 1.2.3, 4.
Joshuahs Army may flee and fall before the men of Ai though he had good
warrant to fall on, and the design wisely managed. Judge. 20.18.21. Math.
14.2^.23, 24.
Israel may lose two battles together, before Benjamin, when God had them go.
Jesus Christ's own Disciples may meet with a cross gale when they go about
his business. Now it being within my own verge to op^n Scr^pture, I t^k^ this
liberty to hi^t un^o your Excellency the meaning of God in this strange
dispensation, and further to let your Excellency know, that God ha^h much sweet
in this bitter, Josh 7.11 12.24, 25, 26. Judge. 20.^6. Math. 14.27.
much good in this seeming evil. Israel was routed, fled and fell before Ai,
that plundering Achan might be found out and punished. Israel fell in two
Battles together before Benjamin, that they might learn more seriously to
seek and trust God upon the first undertaking. And the Disciples must be in a
hopeless, helpelesse, perishing storm, that their faith in Christ (though by a
miraculous experience) might be firmly established. Little did I think when
first I preached and writ out these collections, that God intended to m^k^ them
so suitable to the condition of your Excellencies Army, as now I conceive
them. It is not the least of my thoughts in this, to look at my self, but my
aim is alone Gods glory. I am not unacquainted with your Excellencies
goodness as well as greatness, ever discerning an unwonted humility, in so
great a personage, which is my strong encourag^ment to present unto your
Excellency this small tender of a most real affection. If your Excellency be
pleased to peruse it, it bears the character of a right Soldier, and I know
you will not love it the worse for that? Your Excellency will here find a
sincere heart, and an undaunted Spirit, in a plain and mean Press; Flattery
is fitter for the Kings Court, then the Lords Camp; Be pleas^d then great
General, to honor me in the acceptance; Protect it as you approve it, and I
have my desire. The great God prosper his great wo^ke in your hand^, and make
your Name glorious to succeeding Ages. Most Noble General, in the Name of the
Lord go on, and he will yet do mightily for you; You will exp^esse your
greatness in over-looking difficulties; And certrinly, a General of so many
faithful prayers cannot miscarry. You may yet assure your self, Gods people
have you in a high-esteeme; The Saints a^e daily begging at the Throne of Grace
of you. Question it not but God will make a sweet and full return of all the
pray^rs, tears, wrongs, and Blood, which has so long cried to heaven. This is
the desire and the exp^ctation

Of your Excellencies most faithf^lly devoted in the Work of Jesus Christ.
Thomas Palmer.

A Support for the SAINTS in these sad times.
PSALM. 37. verse. 40. He shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them,
because they trust in him.


VArious, and promiscuous are the Lords dealings with the Godly and wicked in
this life; God does not infallibly feed his choicest Saints with the
sweet-meates of prosperity, and let the wicked only lie under the lash of
biting calamity, woe, and misery. No, for if prosperity did ever wait upon Gods
people, and adversity attend the ungodly, then we might easily find out the
ways of God, and know pe^fectly who were his. But says Solomon, No man
knows either love or hatred, by all that is before them; for that, all things
come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked, etc.
Eccles. 9.1, 2. That is, in the common dispensation of outward things, during
the time of Gods pl^asure. Outward providence at all times, are no infallible
rules to judge by; Gods wisdom is above our reach, we cannot say presently,
that any are in Gods favor because they thrive and prosper, nor conclude
others under a curse, because that misery and trouble does still attend them.

True it is, the children of God may more justly expect freedom and mercy from
the hand of their Father, then the servants of Satan can do; the Saints have
the Word, and the precious Promises of God to build upon, and by which God (as
I may say) is engaged to his faithful ones, which the other have not; yet the
Lord in his wisdom, and by his power, is ple^sed so to order all, that for
the exercise of graces, and the trial of faith, he often pu^s his people to
it, he many times brings them very low, he knocks away all their self-props:
that Gods precious ones many times (seemingly) lie under clouds of displeasure,
when the wicked may be thought to have all at their hearts desire. This
experienced truth has staggered not a few, and even strange believers: Dav^d,
who was endued (with almost unparalleled graces) confesses it of himself,
that upon this very ground he was at a st^nd, he could not presently tell what
to think on it, See his own words, Psalm. 37. First, here is that which amazed
honest-hearted David, I saw the prosperity of the wicked, there are no bands in
their death, but their strength is firm; they are not in trouble as other men,
neither are they plagued like other men, and verse. 3, 4, 5, to 12. And what did
this work in the thoughts of plain-meaning David? Surely sad thoughts,
declaming, and declining thoughts. Verily, I have cleansed my heart in vain,
and washed my hands in innocence, for all the day long have ^ be^^e plagued an^
chastened every morning, verse. 13, 14. This is, as i^ David should have said, I
looked that God would have been downright (...), that he would have presently
punished the wicked, and pr^spe^^d (...) own people, but I find it otherwise;
nay, clean contrary, God is ^ot so good as I looked for, and therefore I have
walked holily to little purpose. You may see how deeply this promiscuous
dealing took with David at the first, and he could not tell what to think of
God for it. Nay, further it appears, that he sat in consultation with
himself, what might be Gods meaning in it, and yet when he had wearied his
thoughts with selfe-reasonings, he could not make it out, When I thought to
know this, it was too painful for me, verse. 16. Now you may see poor David
was at a loss every way, and was almost gone, and yet here the Lord puts in
and brings him to the place and means of full satisfaction in his great^st
doubts, the Word and the Spirit, God only reveals all saving-truth, to whom
and when it pleases him. I went into the Sanctuary of God, then understood I
their end, verse. 17. David now you may see is otherwise informed, and has
reversed his hard thoughts of God, and not only sets out the g^odnesse and
kindness of God to his own people, but solemnly confesses his weakness:
truly, God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart, but as
for me, my feet were almost gone, my steps had wel-nigh slipped, verse. 1, 2.

Thus David, being better instructed, he now preaches known experience, and
for the consolation of the Church, has penned many exc^llent Psalms, of purpose
to support her in the greatest miseries. This 37 Psalm is little but a
reitteration of comfortable promises to the people of God, inter-mixt with
special directions how to behave themselves under their trials. I might be
long in opning the coherents of my Text, but I will not dwell at the door. The
whole matter of the Psalm may be considered under two head.

1. Gods gracious directions to the Saints, how to carry themselves under their
trials.

2. The diffe^ent ends which Gods will make with the wicked and the godly. I
will briefly unfold these, and this will bring you to the sense of the Text, of
which in order.

First, Gods gracious directions to the Saints, how to carry themselves under
their trials, God would not have the Saints to break out in passion against
the wicked, nor once have so much as an envious thought because of their vain
p^osperity: And hereupon faith David, Fret not thy self because of ^vill
doers, neither be thou envious against the works of iniquity. For they shall
soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb. ver, 1.2.
Which is, as if David should say, take example by me, have no hard thoughts of
God, because many times the wicked thrive, and his own people are kept under;
that enemies live on the sweet, and you taste the bitter. Let them alone with
it, grudge them not for it, it is but an empty, fading, comfortless happiness
which will presently be gone, their prosperity is but like cut grass, it will
wither presently, and then all is gone with them; earth is all the heaven they
have, therefore envy them not for that, its as little as you can wish them.

Then in the next place, David calls the Saints to a further exercise of their
grace^, three of which I will observe to you.

1. David calls the Saints to the exercise of Faith, Trust in the Lord and do
good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed, verse 3.
That is, keep to thy rule, walk closely with God, and trust him for the rest,
fear it not, verily, certainly who ever falls, thou shall stand, who ever
wants, thou shall be sweetly and fully provided for.

2. David calls the Saints to an earnest love to God, and delight in his
services, and they shall not be disappoynted of their hopes, Delight thy self
also in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart, verse. 4.
which as if David should say, notwithstanding you may have narrow thoughts of
Gods fullness, and that he spends too much on his enemies. Yet trouble not your
selves with those vain fears, whatsoever God lets out to strangers, he will
reserve enough for his children and household servants: do but you go on
cheerfully, carry on your services with love and delight, and you shall have as
much as you can or do look for, you shall have as much as heart can wish, this
is the second direction.

3. David calls the Saints to patience and contentedness, though God do not
presently manifest his approbation of their righteous and holy convers^tions to
the world; Commit thy way unto the Lord, trus^ also in him, and he shall bring
it to pass: He shall bring forth thy right^ousnesse as the light, and thy
judgment as the noone day; verse. 5, 6. That is, what ever the ignorant world
may say, and judge of thee, as erroneous, or hypocritical, and therefore hated
and despised in the eyes of God, because afflicted, and the stroke lies heavy
upon thee: yet continue thou thy integrity, and trust God with the issue; fear
it not, a discovering time shall come, when God shall put a difference between
those that serve him, and those that serve him not: This is the thi^d
direction, and so I will pass to the subject of the second part of the Psalm
now to be insisted on, viz. the different ends of the wicked and godly.

Secondly, the latter and greater part of this Psalm is taken up in the
discovery of the different ends God makes with the wicked and godly. I put the
worst first, because I had rather close up your thoughts with hopes, then
fears, but chiefly to come straight upon my Text.

First, th^n we are to take a further view of the wicked and ungodly. We have
seen their beginnings, we must also mark their ends. We cannot well judge what
the day will be, till we see how the Sun sets; This then is the business,
Cer^ainly there is some vast difference in death, and something that is far
sweete^ in the ends of the godly, then of the wicked, or else wicked men would
not desire to have the same end, who cannot abide the same-life. Yet this was
the r^quest of Baalam. Let me d^e the death of the righteous and let my last
end be lik^ his, Number. 20.10. But I need not fetch proofs so far, is heree
plain en^^gh. The^e poor wretches many times thrive in their sinful courses,
and pro^per in their pride; but alas it lasts not. They have a fair desired
Gale, but it carries them not home; The wind changes, the storm rises, and
they never come to the wished harbor. When they come to the to^ of their
hopes, they are a^ the point of destruction; Then comes in their ^n^esistable
ruin, which is both speedy and perfect, even a total and final d^solation. I
will not trouble you with pa^ticular re^^t^lls, but if you will view the T^xts.
David pass^th the doom of the wicked at least ten times in this Psalm. I will
only give you the ve^ses, and leave them to your search at leisure. viz.
2.9.10.17.20 22.28.34.36.38.

Secondly, In the next place let us see what end God makes with the Saints, his
own people. Here God has to do wi^h another gener^tion, and now he proceeds
in another course. While the wicked were in power, the Saints have had no
pe^ce; while the wicked kept up, the Sain^s were kept under; while the wicked
did prosper, the Saints lay in bondage and miser^. The Church, the Spou^e of
Christ has been all black with suffe^^ng^, but now God will cloth her with
the garments of joy and gladness. Her night i^ ^ast, her day approaches; Her
storm is over, her calm is coming; The cloud i^ broken up, and the Sun of
righteo^snesse shall appear with ^ealing in his wings. The wicked may for a
time thrive, prosper, and prevail m^ghtily against Gods people. But God has
s^i^l an eye to his, he looks ^n all the while, and will assuredly send a full
and effectual relief in due time. David is very large in repetition of many
sweet promises in this Ps^lme. If any thing will allure and persuade a Soul to
take and trust God, it is here. Here is variety of promis^s. Here are promises
repeated over and over again, to let us see that God certainly resolves t^
ma^e the^ good, and would have his people to build upon them. If I b^e no
de^eived, the promises of one so^t or other are mentioned in 14. several verses
i^ this P^alm, as 3.4.5.6.9.11.13.18, 19.22.28.29.34.37. Of these you have
th^ee ^specially noted; As a promise of plenty in the hardest times. They shall
not be ash^med in the ev^ll t^me: and in the day^s of Famine they shall b^
satisfied, verse 19. If you fear wan^, run to God, lay before him this promise.
Trust him, and he will not deceive you. H^ has promised to supply thee in the
greatest danger thou could propound, in the time of Famine. This is the
first. Secondly, here is a promise of peace, and not a ba^e peace, but a full
peace, and that presently. For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be:
Yea, ^h^u shall diligen^ly consider his place, and it shall not be. But the
meek (...) inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of
p^ace, (...) ^0.11. Wh^t can any desire more? Is not this plain? Is it not
full? The (...) of the wicked shall not be long, it shall be but a while; yet
least that (...) take, the h^ly Ghost adds thi^ pleasing Epithete, a little, a
little while, (...) ^he Saint shall have a peace without interruption, a full
peace, both (...) and manner, a peace to their hearts content. This is the
second.

Th^^dly* here is the promise of a free and full deliverance to the Church, and
least the Church should scruple at the means to accomplish it, God himself
must be undertaker: The Lord Almighty will do it, and who can doubt it? And
the Lord shall help them and deliver them: He shall save them from the wicked,
and save them because they trust in him. This is the third promise, and the
subject upon which I hope to proceed.

My Text is the substance of the Verse, though it contains not all the words.
That which I have chosen, is a sure support for the Saints in these sad times:
Wherein he pleased to observe with me these particulars.

First, the matter promised, Deliverance.

Secondly, to whom the promise runs, to the Saints, them.

Thirdly, From whom the Saints shall be delivered, from the Wicked.

Fourthly, by whom this deliverance for the Saints shall be accomplished, by
the Lord. He.

Fifthly, the certainty of this the Saints deliverance, he shall.

Sixthly, the reason why the Lord will give this full deliverance to the Saints,
because they trust in him to do it.

-- He shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them because they trust in
him.

Thus you have the parts, every of which deserves a serious view, yet for
bre^ities sake, I will draw up the sum of all into one head, which is this.

Doct. Notwithstanding all opposition, Gods people shall be the prevailing
people. God at the last will give the day to Believers, to those that trust in
him.

The point is the very sense and meaning of (...) Text, which is authority
^^ough it self, yet you shall see some of those m^^y Scriptures which clearly
holds out this truth. It cannot be denied but that the wicked may plot,
prepare, watch, and prevail much against Gods people: But they shall not
overcome them, the Church shall outstand all their storms. Look but to the
12. verse of this Psalm, and there they are plotting. The wicked plotteth
against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. Mark the expression;
The wicked plot, continue, consult, and all edged with envy; They exercise both
wit and malice, to accomplish their bloody designs upon Gods people. In the
next place you have the wicked closely pursuing the consulted plot, they are
preparing for the war, the sword is drawn, the bow is bent (such weapon^ as
the times had) and now must the Saints go to the pot, they must down as the
wicked hope. Is not this a night Popish plot? But see the words, the wicked
have drawn out the sword and bent the bow, to cast down the poor and needy,
and to slay such as be of up^ight conversation, verse. 14. Consider but this
place and you may soon see what is the mark and aim of ungodly wretches.
Again, after their plotting and preparing, you shall now find them upon their
watch. All this while the design is carried on in the dark; The poor Saints
shall not know their danger, till they feel the stroke. The wicked watches
the righteous, and seeks to slay him, verse. 32. Certainly, this design cannot
but take; yes, and take him they may, but to what purpose? He shall find
relief come in to him, the wicked shall not have power to perfect the plot,
the godly shall have an Almighty support, For the Lord will not leave him in
his hand, nor condemn him when he judged, verse. 33.

Here is a great deal of sweet comfort to the Saints in this, that God will
not leave his people, and give them up to the rage and ^ruelty of the enemy,
though they do fall into their hands. But if you observe the concurrences
well, you shall see further cause which the Saints have to trust God withal.
You heard, how cunningly the wicked carried on their design against the just
and godly, and they knew it not. But yet all the while, God eyed the bloody
intentions hatched below. The wicked were plotting as I showed you, verse. 12.
The Lord laughs at it, verse. 13. The Lord shall lauhg at him, for he sees that
his day is coming. That is, when the wicked are plotting, and hatching evil
against the Saints, God does as it were laugh, or rejoice at their folly. They
^re strangely deceived, the time which the wicked set for the Churches ruin,
shall be their own destruction. They may think otherwise, but Gods sees it
is so, and will make i^ so. For where, verse. 14. They have drawn the sword,
and bent the bow to slay the Saints. Here is the Almighties determination of
their undertakings, Their s^ord shall enter into their own heart, and their
bones shall be broken, verse. 15. What think you now of the truth of the
doctrine? I am confident, you will confess, the Churches side is the best
side, Gods people shall be the prevailing people. I might take up with this,
but for your further satisfaction I will add one proof more, and that shall
be, that comfortable speech whi^^ God would have the Prophet Isaiah to
proclaim unto Israel, Isa. 3.10, 11. Say to righteous, it shall be well with
him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. But, W^e to the wicked, it
shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands shall be given him, the
place is plain^, and makes what I would prove: That notwithstanding all
opposition, Gods people shall be the prevailing people; God at the last will
give the day to believers, let them know it, all shall go well with them.

The doctrine being clear, I will in the next place lay you down some reasons
why Gods people shall be the prevailing people, and then speedily come to
application.

1. Reason. First, at the most, God does but only suffer the wicked to get
head, and ins^lt over his own people, for the humbling and bringing of them in
to walk cl^s^lie^ with hi^. A Shepherd you know usually has his Dog in a slip
and w^e^ hi^ str^gling sheep will not come up from the slanks that will (...)
them, or w^ll nor come in upon his call or whoop, then he will loose his Dog at
them, but the Sh^pheard will be sure to run and rate the Dog, and kill him too
if he uses to bite ^ard* So d^ale^ the Lord the Great Shepherd, with his
people his sheep. The wicked, yea ^he devil himself, are but Gods curs which
he looses ^t his people, when they will not come from their sinful courses
upon the calls and threats of (...) Ministers, who are f^^quently styled
shepherds in s^cred Scripture: If they should be let alone in their sin and
security, it (...) perish them, and therefore God makes use of wicked Kings and
powers, to drive them home to him. Hence it is, that God in Scripture calls
diverse wicked ^ings his s^rvants, and he makes use of them for this very
purpose. That you may be fully informed in the truth of this, I will give you
some plain instances.

1. You may see what a fair title and large commission is puc upon
Nebuchadnezzar that wicked King, by God himself, observe the place well; it i^
Ier. 25.9. ^ehold I will send and take all the families of the North, (says
the Lord) and N^buchadnezzar, the King of Babylon (my servant) and will bring
them against the inhabitants of this land, and against all these Nation^ round
about, etc. Who God thus makes use of, and against whom he brings them, are
both plain. I must clear two things more out of this chapter, and then I will
go on.

The first of those is, the reason or ground why God calls out the King of
Babylon, a cruel persecutor against his own people, and that was for their
stubbornness and disobedience; God calls, but they will not regard, God would
feign win them by fair promises, as you may read at large, verse. 3.4.5.6. yet
they would not hearken, verse. 7. Therefore thus says ^he Lord of the Hosts,
because ye have not regarded my word^, behold, I will send, etc. verse. 8.9.
Here you have seen the justice of God.

I desire you in the next place, to consider the mercy of God toward his
people, notwithstanding their untowardnesse. The King of Babylon must come to
humble Israel; yea, and the King of Babylon did come to do Gods work, and he
did it to the purpose, as you may read a sad and story of it, Ier. 52. Now
Israel was brought to a low ebb indeed, now they were in the hand of the
enemy; yet according to the promise of God (urged before) God will not here
leave them. When the Lord gave that large commission to Nebuchadnezzar, it was
with limitation; These Nations shall serve the King of Babylon 70. years, verse.
11. And then many Nations and great Kings shall serve themselves of him, Ier.
27.7. Now then, all things considered, what has this wicked tyrant got to
himself? Gods work is done, Israel humbled, and Nebuchadnezzar must perish. I
hope this is plain, I will note but ^^e instance more and be briefer in it.

Secondly, when the children played the hypocrites, and would not be obedient to
God, God provides a rod to whip them into subjection? and who is this rod
think you? It was the King of Assyria; O! Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and
the staff in their hand is mine indignation, I will send him against an
hypocritical Nation, and against the people of my wrath will I give him a
charge to take the spoil, etc. Isa. 10.5, 6. Who could think now that ever
Israel should recover this whipping, or that ever Israel should get up, and
Assyria come down? It were indeed a hard dispute, if flesh and blood, (humane
reason) be left to argue it. But plain, Assyria was but Gods rod, and when the
children of Israel are brought into subjection, the rod may be burnt; there is
no further use of it, which is clear, and cleares the reason. Take but one
text for it and I will pass, it is Isa. 10.12. Wherefore it sha^^ ^e to pass,
that when the Lord has performed (his) whole work upon mount Zion, and on
Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the Kin^ of Assyria,
and the glory of his high look^. Thus you see, God does only suffer the wicked
to prevail for a time over his people, for the humbling and bringing of them
in. This is the first reason.

2. Reas. The second reason is drawn from the promise of God, God has
promised peace and deliverance to his Saints; and therefore it shall come, God
will not, nay, God cannot be worse then his word; God will not deceive those
that trust to him, that depend upon him. Deliverance may be deserved, but it
shall not fail: The needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation of
the poor shall not perish for ever, Psalm. 9.18. God in his wisdom may see
cause to withhold deliverance from his afflicted Saints, but he does not forget
them; they shall not perish under their burden: God will come in with
deliverance, and a seasonable deliverance too, he will not stay an hour too
long with it, It shall come in due time, 1 Pet. 5.6. It shall come in a time
when it shall do them most good. Amongst men, one that carries the esteem of
an honest man, will have a great care to keep his word, his promise, though it
may be to his loss; if he promise, he will make it good. This is one of the
marks which David describes a godly man by, He that swears to his own hurt,
and changes not, Psalm. 15.4. And do you think the great God of heaven and
earth will fall short of a godly man? No, it was a speech of Christ, Heaven and
earth may p^sse, but my word^ shall not pass away, Mark. 1^.31* That is, the
very Fabric of the world may be dashed and broken, yet God will not break his
word with the Saints; for though all these means were away, God of himself is
able to make good his promise, and will do i^; And hereupon the Apostle calls
it a sure word of promise. This is the second reason.

3. Reas. The third reason is grounded upon the power of God in himself, The
Churches deliverance shall certainly come, for God will do it himself, The
Lord ^^all help them and deliver them, the very words before my text in the
same verse. Indeed, if the Churches deliverance did lie upon men and the like
outward helps, truly there were small hopes. There is so much baseness and
treachery, even amongst many of those who pretend themselves on the Churches
side, that she is in more danger by bosom friends, then open enemies. Holy
David spoke prophetically of this, and he made it a grievous complaint. You may
see the place, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. But here is the Churches, the Saints
happiness, God has the managing of the business himself; h^ will make good
his promise, and deliver his people in despite of all; let secret enemies
seek to prolong, let open enemies plot, prepare, and watch, yet God will
discover the one, disappoynt the other, and destroy them all. He has said it,
and he will make it good, He will build up his Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail againts it, Mat. 16.18. Nay, I will tell you further, the
the Church of God shall not only out-stand all power and persecutions of the
wicked, but shall overpower them, and destroy them. I will only open one
Scripture, and I will close up the reasons; It is Dan. 2.44. And in the days
of these Kings shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed: and the Kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall
break in pieces, and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.
These words a^e full, and to the purpose if you mark them well. In this image,
which here Daniel interprets to the King of Babylon; He tells the King, that
under those four different parts of the image, was understood four
persecuting Kings or Monarchies, beginning with him first, as verse. 38.39, 40.
But, when the Lord shall have accomplished his whole work upon mount Zion,
Isa. 10.12. When the Church is fit for deliverance, even in the days of these
proud persecuting Kings, while they are yet in their power, the Lord will raise
up a Kingdom of Saints which shall never be destroyed. Again, a little after,
you have the same promise almost in the sam^ words; The Kingdom and dominion,
and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to
the people of the Saints of the most high, whose Kingdom is an everlasting
Kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him, Dan. 7.27.

Thus I hope I have now put the truth of the doctrine delivered out of dispute,
both by Scripture and undeniable reasons sufficiently proving, That Gods people
shall be the prevailing people. And now by Gods help I will fall upon the
Application.

Applic. 1. Use of R^pr^. First, this is enough to strike terror and amazement
into the hearts of those, who have any hand; any way to act, counsel, or
countenance others against the cause and people of God. I could heartily wish,
that this portion of Gods truth, might be fastened upon every door where
Malignants dwell, that so this seasonable instruction, might work in them a
sweet remorse for their God-provoking sins, or be left without ^xcu^e. Was
there ever any truth of God more plain? Do not you see what shall be the end,
the doom of all their plottings and powers, counsels, and armies, which ever
were, now are, or yet shall be against the Saints of God? What became of proud
Pharaoh and his Army, were they not drownt in the Sea? Exodus 14. What is become
of three of the four, once powe^full persecuting Monarchies, which in their
times commanded the world, as was Prophesied of by Daniel second chapter, Where
is bloody Nebuchadnezzar, which once but Jerusalem, and bore mighty sway? Where
now is cunning Cyrus, and ambitious Alexander? And I pray you, what is become
of Romes glory? What have any, nay all these got, by all the blood which they
have drawn from the Saints of God? Have they set up themselves, and pulled
down the Churches? Have they yet rooted out Religion, and worn out or wasted
the Saints of the most high? Have they yet taken away the name of a professor
(as has been a^tempted) out of this poor spot of the world? No, no, blessed
be God, the Churches enemies are destroyed, in destroying, and she lives by
dying.

Oh! (If we may yet beg it) that the Lord would open the eyes, and soften the
heart of our King to consider this; Alas, alas, little does the King and his
party know, what they lose by that they call getting: that which they think
helps them, undoeth them. You may think I speak strange paradoxes, but I
will clear it to you. I say, victories destroy the enemy two ways.

First, a victory got by the enemy, fills their hearts with cruelty, their
mouth^ with blasphemy, and fires them on to destruction.

That this may not seem a fancy of my brain, I will give you Scripture*
proof, examples from the word: A victory got by the wicked, fills their heart^
with cruelty. Having once dipped their hands in blood, being blooded (as we
said by dogs) they grow bold and desperate, they grow hardy and expert in
murder, they are less merciful, and more cruel every battle more then
other. See in the King of Babylons Army, when they came against Jerusalem: At
the first victory, or at the first taking of Jerusalem, Nebuchadnezzar took
the King prisoner, and put the City to a fine. 2 Chronicles. 36.6, 7. But when he
laid Siege the second time, and took Jerusalem, observe what a fearful
desolation he made of that glorious City, He slew their young men with the
sword, in the house of their Sanctuary (where there lives should have been
saved) and had no compassion on the young man, or maiden, old man, or him that
stooped for age. And they burnt he house of God, and brake down the wall of
Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and abundance of the
like inhumaine cruelty, as you may read at large in this very chapter. Again,
victories fill the mouths of the wicked with blasphemy against God, cause them
either wholly to deny the power and essence of God, or at least to vilify the
Lord Almighty. This was the very ground of Rabshakehs blasphemy, when he would
have drawn the people from Hezekiah, and this was his blasphemy; Let not
Hezekiah make you trust in the Lord, saying; The Lord will surely deliver us,
and this City shall not be delivered into the hand of the King of Assyria, 2
King. 18.30. Whence fetches he this? From the many victories his master had
got, which he instances in. Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? and the
like. Who are they among all the Gods of the Countries, that have delivered
their Country out of mine hand? That the L^^d should deliver Jerusalem out of
my hand, 2 King. 18.34, 35. And then lastly, power and pride fires on the
wicked to their own destruction, because they prevail once, they think to
prosper always; this was the destruction of the King of Ai and his City,
because Israel was routed in one assault at Ai (when they had an Achan amongst
them) the men of Ai think Israel must always have the worst. This was
discovered to Israel by Ioshuah when he made his second attempt, and gave order
for the laying of his Ambush. They will (says he) come out after us, till we
have drawn them from the City: for they will say, They flee before us as at
the first, Josh. 8.5, 6. And so accordingly, they did even to their utter ruin
at that very time, as you may read in the sequel of the chapper. Thus I have
given you undeniable testimony of this truth: but indeed, I needed not to have
gone so ^ar for proof, one days conference with the Kings caves, would give
you full assurance of what I said. This is one of the ways in which the King
loses by getting; a word of the second and I will proceed.

I said in the second place, the King loses by that which he calls getting, by
the victories he gets over (his Subjects) but Gods Saints. In all this, the
people of God are more fitted for deliverance, and the cause is extremely
forwarded. What earnest prayers are now put up? What deep groans, and
pleading-blood, goes daily to God by this means? The King had better to have a
whole Army of men against him, then the blood of one Saint; These Saints which
the King has slain, fight with him night and day. They are now with God in
heaven, and they are continually hastening and moving God to fulfill his
promises, and avenge their blood. I pray you see how the Text is to prove this,
Rev. 6.9, 10. I saw under the Altar the (Souls) of them who were slain for
the Word of God, and for the testimony which they held. And they cried, (yea)
with a loud with voice, saying; How long, O Lord, holy and true, do^st thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell in the earth? You may see, all
this does but help on the cause of God, and bring i^ the Saints faster to the
Lord. The harder the stroke, the louder they cry; the sharper it is, the more
it humbles, the more it fits, and then is deliverance the nearer. Tell me now,
does not this tremble your Malignants spirits? ^s not this a strange cause
which the enemies themselves help forward, and do the Saints most good, where
they intend the greatest hurt? Thus much for matter of reproof.

2. Use of Admon: My second use shall be for Admonition. To admonish all to
take heed for the time to come, of so much as having an ill thought of the
Cause of God or the people of God, for what ever you intend for them, shall
befall your selves, as I have already delivered: and further, all that ever you
are abl^ to do, cannot hinder God for going on with the work. You may
counsel, encourage, fight, and sometimes prevail too, as I have showed; yet
all shall come to naught, and you will be found but to fight against God, and
therefore it was your wisest course to sit still, and let Gods business go
on, let this Church-worke we are now about, go freely on and be done. This is
not only my counsel, for it was the advice of a great Statist in the like
case. When the Apostles were about Church-Worke, preaching up a Reformation,
the Jews made strong opposition. They imprisoned, God delivered; This would
not do, and then they thought to silence them by death, they had determined to
kill the Apostles; But now steps in Gamaliel and tells them it was far better
for them to let them alone, and he gives them very good reason for this his
admonition. And now (says he) I say unto you, refrain from these men, and let
them alone: for if their counsel or their work be of men, it will come to
naught. But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found
even to fight against God, Acts 5.38, 39. The Devil may delude you, that you
may think you do God great service in killing these Roundheads, and destroying
this factious generation; Yea, Christ himself said as much when he was alive,
he then foretold what since is come to pass, John 16.2. Yet woe be to them
that do it: you may think i^ a strange speech, but it is true. It was better
for a man to have his tongue pulled out of his head, then to speak against the
Saints of God; It was better for one to dye, then to have a hand in the death
of one poor Christian: And Jesus Christ makes good what I affirm, for I raise
my speeche^ from his words. Who so shall offend one of these little ones which
believe in (...), it were better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea, Math. 18.6. Now do you
believe that this is the Word of God, and that there is any truth in it? Then
you must conclude it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living
God, by hurting the Saints or hin^ering Gods Cause if they could.

Object. But how shall I know that the Parliaments Cause is Gods Cause, and
those which join with them are more Gods people, then on the other side.

Ans^. Alas, it is the plainest thing in the world, and if yet you know it not,
I will endeavor to clear it, and the Lord set it home upon your hearts. I
will not burden your memories with abundance, but only give you an infallible
mark of the Child of God, I pray diligently observe the words of Jesus Christ
himsefe. I am the good Shepherd and know my sheep, and am known of mine, John
10.14. Known of mine, will you say, what is that? That is, Christ's Sheep,
Christ's flock know him so as to hear his voice, and obey his command^, they
will not follow strange men, nor st^ange and un^arranted ways, ver. 45. They
will hear Gods Word, and endeavor to know Gods will in any thing, and then on
they go. These all speak one language, looking still upon God. That which
thou command, that will we do; And whether thou sendest us, thither will we
go. Now then do but you consider whether of the Forces now raised in this
Kingdom goes the nearest to this rule, and the business is easily decide^.
Who is it that would submit to the Word and rule of God? And who is it that
would rule by prerogative? Who is it that has set upon the work of
Reformation? And who it has said they shall not, and he will not Reform
furthen he pleases? Who is it that are d^sirous to preserve the people of God,
and defend themselves in temple-worke by all lawful means? And who is it that
musters up all the bloody Papists which can be got in this and other Kingdoms,
even making peace with proclaimed Traitors, and from time to time brought them
into England, because they were expert murderers, to destroy his own faithful
Subjects? Truly, I am ashamed to rifle into the King-fins of these times, and
I will forbear, only as the Minister of God, in Soule-businesse I must speak
out, that by my silence I become not guilty of others blood. The Lord help you
to close with the truth, for I protest, if God should have seen it good, to
have brought in Christ into our Kingdom another way, it would have been the
joy of my soul (and many others) to have spoken more and better for our King
then now I can. But I will sweeten this bitter subject with brevity, and now
pass into another point which is much more pleasing, and therefore I hope
length will be delight.

3. Use of Exhort. The third use is of Exhortation. If Gods people shall be the
prevailing people, if God will work deliverance for them, then be exhorted to
labor after a right, an intrest in Jesus Christ, or else you shall have no
share with the Saints. You know all the old world was drownt which was not in
the Arc, Genesis 7.23. So all shall perish that not saved in the A^ke Christ
Jesus, That was a Tipe of this. Nay, I will come nearer to you; unless you be
incorpo^ated into Christ, unl^sse he be yours, there is not any thing you have
will do you any good. Whatsoever God gives to the Church, to his Saints, will
not make you happy, you have no part in it. That which the Saints may rejoice
in, for the very same you shall grieve, yea, it will your sorrow, even the
excellency of your gifts and parts will perish you. Those things which are
blessings to the Saints, are curses to the wicked, they will help damn them
lower in hell. You may think I go far, but I go not beyond my rule; I have
the word of Jesus Christ for what I say. The Scribes and Phar^sees were men of
admirable parts, much wit, and great learning; yea, they used praying, and made
long prayers too: yet these being not sanctified to them, they were but the
more able to do evil, and therefore pressed them deeper into hell. Who unto
Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, for y^^ devour widows houses, and for a
pretense m^ke long prayers: (what then?) therefore ye shall receive the
greate^ damnation, Mat. 23.14. The like you have from Christ in another place,
where he up^raids the Cities of Co^azin, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, for their
security in sin; notwithstanding the rich means of grace which God had given
to them above others, and therefore tells them that their judgments shall be
more sharp then others. Jesus Christ begins his speech to them, Mat. 11. verse.
20. But those I will refer to your examination, and only instance and explain
the 23. verse. Christ's words are these: And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to
heaven, shall be brought down to hell; for if the mighty works which have
been in thee, had been done in Sodome^, it would have remained until this
day. Jesus Christ speaking to the other Cities, gives them their doom in the
former verses; but here tur^ing ^o Capernaum, he speaks to her with an
Emphesis: But thou C^pernaum* As if Je^us Christ should say, W^e unto thee
Corazin, wo^ unto the^ Be^hsaida, etc. but woe, woe, wo^ to thee Copernaum
which art exalted to heaven, who have had means above all the rest, means
which might have brought thee to heaven, such means as would have converted,
and so saved Sodom it self to this day; even these means will make th^e most
miserable, and carry thee fu^ther into hell th^n Sodomes sins will do her: It
shall be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom^ in the day of judgment, then
for thee, verse. 24.

I beseech you, who ever you be, consider this for the Lords sake, take heed of
neglecting, abusing either means or gifts. What a miserable case are those in
which have not Christ, when parts, Sermons, Sacraments, all increase damnation?
On the other side, is not Christ, despised Christ, worth the having, which
helps all, gives a right to all, guides in all? I have here a large subject to
treat off, and I hope you will not expect that I should be very brief, being
such a Christ-concerning point, a soule-concerning point, but that I should
fully open it before I pass. I might indeed run out into many parts, but I
will contract my thoughts, and handle only some particulars, which shall be
these.

First, I will endeavor to discover and set out, the wretched estate of the
wicked who are out of Christ, and then come to show the excellency of the
Saints privileges, who have a right and interest in Jesus Christ. I will after
this lay down some directions for the use of the Saints, as certain special
helps to bring a soul to Christ, and close up all with some choice Motives.

I must begin with the less pleasing part, the wretched estate of the wicked,
who have interest in Christ. But this has its use as w^ll as the other. Nay,
it will help much to the other. The danger of the one, will move a gracious
spirit to look out for the other. The Law (says Paul) was our school^-master
to bring us to Christ, Gal. 3.24. That is, the terrors of the Law show us our
need of Christ; the law sends us to seek relief in the Gospel. I will then
begin there. I must tell you, that wicked men, who have no right, no interest
in Christ, have no right to any thing that is Gods; I mean no such right as
savingly to do them good, to be bettered by them; and I will instance in some
par^^culars and explain them apart

1. Wicked men who are out of Christ, have no proper right to the common
c^eatu^es; I say, they have no good ^ight to do them good, take what creatures
you will; but I will instance in two sorts of creatures, and by those you you
may conceive of the r^^h of the ^^st.

^i^st, wicked men ^ave no right to those creatures which sustaines life, not
to their very victuals which they put in their b^llies. They have them indeed,
but it is with a curse, as i^ plain by that Prophe^^ck speech of David, Psalm.
69.22. and cited by Paul, Romans 11.9. The words a^e these: Let their Table
become a sna^e before them: and that which should have been for their welfare,
let it become a trap. That is, let them not have a san^tified use of the
creatures brought to their Tables, and then they must needs be as so many
snares. A ca^nall man cannot bridle nature, but it will fall into excess of
Riot, Dru^kennesse, or Gluttony. I s^y, hence it is, that so many dishonor God
and abuse him; yea, destroy bodies and souls, by; and in the abuse of the
creatures; Drunkenness and Gluttony are certain signs of a man unregenerate.
The man you see guilty of these, you may say i^ not a chri^tia^ as yet he he
has no right, no interest in Christ, he is in a sad cond^tion. And if you will
descend into other, nay, any thing which God has appoynt^d for the good of his
own people, as wivies, children, servants, friends, or what you will? Says
the holy Ghost, Let that, or th^se very things be trape; That is the
expression, and you know a trap is to destroy. So by this ^ule the faithful
Ministers and Preachers, (the greatest gift that ever God gave to his people,
next to Jesus Christ) are but tra^s to wicked men; the very preaching of the
Word hurts them, it carries them deeper into hell, then though they had never
Sermon; for now, after this, they have nothing to plead for themselves. These
are Jesus Christ own words: If I had not come and spoken (...) on him, they had
not had sin* (That is co^pa^^tively) but now (the word has been revealed)
they have no cloak (nothing to excus^, or plead) for their sins: Ioh. 15.22.
The word was not sent to the wicked, only for the cleaning of Gods justice,
and their further condemnation. They have not a proper right to it, but the
Word and Ministers was chiefly for the Elects sake. God has his precious
Saints dispersed into all Kingdoms and Countries, and therefore the Apostles
must go preach i^to all Nations, Mat. 28.19. But the maine end of Gods
endowing his Ministers with variety of parts and employments, was for the good
of Saints. The Apostle Paul is clear in it, for when he would magnify the
love and care of Christ, in the greatest gift which now he desires to bestow
upon the Saint^, is this; And he gave some Apostles: and some Prophets: and
some Evangel^sts: and some Pastors: and Teachers, Ephe. 4.11. And to what end
think you were all these given? It follows in the first word of the next
verse, for the perfecting of the Saints. And if you do but observe the
Dedication, or direction of all Paul's Epistles, and so the other Apostles, all
to the Churches, all to the Saints in Christ Jesus. I will amongst all, g^ve
you one or two, that you may be fullier persuaded of the Saints privile^ge^ by
being in Christ. First see the words of Paul, writing to the Church of C^rinth,
1 Epist. 1 chap. verse. 12. Paul called to be an A^^st^e of Jesus Christ, etc.
unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, (and who are those Church m^mb^^s?)
To them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Sai^^s, etc. So
again in his Epistle to the Ephesians, this is his direction. Paul, an Apostle
of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, to the Saints which are at Ephesus, and to
the faithful in Christ Jesus, Eph^. 11. That the Saints are in the eye of
Christ, he is still looking upon them, and therefore the Apostles and faithful
Ministers of Christ, have their hearts with the Saints where ever they be,
whether present or absent, the Saints are cared for, they are daily mentioned
at the Throne of Grace. The Saints privileges more then others, they above
others, and so much for the first particular.

In the second place, wicked men and women, who have no trust in Christ, have
^o right to the Sacraments, the ordinances of the Lords Supper, and baptism do
not belong to them, they hurt and harm them in the use of them by usurpers, I
would feign have a wicked man, who has no true saving-faith, (and sow no
interest in Christ) to use one Text in all the Bible^, which gives him a right
to these holy ordinances, and yet an unbeleever. For my part, I know not a
letter in the Scripture which gives the least allowance to any such, but much
to the contrary. Paul is very exact noting out the Israel of God, Rom 9. and
puts a difference both in persons and privileges. They are not all Isra^l that
are of Israel: Neither because they are the seed of Abraham, are they all
children: But in Isaac shall thy seed be called, verse. 6.7. And these are the
true Israelites indeed, to whom pertains the Adoption, and the glory, and the
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises,
verse. 4. There is no great difficulty in the Apostles expressions, but yet he
cleares it, and puts it out of all dispute in another place, Gal. 3.16. Now
(says the Apostle) To Abraham and his seed were the promises made, He says
not, and to seeds, as of many, but as of one, and to thy seed, which is
Christ. The Apostle here, writing to the revolting Galathians, takes them up
sharply for leaving the faith, and hanging upon the Law, plainly showing, that
believers are the seed of Abraham, verse. 7. Yet least after all, they should
still rest in security out of some unbottomed and false hopes of being Abraham's
seed: Paul declares who they are, as if he should say, indeed the promises were
made to Abraham and to his seed; all things that are contained in these
promises, are the privileges of Abraham's seed, but yet not to all his seed
neither. When God made the Covenant to Abraham, he did not say to thy seeds,
(for so many would have been contained) but of thy seed (Genesis 17.10.) which is
Christ: All the promises, and all the privileges in the promises, belong only
to Christians, as they are believers, and tru^t God upon his promises.
Church-ordinances are the Churches, belonging to, and the proper right of
Church Members. Wicked men, Hypocrites may put on a face; an outside of
profession, and for a time may get to the Lords Supper amongst his Saints, but
such had better forbear. They are usurpers, they have no right to this
marriage Supper, They eat and drink their own damnation; not having faith to
discern Christ, 1 Cor. 11.29. And so for baptism, wicked and unbeleevers have
no right to it, nor their Children. It is a peculiar privilege of the Saints,
of believers. I do not observe that the Apostles did ever administer this
Ordinance to any but believers. When the Eunuch asked Philip, (saying) what
does hinder me to baptized? Philip said, If thou beleevest with all thy heart,
thou may, Acts 8.36, 37. Upon this ground the Jailer and his household were
baptized, Acts 16.30.33. Upon this ground Peter told the Jews that they might
be baptized, and further adds that unto such believers the promises did
pertain. For the promise is to you and to your children, and to all that are
afar of, even as many as the Lord your shall call, Acts 2.38.39. That i^, all
you Jews who act faith in your repentance, and are desirous to reform, and now
close with Jesus Christ, you may be baptized into that faith, for baptism is
one of your Privileges. It is yours* you have a right to it by promise. Yea,
and further, your children have a right to it also by his promise to you. It is
a privilege God give^ to the children of Believers. I find not a jot of
comfort, not a bit o^ promise in all the holy Scriptures, but only to such as
shall be convinced and converted, and so brought in to God, pardoned and
privileged by Jesus Christ. I dare not desemble, I dare not cry peace peace,
when security in ignorance and sin may bring damnation to your souls. The Lord
give you hearts to receive the truth in the same love and sinc^rity as I
deliver it to you, and so I come to the last particular.

Thirdly and lastly, the wicked who have no interest in Christ, can have no
share in the Churches peace. When the Lord shall make up this promise, and
deliver those that trust to him, the wicked shall have no part with Gods
people. The wicked are not within the promise. Nay God has promised the
contrary: There is no peace to the wicked says my God, Isa. 48.22. When times
of peace, riches, and honor, and liberty given to the Saints, when the Gospel
times so long promised to the Churches, shall come? Then will the wicked
miseries of the wicked begin; Then shall their times of sorrow and sadness
come in; They will but then enter. I need not seek far for Scripture proofs
of these trueths; It is very plain all along in this 37. Psalm, but that you
may know there is other clear Texts for the purpose. Take some time to read
the seven Chap. of Dan. with the 18. and 19. Chap. of the Revelation. All these
do fully hold out what I intend, viz. The wickeds misery, and the Churches
glory, when the day of deliverance comes, all is for the Saints, and against
the ungodly. Reforming times, are discovering times; Though Gods people have
lain low, and long under reproach and persecutions, yet God will raise them up,
and bring down their upholders. The Saints are Gods Jewels, yea his precious
Jewels, though they have lain amongst dross. And when his refining tim^ comas?
when God sets to purge and reform Kingdoms, God will have a special care of
his Saints, he will spare them, as a tender Father spares his own son. Then
will God make an apparent difference, that others may doscerne b^tweene the
godly and the wicked, M^l. 3.17.18.

Loving friends, I pray you now take up a little time to sit in consultation
with your own hearts; I beseech you consider of what importance and nec^ssity
this my most serious exhortation is, to labor for an interest in Christ;
Without Christ you are nothing, nay you are wo^se then nothing; You had better
never to have had a being in this ^i^e, then merely to live and dye, and go to
h^ll, and that you must do, if you go not to heaven by Christ. Ther^ is no
other means, no other ways, but only by Jesus Christ. They are Jesus Christ's
own words, I am the way the true^h and the life, no man comes to the Father
(...) by me, John 14.6. And who wo^ld not now desire ^nclose with Christ, and
love Christ, and walk wi^h Christ? Yea, who would not be rouled u^, and wholly
enclosed in Christ, where there dwells so much sweetneste, s^ much f^llness^,
so much freedom? What a deep engagement has a Christian to become ^ll
Christ's, while Christ is all in all to him? we have not these glorious
privileges as men and women, but as Christians, as being members of Christ,
And thus we have a right to the creatures, friends, Ministers, Ordinances,
Peace, or what ever may do us good; There is a full place which I have reserved
to prove what I have so much pressed. I pray you observe it and remem^er it,
and the very Text is one of the things expressed in the words which shall be
yours. Whether P^ul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or
things present, or things to come (name what you can) all are yours, 1 Cor.
3.22.23. Is not th^^ a sweet and plain Scripture? But where comes in all this
privilege. Have you this by nature, or purchase? (I mean your own merit) have
you this from Adam? No, no in Adam all dye, but in Jesus Christ we are made
alive; Here comes in the Saints privileges to all: All are yours, because ye
are Christ^, and Christ is Gods.

Object. But if all these privileges belong chiefly to the Saints, to the
Christians, are they only interested in them, by being in Christ, how then is
it that the wicked (f^r the most part) possess more of the world, then the
godly do?

Answ. This objection I have partly answered all along, but now l will
e^deavour to speak fully to it; First you know its a general maxim; To every
thing there is a season, and a time to every pu^pose under the S^n, Eccles.
3.1. And of these, there is a time to weep, and a time to laugh, verse. ^. A
t^me to get, and a time to lose, verse. 6. This is Gods own order, and he will
observe^, I pray you mark here: There is a time to mourn, and a time to laugh,
verse. 4. This is the Saint^ part. There is a time to get, and a time to lose,
verse. 6. That is the doom of the wicked. Search all Histories, and the Church
has had small beginnings, but strong oppositions; few friends, many enemie^,
little peace, much trouble; small joy* great sorrow; This has hitherto been^
the Churches condition, as you may see by all Prophetical Emblemes of
weakness. The Church in many places is but compared to a woman; Amongst all,
do but read Rev. 12. There the Church is called a woman, a woman in travail,
which yet deno^es greater weakness, and accompanied with pain and sorrow; Yet
this poor pained travel^ing woman is now persecuted by a cruel and powerful
^nemie.

This has hitherto been the Churches condition; She has had her time of
mou^ning (since Christ) 1600. and ode years, and therefore now she may look
for her time, her time of rejoicing. It is her right, she may expect it; It is
Gods promise, she may claim it. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy,
Psalm. 126.5. The Church has had a l^ng wet seed time, she has watered her
plants to the purpose; and therefore a full and happy Harvest of peace and
plenty must needs be near, blessed be God, when we look up, when we look
above our blood and miseries, and eye God, the times look white, as if the
Harvest of deliverance was at hand, for the Churches of the Lord in these parts
of Europe. And who ever lives, shall see our present troubles to have a
powerful effect through all christian world. This I say is the Churches, the
Saints time, their part. Now we will view the adverse part, the other side, and
observe the time of the wicked. The wicked you know were ever opposed to the
godly, and so is their condition. The Saints have a hard entrance, but a happy
issue. The wicked is clean contray. They have a plain and easy path, but
death and hell are at the end. They have a time to get, and ^^me to lose. They
have had a long time of getting. Not to look back into the old Testament, where
the four persecuting Monarchies were all prophesied of by Daniel, ch^p. 2. and
answerably had their times, as the Chaldean Monarchy, the Persian and Midean
Monarchy, the Grecian Monarchy; I will only speak of the Roman Monarchy, that
mingle-mangle of Iron and clay, Temporal and Spiritual (as they call it)
Emperor and Pope, though they would not hold together amongst themselves being
of diverse natures, yet they have still agreed to continue pers^cuting of Gods
Saints. That has gone on for above 1600. years. They have been giving upon
the Saints almost all this while; and therefore now its no more but just with
God to bring their time of losing. Saints, cheer up you hearts; ply God with
your prayers, you shall prevail. Blessed be God, your enemies have been of
the decaying, losing hand a pretty while; they have lost in Scotland, that you
know, they have lost in England, that you know, and they shall lose and lose,
till they have lost all; It is their part, God has allotted it to them, and
they shall have it. Yea, fe^r it not, God will do it; He has promised it, and
he will perform it. I am loath to be tedious, or I could draw you to a full
view of the wickeds ruin. In the Revelation, if you will but read and mark
part of two chapters in this book, you shall there have as much as I have
said. In the 17. chap. you have a large description of the Whore in all her
glory, and chap. 18. verse. 2. there is her destruction. I will leave this unto
your more serious thoughts, and now proceed to the more full answer of the
Objection.

In the second place I answer, that the all-wise God may have many and sound
reasons, (and that for the good of his Saints) to suffer the wicked to prosper,
and put much of these outward things into their hands, I will give you some of
them.

1. Answ. First, though God suffer the wicked to th^ive long, and have a great
measure of these ea^thy outward things, yet it is not with the like right which
the Saints have them by, men out of Christ have only outwa^d things by a
general providen^e, they have not so good a^ight and full title to any thing
as the Saints have, and I will show you how they differ.

First, wicked men, unbeleevers, men out of Christ, may have much put into
their hands, when God intends to make use of them; yet it is only as they are
subservient unto his glory in the Saints good. They shall have little comfort
in what they have, while they have it; they have them with much trouble and
disquiet. There is many times, eve^ a hell in great men houses, because God
bestows not outward things upon them out of love, not to do them good. But
the Saints have all from the love of God in Christ. Though they have never so
little, yet they are happy, they live comfortably; what they have does them
good. Hence was that proverbiall speech of Solomon, Prove. 15.16. This is the
difference.

Secondly, the wicked men out of Christ, have no right to any thing that is
Gods, by virtue of any promise from God. They are not in Covenant with God, and
so God is not theirs, nor engaged to them by promise, only what he bestows upon
them by courtesy and mere providence. It was Gods expression to Abraham, I
will give to thee and to thy seed, etc. Genesis 17.8. Now believers are the seed
of Abraham, they are in Coven^^^ with God, they may claim a privilege as
children, they have a right by promise from God. This is the second difference.

Thirdly, the wicked who have not Christ, have all they possess without
Christ, they have the gift, without God; They have the gifts without grace to
use them, and then you may know how it will go with them. You know it will do
a man little good to have a whole shop full of curious tools, and know not how
to used them, But the Saints have God and the gift, yea God in the gift. They
have the holy Spirit brought along in ever mercy, which will help them to
manage all, and guide them in all, and so sweetens all to them* turns all to a
happy and blessed use, that all is for their good. It is the promise of Jesus
Christ, and he will see it made good to his Saints. The Comforter, which is the
holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, John 14.6. This is the 3, difference. I will now come to the second
answer to the objection.

2 A^sw. 2. God may suffer the wicked to have great power to get into much
strength, the better and more effectually to do his work. You know it is not a
little common fire that will melt gold. It must be a strong fire, a hot fire:
Now Gods Saints in Scripture, are compared to gold, and though gold (the
chiefest of mettalls) yet it has dross, which must be purged out and taken
away, Isa. 1.25. That is, even the best of Gods Saints have many sins and
corruptions which must be purged out in the fire of af^l^ctions; And for this
purpose God makes use of wicked Kings and great men, and in this sense God
calls them his servants, as I mentioned at large in the Reasons. Alas, the very
greatest and sharpest persecutions that ever the wicked raised, did the Saints
good; it exercised their graces, refined them, and made them shine bright.
Though persecutions and wastings may seemingly appear to threaten the ruin of
the Church, the people of God, Yet the same hand which permits them, turns for
the good of the Saints, they are necessary, the Saints could not be without
them. God sees this, and therefore God suffers the wicked to hate his people
that they should not fall in love with the world; That is dangerous, that will
undo them indeed.

That which the wicked does, does do the Saints good: It fills up the measure
of their own sin, and prepares the Saint^ for mercy. Consider all well, and
you shall find that the Churches enemies, are her friends; their persecutors
are her promoters, they help on the Lords work mightily; all the plottings
and powers of the enemy shall promote Gods business which he has in hand
mightily. God makes use of all their wits parts and powers, for the advancement
of his glory and the Churches good; though the wicked do it out of self ends,
and intend nothing less then Gods service and the good of his people; yet God
does (and they shall perish when they have done) too. I will give you clear
texts for what I say; see it first in the 10. of Isaiah, there God seems
mightily to be taken with the King of Assyria as though now he would set up
him, and give up Israel into his hand; he shall have the whipping and beating
of poor Israel, ver. 5, 6. now the King of Assyria thinks all is his own, but
little imagines what God has in it; he intends one thing and God another; he
intends to destroy Israel and set up himself. God intends only Isreal's
correction and the Assyrians ruin: God calls out the King of Assyria only to
whip Israel out of hypocrisy into sincerity; how be it, he (the King of
Assyria) means not so, neither does his heart think so, but it is in his
heart to destroy, ver. 7. and does the King effect his desires? no, no, he does
Gods work under self-seeking, and when that's done which God looks for, when
^srael i^ humbled and brought in to the Lord, Assyria shall smart for it; when
the Lord has performed his whole work upon Mount Zion, I will punish the fruit
of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, ver. 12. Self-seekers may do Gods
business, but you see what they find, God may make use of the wicked great
ones of the world the more effectually to accomplish what he intends, and yet
they are not betterd by it; in the end God whips them with their own rod. This
the second Answer.

Thirdly, God may suffer the wicked outwardly to prosper and get into great
strength and power, to show and make known his power in delivering his people
from them, when they are mighty. We account it nothing, its not worth speaking
on, to see a Giant, a great strong man to wind and turn a little stick out of
the hand of a little Boy, a poor child; but it would be recorded for a
wonder, to see such a child, violently to take a weapon out of the hand of a
Giant; it would not have been mentioned for a miracle if Goliath had killed little
David with his sword and his club; but here is the wonder, that little David
should kill Goliath with a stone out of a sling a boys play, 1 Samuel 17.48 49.
And who think you did the wonder? Truly it was not little David, he will not
make such an encoun^er of himself, he will not own the attempt nor take upon
him the killing of Goliath, but he says, God will do it and do it by him too.
This day will the Lord deli^^r thee unto my (...) (and (...) then) and I will
smite thee and take thy head from thee, etc. ver. 46. I tell you God is not
seen, but in difficult things where God must do the business, or the work
is undone; if God do not more then man can do, man will no^ confess its God
who does it; this is not only the fault of men, common men, but of the best
men, it is a fault of Gods people; God himself speaks of it, I presume you
know the place, Iud. 7.2. Now therefore that he may be owned in delivering his
Saints, he will suffer the wicked to get into great strength and power: You may
see it evidently in the case of Isreal's deliverance out of Egypt: God had
promised Israel to bring them to Canaan, yet he would have them know it was he
which did it^ and what course does God take to make Israel sensible of what he
intended to do for them? if you mark the History, you shall find that God
raises up a potent enemy to oppose and oppress, that so his power might be
more manifest in Isreal's deliverance. These are the words of God spoken to
Pharaoh King of Egypt, who would not let Israel go to Canaan, but kept them
long in bondage. In very deed, for this cause have I raised thee up (given
power and strength into thy hand) for to show in thee my power, and that my
Name may be declared throughout all the earth, Exodus 9.16. Which is as if God
should say, if Israel did not meet with some opposition in their journey to
Canaan, if it proved not a difficult business, I should be little looked at;
but I have therefore raised up thee Pharaoh, and have hardened thy heart to such
a pitch of cruelty toward them, that now when they are in streights, when they
are overpowered and cannot help themselves now they may find experimentally of
what strength and power I the Lord almighty am of, in working this great
deliverance for my poor helpless people, and I shall by this have the fame of
my goodness and greatness spread abroad, that others may love and fear me.
And now I hope I have fully and clearly answered the Objection, I will in the
next place come to lay down some directions how a poor soul may get to
Christ.

When I here speak of directions or rules, whereby a poor soul is brought to
have acquaintance with Christ, and so by faith a right and interest in all that
is Chists; I would be understood that I do not attribute the work of Gods
free Grace upon the soul to man endeavor, as though I put Salvation into his
will and power, but my intention is (so near as God shall enable me) to set
you in the way, and direct you to the use of such means and helps, as God has
revealed in his Word, and through the sanctification of his spirit, makes them
effectual for the bringing of the soul to Christ, and working of an assurance
in that soul that Christ is his; this being presupposed I proceed.

Direct. 1. If thou have any desire after Christ, to have Christ thine; if thou
would have this cleared to thee, I would have thee to study self; my meaning
i^, I would have thee learn to know thy self under a double condition, in a
twofold estate, under these Notions. First, thy nothing, thy worse then
nothing, and these explain thus; first, learn to know thy nothing, the
frailty of thy ourward man, thy body, thy mortal body, look back upon the
matter and composition whereof thou art made, and this will help discover to
thee the need of Christ. The very first and perfectest man that ever was in the
world (except God-man, the man Christ Jesus) was at best (in his body) but
Adam, red earth, he was but a little foulded dust, that was the matter whereof
he was made, and into that he must again be dissolved; dust thou art, and to
dust shall thou return, Genesis 3.19. Hare's a small business to be proud on,
here is a poor matter to glory in, here is a weak foundation to build upon for
a long life, and after repentance; what is a dust-heap? you know well a shoure
of rain will dissolve it, a blast of wind will scatter it; and such is the
matter of all our bodies, a very nothing; if there had not been a word more in
all the Bible, this had been enough to manifest the bodies mortality; but the
al-wis^ God which knows best the deceitfulness of our hearts to believe such
truth against our selves, would not leave it without a full discovery: Hence it
is, that in all the course of the Scriptures, the nothing of man's life, the
natural being of the body here upon earth, is so frequently compared to
nothings; that you may the better know the certainty of what I say, I will pick
up some here and there. Job compares man but to a flower (nay not to a Flower
in his full groth and in lhe time it would last, but to a flower) that is cut
down; (and as if in this expression, man's mortality was not yet sufficiently
discribed; Job likens man's life to another nothing, to a more mere nothing a
shadow, and as though the nothing were not yet fully cleared, he adds this
epethite of this nothing) fleeting) he sleeth also like a shadow and continues
not, Job 14.2. Here you see how sensible Job was of all men's mortality, and so
of h^s own with the rest; but mark I pray you what use he makes of this, All
the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come, ver. 14. that
is, I find the nothing, the frailty of uncertain, and yet un-regainable life,
there is no living again to live better when a man is once dead and dissolved;
I will therefore take the present time* I will prepare and make my self ready
for the Lord, that when the time which God has determined is come. I may have
nothing to do but dye: David also has many the like expressions to the same
purpose, but I will not insist upon them, only give a touch upon one or two
and so pass, Psalm. 102. David equals his life but to a shadow, and a shadow
declining; to grass and that not green, but withered; My days are like a
shadow that declineth, and I am withered like grass, ver. 11. Again, David
Psalm. 39. is computing the length of his life by measure, and then draws his
conclusion upon it; if you know not the place, you will wonder much at David's
Geomatry, and more at the strangeness of his conclusion; he sets all at a low
rate, he measures his life but at a hands breadth, and calls it a nothing, a
vanity: Behold thou have made my days as an hand breadth, and mine age is a^
nothing before thee: Verily (not I, but) every man (not at some low ebb at the
worst, but) at his best estate is altogether vanity, ver. 5. But what effect
did this work upon the heart of David? you shall see, it put him to lay out
unto the Lord for help, it brings him to his prayers; and now Lord what wait I
for? my hope is in thee, ver. 7. And again, Hear my prayer O Lord, and give
ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at my tears for I am a stranger with thee
and a sojourner as all my Fathers were; O spare me a little, that I may recover
my strength, before I go hence and be no more seen, ver. 12, 13. Thus in the
first place, study thy nothing. Secondly, learn to know thy worse then
nothing, study to know the dangerous estate and condition of thy soul in
respect of sin; recollect thy thoughts and call to mind what shall become of
thy soul if thou have not a Savior; look to it as well as you can, thou have
two weights hanging up thy soul, the least of which will drag thee to hell, if
there be not help: Thou have the burden of original sin, and that is death;
In Adam all dye, 1 Cor. 15.22. that is, as we by nature come from Adam, so by
nature we lie guilty of his sin, and by the sin derived from Adam, we lie
liable to eternal death; this is one heavy weight. Then again, there is yet
another weight lies upon the soul which without support will also press it to
hell, and that is, the burden of innumerable actual transgressions; they are
given to us in Scripture under various expressions; sometimes they are called
sins, sometimes iniq^ities, sometimes transgressions, but all grievous soul
burdens; I will but give of each an instance and so pass. Thit we call sin,
is a soul procuring destruction, it captivates the soul, leads it from Christ
and Salvation, and presses it down to hell; hence is that complaint taken up
by Paul Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death; that is, as if Paul should have said, I find the power of
natural lusts and corruptions working so contrary to the will of God and the
rule of his spirit, that were it not for the hopes of a Savior, I was in a sad
condition, I was in a wretched estate; for who is it, or what is it in all the
world that could help my soul out of hell? who shall deliver me from the death
and damnation which the sin of my nature, my flesh (the body) has brought me
to? Alas! the Creature cannot comfort me, nothing in the world can save me but
only Jesus Christ who dyed for me; and here is the hope, help, joy and cause
of rejoicing; I thank God ^horow Jesus Christ our Lord, ver. 25. this is sin.
Again these sins and evils which we commit are called iniquities, and these
are also soule-weights: If you dare believe David, he will tell you he found
iniquities to be a weight, yea an unsupportable weight; they let him have no
quiet night or day, they got above him and pressed him down, he could not
bear the sense of them, Psalm 38.3. And hereupon David addresseth himself to
God in prayer, and urges this complaint as a motive to move God with mercy to
look upon him, and now to help, for min^ iniquities are gone over mine head
(they are above my strength) as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me to
bear, ver. 4. of this weight is iniquity. This is the second Instance.
Lastly, actual sins and iniquities are also called transgressio^s and this
word explaines both the other; sin is sin, as done evilly, wickedly, and
it is ill done, or wickedly done which is done beside or against the rule and
command of God, and this is is transgression: A Christian has a rule to walk
by, and to go off from his rule is transgression, iniquity or sin; and hence
is that expression of Paul, Romans 14.23. He that dourteth is damned if he eat,
because he cares not of faith, f^r whatsoever is not of faith is sinne^, that
is, look to your rule, see and know a warrant for what you do, or else you
will transgress, you will sin; these tran^gressions are soul weights, soul
burdens, and therefore David prayed for deliverance from them in these terms,
deliver me from all my transgressions, Psalm. 39.8. Thus I desire every one to
study the estate of their souls; I know it is a hard matter, it is above a
Preacher to make some believe this; but let me speak home, and speak the
truth too, for which I will give you my warrant from the Word; I say (to any of
you) you had far better never to have been borne, without you have the
new birth, unless you be borne again; unless you be borne anew unto Christ
Jesus; unless you have this birth you can never come into Heaven, and then you
know where your place will be. These are the words of Jesus Christ twice
repe^t^d; Jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily I say unto thee,
except a man be borne again (or as the Original affords, from above) he
cannot see the Kingdom of God: John 3.3. And as though Jesus Christ did not
here fully explain it, he still redoubles his affirmation in the same word^
and enlarges his meaning: Jesus answered, verily, verily (the deepest
attestation that ever Christ took) I say unto thee, except a man be borne of
water and of, the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, ver. 5.

Oh that the men of the world, which as yet have nothing of Christ, that as yet
know not savingly and experimentally what Christ is, nay, know not whether
their souls have need of Christ or no would think sadly of this and seriously
lay to heart what shall become of them hereafter; what shall become of the
soul when the body is put to rot in the grave? what joy can any, take in
Riches* Honor, Wife, Children, F^ie^ds or any thing, if they have nothing of
Christ, but when death seizes on the body, Riches, Honou^^, Friends all leaves
them, and the Devil seizes upon their souls; would not this tremble a
stubborn heart? is not this enough to startle a carnal man or woman out of
their sleep of security? I am sure it takes deep with them who have less
need to fear it, the Saints of God; and because I would not lay too much
sadness upon their spirits, who have more need to be lifted up, then cast
down, I will now fall into a more pleasing subject, the other means to get
assurance of Christ.

Doct. 2. The poor soul that would have an interest in Christ, must labor to
get a true knowledge of the freeness and fullness of Gods promise^ made in
Christ. Here is that which will do your bodies good, and your souls good,
here is a comfort for every calamity, a medicine for every malady and a salve
for every sore. I may speak plainly of the blood of Christ, which Jeremiah
speaks Prophetically, Ier. 8.22. Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no
Physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people
recovered? that it, there must needs be Balm where Balm grows in the place
from whence all comes. So there must needs be mercy in the fountain of mercy in
the Father of mercy: Why then take ye not the right way? why go ye not to God
in your misery? why lay ye not the Promises before God, and claim your
privileges by the death and sufferings of Christ? If you do this God cannot
deny you, God will not deny you. For your help herein, you must be frequent in
the Scriptures, hear them, read them, they will acquaint you with the
Promises, and the Privileges which shall come in to you by Christ. The Bible
is Gods Book of Record, and you cannot know the mind of God any where else;
the best of other Books do but derive their excellency from this, this is the
rule to all others, and therefore Jes^s Christ calls us to the use of this above
all others; Search the Scriptures, for they are they which testify of me, Ioh.
5.39. Of all Books here you shall have most of Jesus Christ.

Object. But some may say, I have heard and red the Scriptures by times this
thirty or forty years, etc. yet I find not so much in them as you now say: I
know not whether I have any right to Christ for all this, only I hope God will
have mercy on my soul when I shall dye.

Answ. The Lord knows this is the condition of abundance; the most part even
of those who have been Sermon-hearers, and Sacrament receivers, and think
themselves in an estate good enough. Alas poor souls, you are in a sad
condition: but I had rather inform you, then lament you: I will therefore
endeavor a full answer to the objection. I say to lay all things together, and
consider well every thing a part, you would think it no wonder to see men so
ignorant in the ways and truths of God, notwithstanding so much Gospell-meanes
and Gospel light we do enjoy. I will not mention the malice of our
Non-preaching Prelates (the deliverance from whom, our Kingdom yet has not
had a greater cause of thankfulness in these late times) neither will I urge
the pride, idleness and baseness of (I think I may say) the most of the
Clergy; these have been too well known lets to the increase of Christ's
Kingdom. But I will give you some reasons of thi^ your ignorance and darkness
ensuing from your own selves. First, you hinder and deprive your selves of
much light, and many sweet comforts, by neglecting the mean^ and helps to
knowledge. A man that would keep himself warm, will go to the fire; if you
want water, you go to draw it out of the Well, and go to the Spring; a child
in his wants will go to his Father. Thus you must do, or else you cannot be
helped; this must be the course you are to take to get spiritual knowledge;
Resort unto the Ministers of God, acquaint your selves with experienced
Christians, who are able to speak out of knowledge what they have found God to
their poor souls. Be diligent in hearing Sermons, and reading the Scriptures;
never any man yet who endeavored ea^nestly the saving knowledge of God (as it
was needful for him) but he obtained it at one time or other. Let nothing then
(but God) keep thee from public or private services. Tie thy self to this
soul business; propound (as justly thou may do) to thy self weighty
reasons; as the necessity of this soul work, the danger of delay, the
uncertainty of the time of life: say to thy self, let go this Sermon, and it
may be I let go all, I may never live to hear another.

Secondly, its no wonder to have men and women Sermon-hearers and Bible-readers
all their days, and yet never come to the excellency of the knowledge of Jesus
Christ (as Paul calls it Phil. 3.8.) if we consider how unpreparedly and
carelessly most go either to reading the Word or hearing of Sermons? They may
depart fencelesse, that come rashly; they may well go without profit, that
come without preparation: they may well return without a blessing, which never
asked it. Abundance have more ends in these services then the increase of
saving knowledge, and therefore God may justly suffer such to be Bible-readers,
and Sermon-hearers, and yet ignorant of Jesus Christ, and saving knowledge.
Some will go hear a Sermon when they have nothing else to do, that their
business is over; some will hear only one particular man, and if he Preach
not, they will hear none. Some will go to show their fine clothes, or that
their neighbors may see what good Church-folke they are, I could name many
such^ But how few is there that comes preparedly to these Sacred Ordinanc^^?
Who is it that considers duly the weightinesse of the business he i^ about?
Who is it that takes into his thoughts that now he is about soule-saving or
soule-destroying work? Who is it that premeditates into whose presence he is
to come, and with what a Majesty he has to do with? Who calls to mind the
all-searching eye, who looks into hearts? and who discernes the Almighty power
of God who is able to dambe body and soul? Who is it that out of the sense of
hi^ ignorance, makes it his maine end in all his Services to get saving
knowledge, the more to g^orifie God? And who is it which hence goes first to
God in prayer to ask leave and crave a blessing? Alas, I know you cann^t but
be ^ully answered in the cause; nay, the causes of ignorance, when you but
hear me go this way to work, and you must go this way or else you will
never get any knowledge of Christ to do you good. The way to obtain is to go
to God for it; Are not the Ordinances Gods? Is not true knowledge Gods? is not
Christ, Gods? and all Gods? then if you would speed, you must go to God by
prayer; Gods promises runs upon these terms, Ask and it shall be given you;
seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you, Mat. 7.7.
What can you desire more? you see God is ready, and Jesus Christ is willing to
do you good: Nay, I may add further, Jesus Christ would have us to make use
of this, and see what the event shall be; he would have us to take this way
upon liking, and he will pass his word for a good is^ue^ Hitherto (says he)
ye have asked nothing in my Name; ask (once make a trial) and ye shall
receive, that your joy may be full, John 14.24. Jesus Christ will not give
sparingly, and yet he has much ado to persuade us so much as to ask: this is
the second Reason.

Thirdly, it is no strange thing to find even old Sermon. hearers ignorant they
record so little: To hear Sermons and not to write, is like the taking of
water in a sive: You may have something of every thing, and nothing of any
thing; the best memories are but bad at remembering all things; as in a sive
(for I can compare one memory to nothing better) there may hang some drops
after you have poured in much water and yet if you take not them, they are
presently dried up: So after the hearing of a Sermon, you may here and there
remember a Notion, a passage; but if you take it not presently and put it sure
it is gone: I am sure you will not deal with the world as you do by your
souls; you keep a bill of Parish-taxes, you keep Shop-books for your takings
in and layings out; be persuaded to keep a Soule-book, that you may know how
your spiritual estate stands, what increase or decrease of Graces you have:
This recording of revealed truths and soul-experiences from God, would be of
admirable use, of great importance in times of trouble and trial. The calling
to memory of former experiences of Gods love, power and providence, helps a
soul exceedingly to trust God for the future, it strengthens faith mightily in
extremities: Moses makes great use of former providence and deliverances, and
urges Israel to further obedience and faith, from what they had found God.
These are frequently recorded, yet I will only note one place to you. Deuteronomy. 4
3, 4. Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baal-peor; for all the
men that followed Baal-peor, the Lord thy God ha^h destroyed them from amongst
you; but ye that did cleav unto the Lord your God, are alive every one of you
this day; that is, as if Moses had said, the very wrath and destruction which
God has brought upon these Idolaters in your sight, should engage you to walk
closely with God, and to love and trust him for the time to com^, ^ho has so
sweetly preserved you: So the very like you may see in David, former experience
of what God had been to him, imbolde^s him upon a new attempt: Saul thought
David was not able to deal with Goliath, and would have dissuaded him from the
encounter; but mark how and whence little David takes this great courage, from
former experience of what God had done for him; David said moreover, the Lord
that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear,
he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine, 1 Samuel 17.37. This is a
sweet observation, and of great use to all Christians; but I would especially
commend it to you brave Soldiers, the David's of our time, the Champions of
Christ, his Churches, of all Christendom, who are now combating with the
Goliath of Rome; that is the Monster you club with, whatever the Colors be; call
to mind what you have alreade found God* what great victories God has g^ven to
you by weak and small means, and this will raise up your spirits above men. I
say there is an undanted courage in the Saints, a lofty spirit that cannot be
conquered by men or Devils; death it self, fears them not, when they are in
Gods way and Gods work; you may see examples as of Paul, Acts 21.13. and of
the other Apostles and Martyrs: But now whence draw all the Saints these
Heroicke resolutions? whence fetch they all this strength an^ courage? surely
all from God in Jesus Christ: David had his victory by God, 1 Samuel 17.46, 47.
Paul builds all his confidence upon Christ; I can do all things through Christ
which strengthens me, Phil. 4.13.

Object. But if all courage, strength and comfort comes from God in Christ what
a sad condition am I in? I never sought God in any action, or owned the hand of
God in any deliverance from danger; do you think that God would now hear me
if I should henceforth seek to him?

Answ. Yes; let me tell thee, if thou in thy heart art grieved for thy neglects
of God, if the contempts thou have offered to the face of God do prick and
wound thy heart with sorrow, and thou be willing to walk with God, if he would
now receive thee; fear it not, there is hope enough in Christ to infavour thee
with God here, and bring thee to the fullness of glory hereafter: God looks not
so much at former sins as future obedience; if now thou have a desire to give
up thy self to Christ, thou must count with thy self to live as a Christian,
thou must determine to cast off all thy unwarranted courses, and as near as
thou can, endeavor to walk and act according to the rule of Christ: The
Apostle puts it down for a Maxim, Let (who) every one that names the Name of
Christ (that will challenge the profession of a Christian) depart from
iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. Jesus Christ looks not so much what you are, as what you
would be; God is willing to quit scores for all that is past whatever it is, and
that for his own sake, that shall never be questioned again: You may think
this is much, but I have Scripture for what I say; God charges I^rael with
their unkindnesse and miscarri^ges toward him: Thou have bought me no sweet
cane with money, neithe^ have thou filled me with the fat of thy Sacrifices,
but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me with thine
iniquities, Isa. 43.24. This was Isreal's misery, yet the object of Gods
unspeakable mercy; I, even I am he that blotteth out thy tra^sgressions for my
own sake, and will not remember thy sins, ver. 25. Here Is engagement enough
for poor sinners, and if I had named no more, I had said enough for the full
answer the Objection.

Object. But says the poor soul again, I have been an open enemy to God* I
have taken up Arms against God, I have broken his Sabbaths, I have mocked at
Religion, yea, I have persecuted the Saints, and can there yet be hope for me?

Answ. I answer yes, there is yet hope for thee; this degree of sin is not
ordinary in one elect by God; yet all this cannot ke^p off Christ from saving
thy soul, if thou find in thy self a sorrow for thy sins, and an earnest
desire to walk in new obedience: He against whom thou have sinned puts this
sorrow into thy heart and will save thy soul. Remorse for sin and thoughts
of obedience, are gifts and graces wrought by the Spirit of God in thee; these
are not the fruits of nature coming from thee; present pain may work and
stir up a grief for thy misery and sorrow, but never procures a sorrow for
sin; I might give you diverse presidents, but I will take up with this clear
precept, It is God who works in us both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, Phil. 2.13. that is, all our good thoughts of turning unto God, and
the strength of all our abilities according to the rule of Christ is all from
God. God puts them into every one before they have them: This might be
sufficient for some, but if thou be not yet fully satisfied, I will
endeavor to find thee out some taking comfort: If once thou come to have
earnest breathings and longings after Christ in love to Christ, it is not
former sins that can keep off Christ from thee: Christ looks not to have us
perfect, but comes to make us perfect; Christ found Paul a persectour, but
makes him a Preacher of the Gospel, Acts 26. to ver. 18. Paul does not from
his former sins so much question, as magnify the free Grace of God: Only
this use he makes of it, that the more God had done for him, he endeavored the
more in the exercises of his Graces bestowed upon him, to publish and advance
the glory of God, 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. If thou be not a sinner, thou have no
need of a Savior; but if thou find thy self in a perishing condition, and
can say, a God, or I am gone, a Jesus, a Savior, or I am lost for ever: thou
art such a one as Jesus Christ looks for, they are Jesus Christ's own words,
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Mark 2.17. that
is, I came not for those who are holy and righteous in their own eyes, but to
make rig^teous, and save poor sinners, who lie even in hell, to their own
apprehension: unworthiness is no warrant to keep thee from Christ, Jesus
Christ will make thee worthy, it is the business for which God sent Jesus
Christ into the world, and it was Jesus Christ's only desire to do the will of
his Father: and that yet a poor sinner may be further encouraged to seek
after Christ, I will lay down some special privileges which comes into the
soul by Christ. First, by Christ, thou shall have all these soul-destroying
sins (in themselves) these heart-trembling sins, these conscience-biting
sins as clearly taken away by Jesus Christ, as if thou never had committed
any such: Thy conscience shall be at quiet, and the devil himself shall not
have any thing to say to thee for them: God has laid all thy sins, and the
sins of all the Elect upon Christ, Isa. 53.6. Christ has suffered and
satisfied the wrath of his Father for them, it is finished, John 19.30. Jesus
Christ has done this for them; and hence is that challenge which the Apostle
takes up against the devil, the world, yea conscience; who is it shall lay any
thing (any manner of sin) to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns? Romans 8.33, 34. all is put to Christ,
Christ does all. Secondly, Jesus Christ does not only justify a soul before
God, but he reconciles God to the soul, he makes a sweet peace and friendship
between them who were at enmity; and the Apostle makes this work of
reconciliation an argument of eternal salvation, from which we may draw the
certainty of both: For (says Paul) if when we were enemies we were reconciled
to God by the Death of his Son; much more we being reconciled, we shall be
saved by his life, Romans 5.10. Thirdly and lastly, (because I will hasten) Jesus
Christ will send the holy Ghost, the Spirit, to direct and sanctify all those
who have an interest in him: If once Christ be thine, Christ will have a care
of thee; thou shall have a guide to lead thee in all the ways of truths or
God: Jesus Christ knows well the failings of the Saints. He therefore promis^^
them a guide which his Father will send in his Name, the Comforter, which is
the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my Name, he shall teach you (all
things) and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said to
you. Joh. 14.26. I hope I have in this set open a large door of sweet comfort
to every poor soul groaning under the burden of sin; I will now, the Lord
assisting, come to point of trial, of which as brief as I may.

I have hitherto endeavored all along to discover a Christians privileges he
has by Christ, with some directions what a Christian is to do in himself to
get an interest in this Christ, I am now come to give you some Signs or
Evidences by which you may know whether as yet Christ be yours or no; they
shall be but few and short, the Lord help me in the discovery, and you in the
faithful examination of the ground upon which your building stands, and there
will arise abundance of sweet and full comfort to all our Souls.

Sign 1. The first Sign whereby a Christian may know he has an interest in
Christ is a sound and sincere love to Christ for Christ alone: It Is not enough
to love Christ for the Loaves; so Christ has lovers and followers too many, to
love Christ because you outwardly thrive and get by Christ; Christ finds fault
with this, Joh. 6.26. It is not enough to love Christ with the Loaves with the
world, this also Christ cannot away with, this will not do, ye cannot do it,
Mat. 6.24. but Christ will be loved for himself, he will have all your love,
and have you love him only, that is, to love him above all, more then all;
Christ would not have any thing here below to stand in computition with him; if
any thing must be parted with, let it be any thing, all things save Christ,
Goods, Friends, Life, are all to he left for the love of Christ when they
cannot stand together: This is the meaning of those two Scriptures, Mat. 10.37.
Luke 14.26. Now if you solemnly and seriously ask your hearts, they will tell
you whether you love a naked Christ, a despised Christ; I say your hearts will
in some measure tell you how they are disposed; what longings have you after
Christ? what inquires do you make after Christ? what delight have ye in the
Saints? ^ow do ye prize the Ordinances? what soule-meetings have you with
Christ? what sweet communion have ^ou with Christ?

Object. But you will say, who can do this?

A^sw. I answer, every Christian may do this; nay, I say further, every true
Christian does do this in a greater or lesser degree; what is prayer but the
souls discourse with God and Christ, by the help of the holy Ghost? what is
the Word and preaching, but a declaration of the mind of God to us? Love these,
and love Christ; neglect these, and you care not for Jesus Christ: Now then*
have these taken thy heart and ravished thy soul? are these the cause of thy
rejoicing, and the want of these thy sorrow? do thou prize the Word of God
above all the Words wealth? do thou love to follow Christ under all
contempts? can thou rejoice in Christ and account thy interest in him to be
dearer to thee then all other honors and privileges? I say, here are
infallible signs of a sincere love to Christ, when you can love any thing for
Christ and all things for Christ, and only for Christ; can you love Christians
as they are Christ's. Ordinances as they are Christ's? do you the more love
Christians where there is the more of Christ in them? do you the more love pure
Ordinances as they are the more agreeable to the mind of Christ? certainly,
unless you can do this, unless your hearts close with Christ in these, I can
give you no hopes that you either love Christ, or have any interest in Christ:
This is not my own rule, but the rule of Jesus Christ; this is not my word,
but the Word of Jesus Christ: In one place, Jesus Christ propounds a brotherly
love to be a known sign of being in him: By this shall all men know that ye
are my Disciples if ye have love one to another, Ioh. 13.35. the other place
is Joh. 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments; that is, if you will make
it appeared, and manifest that you love me, let it be known by your obedience
in walking according to the rule I have given you to observe; you see how
strict Christ is, and therefore it is not good for us to depart from Christ's
rule, from what he warrants us in: I say again (for I cannot say it too often)
for the Lords sake take heed that you deceive not your selves in the clearing
up your Evidences for Heaven, your right to Christ; you must not think because
you live in the air of the Gospel amongst Christians, and Ordinances, and
Bibles, that this can make you Christians, and entitle you to Christ; no, no,
it is not faint prayers will bring a man to Heaven; every one that says Lord,
Lord, shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of
my Father which is in heaven, Mat. 7.21. Christ requires acting, doing his
will, as well as confession of him; nay, it is not barely a civil and strict
life will bring a man to Heaven: The Scribes and Pharisees. went far in this,
and yet fell short, and therefore did Christ propound this seasonable Caution;
Except your righteousness exceed the righ^eousnesse of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 5.20.
Nay, I must go a little further yet; its not barely your partaking of the
Seals of the Covenant does put you into Covenant; it is not (in plainer words)
your being baptized and receiving the Lords Supper which makes you Christians,
and interests you in Christ; you may do all these and yet do nothing, you may
perish for all: To this it is considerable which Paul writes to the Church at
Galatia; you may see what a stir they kept about Circumcision: Now to stint
the strife, and take them from their fa^se bottomes, the Apostle tells them
plain, it is neither one nor the other will bring them to Heaven; it is only
the work of faith by love: For (says Paul) in Jesus Christ, neither
circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith which works by
love, Gal. 5.6. all these outward privileges advantageth a soul nothing,
unless it can sensibly close with Christ in a full persuasion of the love of
Christ to the soul in the great work of Redemption, and that it self have a
p^rt therein; but if the soul can thus trust Christ, and hence really love
Christ again, it may assuredly rest upon it, it has an inte^est in Christ:
This is the first sign of a real love to Christ.

Sign 2. Secondly, the soul that has an interest in Christ, will trust
Christ with all; the soul that has an interest in Christ (in some measure or
other) is acquainted with the love* care and power which abides in Jesus Christ
and upon this ground saving faith is built; They that know thy Name (says
David) will trust to thee, Psalm. 9.10. that is, they that know Jesus Christ to
be the Son of God, to be one with the Father, Ioh. 17. know him to be God
all-sufficient: This is f^iths sure foundation, and hence it was that Paul takes
up his firm resolution to commit all to Christ, I know (says he) whom I have
believed (I have had experience of him) and I am persuaded that he is able t^
keep that which I have committed unto him, 2 Timothy 1.12. This was a sweet frame
in Paul, here was a right faith; and assuredly the Saints have the same, they
have the like precious faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. all the Saints now have the like
faith the Apostles had for nature or matter, though not the like measure of
faith. Every christian is willing, nay desirous to give up all to the disposal
of Christ; they well know that Jesus Christ is a better keeper of any thing
then they themselves are, and therefore they are desirous to put all into his
hand: christians will trust Christ with estates, wives, children, Religion,
bodies and souls; this is the faith of christians; it is a true faith and it
never fails: True it is an hypocrite, a mere knowing professor may go far,
as the young man did, Mat. 19. but they cannot trust Jesus Christ with all:
they may stand the calm and make a goodly show, but in the storm, when
troubles, sufferings, and losses come in with profession of Christ, they are
lost too they are gone, they want foundation, they have not faith to trust
Christ under difficulties, Mat. 7.26, 27. they know not that the Lord will be a
refuge for the oppressed, a refuge (a hiding place a defense) in times of
trouble, (as David did) or else they would put their trust in God, Ps. 9.9, 10.
now then, bring your hearts to the rule, try them whether they will be willing
to close with Jesus Christ, and trust him with all and for all, if you have a
faith that can thus see, acknowledge and trust Christ with all, it is good, it is
firm; it is a faith given by God wrought by the holy Ghost, it is more then
flesh and blood can do, thus to trust Jesus Christ. And therefore I will
conclude upon this faith, as Jesus Christ did of the same faith in Peter: This
a firm faith, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.16,
17, 18. This a second sign of a christians real interest in Christ.

Sign 3. The third Sign of a Christians interest in Christ, is a ready
obedience to all the commands of Christ; when I give you obedience, for a sign
of being in Christ, I mean a filial, and not a servile obedience; an
obedience that is free, full, universal not compelled or in part; Jesus Christ
loves not half Christians nor almost christians, Jesus Christ will be all
Master or no Master: I am persuaded your selves think this a truth and no
matter of dispute: The soul that has truly given up it self to Jesus Christ,
that trusts him with all, (...) expects all from him to make it happy, will be
counseled and commanded by the will and word of Jesus Ghrist. Obedience is a
full discovery a notable mar^ to make known what Master you serve, whose
commands you obey and works you do, his you are; if you obey Christ his you
are; if you obey the Devil his you are: I know this truth is very hardly
received, many will live like devils, and yet would be called christians, and
be partakers of the Saints privileges. That therefore you may the better judge
of your inward estate, con^^d^r your outward walking: who has the command of
your lives and actions? what rule go you by? that will not deceive you: this
was Paul's direction to the Romans, and it shall now be mine po you: Know you
not (that is, it is a thing you ought to remember) that to whom ye yield your
selves serva^t, to obey, his servants ye are to whom you obey: whether of
sin unto death, or obedience unto righteousness, Romans 6.16.

Objest. But you may say, how shall I know by my actions when I obey the
devil, and when I obey Jesus Christ?

Ans. This is the easiest thing that may be, if you deal faithfully with your
own souls; there is no truth in all the Bible more clearly set down then this:
for the children of the devil, Jesus Christ says, ye are of your father the
devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do. Ioh. 8.44. On the other side,
the sheep, the servants of Jesus Christ, they harken for his commands, and
obey his will -- the sheep follow him, for they know his voice, Ioh. 10.4.

Object. But how shall I know which are the works of the devil, and which are
the commands of Jesus Christ?

Ans. This also is as plain as can be, and they are distinguished all along the
Scriptures; but I will give you one place for all and that will clear both to
the full; Paul writing to the Galathians satisfies the point to the full, only
he differs in terms from the other places alleged; before, these works are
distinguished and the one called the works of the devil; the other, the
commandments of Christ; and here Paul calls the one* the work^ of the flesh, and
the other the fruits of the spirit: and here is little difference, if they be
considered: now if you would know how these may be discerned, the Apostle first
tells you they are manifest, and then reckons up many particulars; the Apostle
begins with the works of the flesh or the devil call them whether you please,
and also shows the reward of them; then he describes many qualifications in
christians, and gives the reason of their sweet frame: I will give you both
these apart, because the knowledge of them may d^e you much good and the Lord
bless it to you. First, the Apostle discovers and names many particular works
of the devil, now (sait^ he) the works of the flesh are manifest (any body may
know them) which are these, adultery fornication, unclea^nesse,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, var^ance, emulations, wrath,
strife, seditions, heresies, envy^ngs, murders, drunkenness, revilings, etc.
the Apostle names these, and concludes with such like; that is, these and such
as these are, will keep a soul out of heaven, they have no inheritance there,
and then you know what will follow: his words are these, ^hey which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19.20 21. Thus you see
what the works of the devil are, and how he pays them their wage. ^ will next
fall upon the qualifications of the Saints, as they are helped and guided by
the Spirit the holy Ghost, and therefore called the fruit of the spirit. In the
Saints, the servants of God, you find nothing but sweetness: thus the Apostle
goes on, but (says he) the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, ver. 22,
23. Here is a Saint-like frame indeed: but how comes this think you? surely
all this is but the effect of obedience, for it presently follows, and they
that are Christ's (that have an interest in him) have crucified the flesh, with
the affections and lusts, ver. 24. that is, they that are in Christ, that have
an interest in him, have given up themselves wholly to him, and by the guidance
of the Spirit, and the power of Christ's death, the power of sin in their
nature is subdued, the sinful affections and lusts arising thence are kept in
and killed: I beseech you be faithful to your souls in examining your selves by
this Sign; of all other, actions cannot be covered, they will tell you whose
you are; you are not to do any thing nor speak any thing, nay, if once you be
Christ's, you dare not transgress the command of Jesus Christ: let it be what
it will, in never so small a thing, if a christian discern it to be against
Jesus Christ, he will rather dye then do it; when once a christian gives up
himself to Christ, to be married to Christ, he is no longer his own, he is now
under the command of Jesus Christ: if now the devil or a lust bid such a
christian do this or that, the christian will presently say, did Jesus Christ
command me, did he bid me do it? if Jesus Christ give me but a word I am
ready, or else I dare not: this is the third sign whereby a christian may know
he has a right to Christ.

Sign 4. A fourth sign whereby a christian may know he ha^h an interest in
Christ, is when he he will own Christ, own his cause and people in the worst of
times; it is not much to own Christ, own Religion and associate with christians
when all these are countenanced and in credit: but here is the trial of love,
the faith and obediance of a christian, when he will take up the Cross and
follow Christ, when he will yet keep on after Christ through wet and dry, as
the Proverb is, it is a sign a christian has much of Christ when he will yet
own Christ though others forsake him, when he keeps his walking with Christ
though he go alone, as Paul did, 2 Timothy 1.15. chap. 4.16. when he will follow
his profession, though he must let go his life, as the three children did.
Dan. 3. and many precious Saints have done and now do; it would but take up
time to urge ins^ances: do you but make good use of this little and it will
do you much good; the Lord has now brought us unto trying times, and Jesus
Christ does now say, who is on my side? who? what now will you venture for
Christ and his cause and his people? does your hearts tell you that Religion is
dearer to you then esiates, then life, then the best blood in your bodies? do
you pray for the prosperity of Christ's cause? will you stand for it and own
it what condition soever it is in? does not the ebbings and flowings of Christ's
cause bring you to it and cast you from it? the Lord knows there it more of
this latter sort then the former; abundance follow Christ's Cause for their
own ends, and these will fall off when their ends fail; but let me tell you,
none but christians can suck to Christ under difficulties; the spirits and
hearts of others are up and down as their objects are, the principles by which
they are carried, it is only the christian who lives by faith that stands to
Christ, his cause and people at all times: this is the fourth sign.

Sign 5. The fifth and last sign whereby a christian may rest assured of his
interest in Christ is his desire to be with Christ in his glory; when a soul
has once got a relish, a taste, an earnest of the inheritance in Heaven, it is
full of longings and desirings after glory: take such a soul, nothing takes it
up, nothing takes it off, Jesus Christ alone is all in all; you may offer such
a one, the gold of Ophir, the treasures of India, the wealth of the world, the
Crown^ of Kings but all this takes not, it affect not; no says the soul,
Christ is my treasure, Christ is my crown of rejoicing; you may proffer what
you please but still the soul will say as once Paul did, I count all things
but loss for the excellency (to be com^ared to the excellency) of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord Phil. 3.8. talk what you will of parts and
prililedges, yet when all is done, this was Paul's conclusion, but Christ is all
in all, Col. 3.11. of all the things in the world, Paul found but one case
wherein it was disputable whether he might desire ^o live in the flesh, and
that is such a one as many would not imagine, they would think it almost the
lest matter of all: but it is this, here was Paul's case, he was at a stand
whether it was better for him to live in the flesh to promote the Gospel, or
to dye and go to Christ in his glory; Paul was in a sweet condition come life
come death, and that made the difficulty the greater; for to me to live is
Christ, and to dye is gain, Phil. 1.21. that is, if I live I shall be comforted
in the work of Christ, and if I dye I shall reign with Christ; yet what I
shall choose I wot not for I am in a straight betwixt two, ver. 22, 23. Paul was
now between doing the work of Christ, and going home for his wage to Christ; it
put faithful Paul hard to it to satisfy the scruple of his own conscience,
and when all is done he answers with a distinction; for his own part, this is
his resolution for himself, he holds for Heaven -- having a desire to depart
and to be with Christ, which is far better, ver. 23. the latter part. But
then on the other side, as Paul had a respect unto the work he was in, the
preaching o the Gospel unto the flock of Christ, his life was better and more
necessary for them: nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for
you, ver. 24. here then is an example for you to try your hearts by; truly when
this is seriously considered, it is no wonder to see so many loath, and so few
willing to dye; alas, ^he reason is easily given, they have no interest in
Christ, they have no acquaintance with God, they know not what shall become of
their souls when they dye: again, the fears and terrors of death strike
deep, and speaks terrible things to them; Jesus Christ has not taken away the
sting of death for them, it bites deep, it amazes them, death being but the
gate of hell, to let them now feel those torments which in life and prosperity
they would not fear; but on the other side, death is the desire of true
Christians, the thoughts of Heaven and that happiness which is there with
Christ, takes up the heart, rejoices the spirit, and fills them with desire of
glory. Oh says a believing christian, to be with Christ in Heaven is the end
of my hopes, here I am a stranger and a pilgrim, in Heaven I am at home, here I
am waifairing under troubles* wants, miseries and biting calamities inward from
my self and outward for the world; there I shall be in the full fruition of rest
and peace and glory, that shall never have an end, the place is purchased and
the way is plained; Jesus Christ who has done all for me, and is my only
beloved is gone before, why then should I stay behind? every hour I live here
in sorrow, I miss innumerable unspeakable joys in the life eternal: this
will be the frame of a christian who has an interest in Jesus Christ, and the
last sign.

I have been faithful to my poor power in this discovery of a true christians
interest in Christ, the good Lord make it effectual for the kindly working
upon all our souls* and that this main soul-busines may be the more carefully
and earnestly endeavored after, I shall encourage you to this comfortable work
by some affecting motives, and so leave you and this word to the power of God's
grace.

Motive 1. First, labor to get thy evidences cleared, assurance of Christ past
unto thy soul, and though the full time of the churches deliverance be not yet
come thou shall be sweetly provided for; whatever becomes of strangers of
enemies, God (to speak with reverence) will and must take care of children and
servants: it is God's own rule, he that provideth not for his family is worse
then an Infidel 1 Timothy 5.8. now the church is God's family, the Saints are his
children and joy^t hei^s with Christ, Romans 8.17. we cannot therefore have such
hard thoughts of God as to think he will charge that upon man which he will
break himself, we never yet could accuse God of so much weakness, and let us
take heed of suspecting the lack of love or the lest unkindnesse in God: The
Saints are Gods and Christ's, Gods in Christ in all the nearest and sweetest
relations that can be; name the fulle^t and fi^mest relations that can be, and
the Saints are the same to God in Christ: God is a Father, the Saints his sons
and his daughters, 2 Cor. 6.18. Christ is the husband the church the wife, the
spouse, Cant. 4.9, 10.11. Christ is the head the church his body Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
and as if this expression d^d not yet fully set out the near relation betwixt
Christ and the Saints, the Apostle adds in the same Epistle, we are members of
his body of his flesh and of his bones, chapter 5. ver. 30. can you think that now
the Saints of God shall not be provided for let what times can come do come? I
tell you poor Saints upon the matter, you have as much as God himself has:
you have God and you have all that God can do the wisdom of God is yours, the
power of God ^s yours, all is yours, because ye are chist's, and christ is
God'^, 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. the Saints have a protection against the evil of sad
times: when it goes ill with others it shall go well wi^h them; The young Lions
do lack and suffer hung^r (the great ones of the world may come to much misery)
but they that seek the Lo^d shall not want any good thing, Ps. 34.10. see, you
have God's Word, God's promise for what I say, and God will break the frame of
heaven and earth, rather then break promise with his people; God is faithful,
and therefore the Apostle calls his promise, a sure word of promise, 2 Pet.
1.19. you may build upon, you may venture your salvation upon it God never
deceived any; who then would not be a christian? who would not seek for an
interest in Jesus Christ? who would not c^ose with this God and trust this God
with all? let this fear you from offending, and stir you up to a search after
the privilege; let this persuade you all, and altogether to become christians:
and this shall be the first motive.

Motive 2. Secondly, if you have a right or interest in Christ that Christ be
yours all the power of the wicked cannot harm you, all that the wicked can do
shall not hurt you; is not this a comfortable condition? is not this a sweet
support for Saints in these sad times? nay, I will tell you more a^l the
intended evil of the wicked shall work for your good; is not this enough to
anger Malignants, and vex the bloody wretches that are now in arms against
Gods Saints? yes surely it would if it were not hid from their eyes; I know
this will hardly go for truth, few will believe it; and indeed it is such a
pitch of faith as few (comparatively) ever reach too; it is (I say) an
infallible truth but hardly believed. I have already touched upon this, but me
thinks I could dwell upon this sweet subject* it speaks so much comfort to the
Sai^ts in these sad times of war, woe and misery: the Saints have much need
of all encouragement to hold up their spirits, when persecutions strain out
blood: give me leave then to clear up your comforts in particlar cases.

First, let the wicked rage and threat, and plot, and feed themselves with
hopes of the Saints blood; yea let them take the devil and hell to help, and
they shall go no further they can do no more then what the God of the Saints,
the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ suffers. Now (...) in it, if God suffer it
you may be sure it shall not hurt the Saints, let (...) sufferings be what they
will; let them carry never so black a countenan^^^ (...) the face be as grim
and fearful as it will, God has go^d in it to the Saint^ it shall do them
good; I will give a clear text for it Romans 8.28. We know (sait^ Paul) here is
a certainty) that all things (let them be what they will) work together for
good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his
purpose: Is not this a sweet place? is not this a strong support for the Saints
that all the working, plotting, and powers of the wicked shall do them good?
let them go on as long as they can they do the Saints good, they help on the
cause of God let them purpose what they please, God still over-reaches them God
overplots their plottings and over-powers their strength, that all their
endeavors takes no effect, all they do proves foolish and vain, they make
nothing of all in the end: David observed this long ago; Behold (says David)
take notice of it) he (the wicked) travaileth with iniquity (their very
plottings are painful, they are carried on with great difficulty) and has
conceived mischief and brought f^rth fal^hood, P^. 7.14. that is, when they
have done all they can they miss of their hopes, when they say their p^ots
shall take effect and hurt the Saints they lie it shall not be so; nay, poor
Saints I have more comfort for you yet here is that still which may do your
sorrowful hearts good, and that is this; God does not only infatuate their
Counsels and bring to nothing their plots, but God u^ually beats them with
their own weapon; let the wicked prepare what they will and intend what they
will against the Saints, that shall be their own, its for themselves; as you
see but now, David said the wicked were travailing hewing out their mischievous
plots; but what comes it too? al^s, all this while they but dig a pit wherein
themselves shall perish, their mischievous intentions shall be their own
misery, their cruelty shall come home to them; he made a pit and dig'd it, and
(...) fallen into the ditch which he made; his mischeife shall return upon his
own head and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate, ver. 15,
16. of the same Psalm. This is a plain proof but if you may see example it is
l^ke you will believe it better, take notice then but of one or two; take but
the confessi^n of Adoni-bezek King o^ Jerusalem when he himself was taken
prisoner, by Jud^h and Sime^n -- as (says he) I have done so God has requited
me, Jud. 1.7. again consider the event of Hamans bloody design upon poor
Mordecai and the Jews mark the end of that plot. Haman thought he had so
cunningly contrived the bu^^nesse, and was so confident of obtaining his
desire, that he made ready a high Gallows and now only waits for the Kings
decree, Hest. 5.14. in the next chapter Haman goes to the King with an intent
to have him speak the word, and all was done: but see I pray you how God turns
about the design, the poor Porter Mornecai is advanced to the greatest honor
in the Kings Court and by the Kings command Haman was hanged upon the same
Gallows he set up for Mordecai, Hest. 7.9 10. I might also give you more of
the same presidents, but these are sufficient: what think you now of this? who
would not be on God's side and Christ's side and the Saints side? which is such
a prosperous side, which shall be the prevailing ^ide. And what a miserable
condition are wicked men in, who are enemies to Gods people; that none of all
those ever brought their desires about; look upon all the persecuting
Monarchies that ever yet reigned, and they never carried their designs through,
this has still been their ends, They have fallen and perished and the Church
yet thrives. Tstis speaks comfort to the Saints in the first c^s^.

Secondly, let the wicked proceed as far as they can against the Saints, let
them come to the washing of their hands in the hearts blood of the Saints (and
that I suppose will conclude) which is as far as they can go,) yet I say in
this they do the Saints no hurt; nay, I will affirm it, they do them good. I
say suppose (as now its frequent) a Saint falls by the hand of the wicked, yet I
say such a one has no hurt, he is not made worse, but better by it. Such a one
does no^ loose but lay down his life in the cause of God. I say the child of
God that so dies, does but lay down his life for a time, and it shall
certainly be restored again with advantage, it shall be bettered it is only
changed an immortal for a mortal, 1. Cor. 15.53.. Who I pray you would not
change thus at any time? who would not willingly leave a poor rotten cottage,
that will keep out to wet or weather, for a goodly fair Palace: alas! what
hurt does the wicked to the Saints by killing them? what hurt does one do to a
poor pined prisoner, to knock off his bolts and set him at liberty? what hurt
does one when he finds a poor child like to perish in the woods, to lead him
out and bring him home to his Fathers house? this is all the hurt the enemies
does the Saints. The poor Soul is locked and pined in the prison of the body,
a Bullet sets it at liberty; the poor soul being ready to perish in a wood of
troubles and miseries, Death brings it to heaven and happiness, to God and
Christ, the Saints and glory. I pray you consider this well, and you shall see
that let the wicked do what they can, they can do the Saints no hurt; nay all
is for their good. This is the second Motive.

Motive 3. Labor to get a right, an interest in Christ, and then let your
condition be what it will be: you have God for your help, and Jesus Cbrist to
bear you company. If once you be married to Jesus Christ, he takes you for
better and worse he will go with you, counsel you, comfort you, suffer with
you and carry you through all. Every Christian may challenge this promise, I will
not leave. thee, nor forsake thee. Heb. 13.4. and from this the holy Ghost
raises an invincible sort of courage, saying: so that he may boldly say, The
Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man shall do unto me, ver. 6. This
you will conclude is right Christian valor indeed; but whence fetches the
Christian this undaunted resolution? It is not barely from the Promise, but
from the everlasting love of Jesus Christ, in whom all promises are confirmed,
as ^ollowes ver. 8. Jesus Christ the same yesterday and to day, and forever.
Jesus Christ is faithful and constant to the Saints; Jesus Christ likes his
poor Saints never the morse because they are black with sufferings; though
the world makes them miserable, and acconts them as the filth of the earth,
they are of a higher esteem with Jesus Christ. Hence is that speech of the
Spouse in the Canticles, Look not upon me because I am black (judge me not by
my outward appearance, there was cause for it) my mothers children were angry
with me, Cant. 1.6. yet for all this the Spouse is not troubled at he^ sable
color her self, nor Jesus Christ loves her never the less. In her own
apprehension she is comely, ver. 5. and to her beloved, she is the fairest
among women* ver. 8. Go further, as Jesus Christ likes not the afflicted
Church, the despised Saints the worse: neither does he leave her the more. Of
all times he is most with the Saints in trouble: it was the promise of Jesus
Christ to his Disciples to come in to their help (especially in straits) I
will not leave you comfortless. I will come unto you, Joh. 14.18. Of all times
Jesus Christ will be sure to come in to the Saints when he sees there is need
of support. Jesus Christ must do it, he cannot but do it, he is a
fellow-feeler of the Saints miseries; the Saints are of his flesh and bones (a
near relation) and that you know is a strong mo^ive with men to help a
child, a friend when they are over-borne with power. The Saints are also the
members of Christ's body, Ephesians. 5.30. and Jesus Christ is the head Ephesians. 1.22. Now
you know you cannot in the least manner hurt the remotest part^ of the body,
not a little fingers end, not a toe, but the head is instantly sensible of it.
The head is the seat of the soul, all the motions of li^e in the body are
chiefly acted from the rational faculties there. Christ is not less to the
Saints his members, he is more to them. Let the wicked take heed how they
medd^e with the Saints; they that put the Saints in prison, puts Jesus Christ
in prison; make the Saints suffer, and you make Jesus Christ suffer; Jesus
Christ must be with the Saints in all conditions, it is his promise and he will
make it good; when but the three children were cast bound into thar sevenfold
fiery furnace because they would not worship an Idol, the King did see four
men loose walking in the midst of the fire and they had no hurt, and the form
of the fourth was ike the son of God Dan. 3.25. Jesus Christ will go through
the fire with his Saints: when Peter was in prison for the testimony of Jesus,
an Angel comes, knocks off his bolts, makes all the doors fly open before him,
and leads him away, Act. 12.7, 8 9, 10. the like (upon the matter) was done to
Paul and Silas, Act. 16.24 25 etc. I say, let the Saints be where they will
Jesus Christ will be with them; do what you please to the Saints, you do it
to Jesus Christ: Saul could not go to persecute the Saints but Jesus Christ
calls to him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Act. 9.4. and mark I pray you
what an Item Jesus Christ adds, ver. 5. It hard for thee to kink against the
pricks; the wicked must look for sharp service, it is a dangerous work to hurt
the Saints; their wisest way is to let them alone and not meddle with them; let
the Saints be never so few in appearance and the enemies never so many, the
Saints have more with then against them, they that have Jesus Christ for them
have enough at full; though they be weak he is strong though they be few he
has men and Angels at his command; when Elisha's servant upon the approach of
the Army which came to take away Elisha cried alas my Master how shall we do?
2 Kin. 6.15. Elisha answered fear not for they that be with us, are more then
they that be with them, ver. 16. and these Elisha made use of ver. 17, 18. the
like is in that speech of Christ in his straight in the Garden; he had only a
few and those fals-hearted Disciples with him when the multitude came with
swords and staves about him; alas (says Jesus Christ) what are al these? I
^ould but pray to my Father and he would ^resently give me more then twelve
legions of Angels. Mat. 26.53. that is an infinite number: I might add much
sweet comfort to the Saints out of the power of Christ, who is their companion
in all, but this subject is the sum of the next motive, of which in its place.

Motive 4. Fourthly, get your interest in Christ cleared up, make sure of your
right to him and you shall have a share in the Churches deliverance; there is
not a more infallible truth, there is not any thing more certain, the Churches
delivera^ce shall come the Saints deliverance shall come, God will do it
himself: the Lord will save them and deliver them because they put their trust
in him: the time will come certainly, yea, the time will come shortly that God
will give a glorious day to his poor despised saints: saints, fear it not, it
will come: this encouragement is not mine, but he which knew well the mind of
God, and never yet was lie found in his mouth, even the Lord Christ Jesus: I
will give you his own words; fear not little flock, it is your Fathers good
pleasure (it is his own mind) to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. this is so
sweet to the Saints, this is such a soul-affecting subject, that I cannot pass
without a little stay upon these excellent comforts, I will therefore view
them apart: first, it is a great comfort and strange support to the saints, to
consider that a glorious deliverance shall bertainly come, if there be any
truth in all the book of God (which let them ever perish that dares deny it)
this position is true, the Churches of Jesus Christ shall certainly be
delivered from the wicked; it is God's word and God's promise, it is a sure
word of promse, and God will not fail his people nor break his promise: the
Churches deliverance was determined by the counsel of heaven from all
eternity, promised when the commission of persecution was first of all
granted, Genesis 3.15. and diverse hundreds of times repeated in the old and new
Testaments: it were enough to have only the promise of God that deliverance
shall come to the saints, but that which confirms the certainty is, that God
himself will do it* it is no less then three times repeated in two verses
of the 37. Psalm. The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he is their
strength in the time of trouble; The Lord shall help them and deliver them he
shall deliver them from the wicked and save them because they trust in him,
ver. 39 40. indeed if the business was altogether left to man there might be
just suspicion of a long delay: our eyes and our ears see and hear daily of
the baseness of many who are strong pretenders to the Religious part in these
times wherein God is about this great business of the saints deliverance pride,
self and treachery have much prolonged our misery and were it not that our
hope was in the Lord, we were in a sad condition; but I say again Saints
cheer up your drooping souls let open enemies and pretending friends do what
they can to keep off the Churches peace, God will infatuate their counsels,
discover their treasons and destroy their strength: the Lord will certainly
deliver his Saints from the wicked because they trust in him. Secondly, the
Churches d^liverance shall not only certainly but shortly come; I mean not
comparatively, but really within a little time; when I say (...) deliverance
shall shortly come, you must think I look above our present condi^ion, which
(though blessed be God our cause has much more life in it no^ then outwardly
could be discerned the last year) yet our continued distempers and
distractions bespeak much misery: but I say, I look above these, I look at ^he
Word and usually ways of God and these are my guides; I know you will be
desirous to hear my grounds for which I so confidently affirm, and I will
pres^ntly give them to you: some there are which I could urge, yet think it
wisdom to conceal them; but I will name two, and they are strong ones. First
it is a ^otable sign that our deliverance is at hand now the Lord has put our
worthies of Pa^liament upon the work of Reformation; Peace is the Babe, the
fruit of Reformation; the Scriptures are plentiful in president^, 2 Chronicles.
15.19. chap. 20.29, 30. both these are plain and full of comfort, if you read
the chapters; but this 30. ver. is enough it self, I pray you mark it; so the
Realm of Jehosaphat was quiet, for his God gave him r^st round about; the Lord
gave the Kingdom peace upon reformation, that was the ground. Secondly, the
Saints may conclude that their deliverance is near, from the height of the
enemies pride and blasphemy; when they are at the height then they shall down,
when the measure of sin is filled up, then wr^th shall be poured down upon them:
you may read Senacherib's pride in Rabshaketh's blasphemy, and then mark the
issue; it would be too much to give you the words of the whole story here, but
consider the event, that is the thing I aim at: In the 2 Kin. 18. you have a
relation of Assyria's pride and blasphemy, and in the very next chapter,
Assyria's Army, the object and subject of the Lord's wrath; now then, what do
you think of the hope of the Churches deliverance, when you consider the height
of the enemies pride and blasphemy? I will not mention the enemies pride and
conceited self confidence of a promised conquest, and I know now what; if you
be not acquainted with their fancies, you may but read those printed papers
which are called the Kings Declarations and you may see more then I ^m willing
to express: but if you dare believe reports, never was there the like
blasphemy known in the world as is daily heard in the enemies quarters, which
are now in arms to hinder the work of Reformation. Alas; Rabshaketh was but a
learner to these of our times, these are so bold that they scorn God to his
face, and commonly use this blasphemous expression as a familiar oath, God dam
me if he dare: truly I hope you will excuse me in further instances I fear and
tremble to think of them; but certainly the Saints may build upon it, God will
very shortly execute vengeance upon this wicked bloody generation who have so
long called for it themselves; fear it not God will do it, he wants not power
when he is pleased to set about it: this is the fourth motive.

Motive 5. Labor after the assurance of your interest in Christ, and you shall
enjoy a sweet communion with Christ; nothing is so sweet and pleasing to the
soul as communion with Jesus Christ: this is the very reason that Paul desired
to dye and to be with Christ, that he might have a nearer communion with Christ
then he could have in the flesh; I tell you it is a high privilege which the
Saint^ have, to have communion with Jesus Christ, it is the life of their cause;
it must needs go well with you when you have such an Advocate to plead for you
at the throne of grace, when you have such a friend as can and will frequently
carry your prayers and present your desires to the great God who is his Father,
and by him made your Father: I say fear not the success do you only keep to
the rule labor to eye God, labor to conform your selves to the revealed will
of God in his Word, be earnest with Jesus Christ to intercede with you and for
you to your Father, lay home his promises to him and he cannot deny you, God
will not deceive you, because you trust in him: the which the Lord of his mercy
speedily accomplish, and that alone for the sake of Jesus Christ, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

