A DECAD of CAVEATS TO THE People of England, OF General Use in All Times, but
most seasonable in These. As having A Tendency to the satisfying such as are
not content with the Present Government, as it is by Law established. An
Aptitude to the Settling the Minds of such as are but Seekers and Erraticks in
Religion. An Aim at the Uniting of our Protestant-Dissenters in Church and
State.

WHEREBY The worst of All Conspiracies lately raised against Both, may be made
the greatest Blessing, which could have happened to either of them. To which is
added an APPENDIX In order to the Conviction of those Three Enemies to the
Deity: The Atheist, The Infidel, and The Setter up of Science to the Prejudice
of Religion.

By THOMAS PIERCE D. D. Domestic Chaplain to His Majesty, and Dean of Sarum.

Partim Jussu, partim Permissu Superiorum.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Davis Bookseller in Oxford. 1679.

The AUTHOR'S PARAENESIS TO THE READER, Touching his PRINCIPAL DESIGN In the
following CAVEATS.
Christian Reader,
BEing passionately desirous (as by my Calling I am bound, and so with every
man's Pardon I am allowed,) to do as much as in me lies for the converting of a
Sinner from the Error of his way, whereby to save a Soul from Death, and cover
a Multitude of Sins, I penned the following Discourses as well for private as
public Use. For the private use first of some in the world whom they have
satisfied, and (by the Blessing of God) have had a good effect on. For the more
public use next of many Noble and Learned Auditors, whose Judgments as well as
Qualities being superior to mine own, have induced me to permit them to pass
from the Pulpit to the Press, as conceiving that by their being in common use,
they would be also more commonly and truly useful. What success they may find,
God only knows, who alone can command it, as He sees fit. But I am conscious
to my self of none other than the sincerest and purest Aims, at the Glory of
God, and the Good of Men, from the beginning to the end of my whole Performance.

If in the Conduct of my Discourses I shall seem to some Readers to have been
in some places too sharp, or pungent, I have This at least to say in my
Justification, or Excuse, that the sole End and Motive of my severest
Argumentations, has been only to compel them to be as happy as my self, in the
Communion I enjoy with the Church of England. As God himself is expressed, by
way of Parable, to send his Servant into the High ways and Hedges, Luke 14. 23.
to call the poor, the maimed, the halt, and the blind, and compel them to
come in (to his heavenly Feast,) that his House may be full; so I am earnest
(if I am able) to drive Dissenters out of their Hedges and Highways of Schism
and Disobedience, into the True House of God, and the Lord's own Table. The
whole Design of my sharpness, either in Argument, or Expression, is by Reason,
and Scripture, and by Scriptural Examples and Comminations, to force our
separating Brethren into Unity, and Embraces, and Friendship with us. God is my
Witness, I look upon them with Bowels of Tenderness and Compassion, (not with
Hatred, or Contempt,) as Poor, and Maimed, and Halt, and Blind; as lying in
Hedges of Aberration, and in the Highways of Corah, which lead directly both
to Temporal, and into the danger of Endless Ruin: And I would (if it were
possible) (...), even compel them to come in, and partake with us equally of
That Celestial Entertainment we commonly call The Lord's Supper; that so as
well The Lord's House, as the Lord's Table may be full of them. We abominate
nothing more than such an uncharitable Monopolizing both of Salvation and the
means of it, as Some (we read) have been guilty of; and do love Them so
heartily who do as heartily hate Us and our Way of Worship, that if it were in
our choice and power, we would not ingross the rich Reward of orderly Walking
unto our selves, but would make them partakers together with us. We would not
Pray, or hear Sermons, or communicate in Sacraments, or might we have our most
ardent Wishes, we would not go to Heaven without them. And it is with This
Charity that I endeavor in one Discourse to prove our Separatists have None,
so long as they abide in their State of Schism.

I know there is a great Difference, betwixt the Weaker, and Wilfuller sort of
Dissenters. Some of the former do not know, and None of them probably do
consider, how the Pharisees had their Name from their Separation, which arose
from their Opinion that they were Better than other Men. Much less yet do they
imagine, by what sort of Men they are invisibly overacted. They little think
that they are Journeymen to their own vvorst Enemies of each Extreme, who
drive a Trade of Divisions in Church and State, whereby to sacrifice to the
Lust of Revenge, or Avarice; and that They who do not intend the very least
public Mischief by their Dissentions, do (before They are aware) carry on
Their Designs who intend the greatest. Now there is nothing more dishonorable
to the Nature of Man, or more to the shame of his Understanding, than to be
made another Man's Property, another Man's Instrument, or Tool, even without
his own Knowledge, and against his own Will, as well as Interest. And if by any
thing I have urged in the Discourses of this Book, Persons abused and
over-reached by men ingeniously wicked (as Innocent Eve by the cunning
Serpent,) shall be made sensible of their Wrongs, and as well of their private
as public Dangers; I shall esteem it a great Reward to have been serviceable
to the more Tender and the more Treatable Dissenters, though I sustain the
Ill Will of the more Obdurate.

If any Reader shall Object, (after his perusal of All that follows,) that I
have showed as much Severity to certain Jesuited Protestants, as to the
Jesuits themselves of the Church of Rome, and in one place have paralleled the
Dismal 30 of January 1648. with the 5 of November 1605, my Answer is at hand,
and it is plainly this: that the Keeping out of Popery, with all its Plots and
Conspiracies of every kind, stands not so much in a Discovery and Confutation
of its Errors, (though That has evermore been done, and is still in doing,) as
in an effectual Disappointment and defeating of its Designs. The great and
general Design of the Popish Factioners and Factors, (I mean the Jesuits most
especially,) is to debilitate by dividing, and to distract by discontenting the
People of England; and by That Artifice, (having found by long Experience, They
cannot well hurt us without our Help,) to make the Protestants Themselves who
would have Popery kept out with Both their Hands, most Instrumental to bring it
in by Head and Shoulders. All I say against the Practices of our Habemus enim
and Nos Jesuitas, inquiebat Rex Jacobus. Isaaco Causabono dicuntur (...).
Epist. 116.
Jesuited Protestants, is in Displeasure to The Jesuits, who drive them on. And
were I to labor for my life against the Inroads or Growths of Popery, and in
prevention of the Conspiracies which come from Rome, I would make it my whole
Endeavor, both by Menaces, and Persuasions, by Terrors, and Entreaties, by
sense of Interest, and Honor, and Shame it self, by all the Means I could use,
and all the Arguments I could urge, to convince and convert our English
Protestant Dissenters, and make them All meet as One in the Church of England.
If it is Their Masterpiece to divide us, it should be Ours to be united. And
Now, if Ever. Else in vain do we strive to confute their Errors, though we do
it never so well, whilst torn in pieces among our selves we commit the grossest
Error (in point of Policy and Prudence) to be imagined. It should therefore (in
my opinion) be the Ambition of us All, who are heartily the Sons of the Church
of England, to prevail from All Topics with Protestant Sectaries amongst us,
(who do agree with us already in the public Profession of being Protestants,
and being equally averse to the Church of Rome,) to lay aside their
Animosities, if not to bury them for ever in the same Churchyard; to acquiese
in one Government by Law established; to submit their single Judgments to the
united ones of their Superiors; to sacrifice Private Discontents to Public
Interest, and to be as a City which is at unity in it self; to consider that as
the Laws would be otherwise than they are, if their Governors were as They, so
if They were as their Governors, the Laws would still be as they are by their
own Contrivance; to keep in mind that as of Mortals, who are but Men on this
side heaven, He is reckoned to be the Best who has fewest Faults, not He who
has none in a State of Frailty, so of all Governments upon Earth, That ought to
pass for the most Perfect, (as well in respect of its legislative, as of its
executive Administrations,) which is subject unto the fewest and most
supportable Imperfections.

Add to This the Consideration, how many Rebellions and Conjurations raised by
Christians (so called) against their Governors, have brought The Profession
into an Hatred with Jews and Gentiles ever since; and tempted many even at home
into This passionate Imprecation, Sint Animae nostrae cum Philosophis. Nor can
we say who were the worse, of men pretending to Christianity, They who did
execute what they intended on the 30 of January, or They who Intended only to
execute on the 5 of November, the barbarous Murder and Subversion of King and
Kingdom. And if our present Dissenters (such I mean of their Number as mean the
Best,) would but impartially consider, or sufficiently compare, as well the
Principles, and the Parties, as the Projects Themselves, which Those Two Days
have made so signal, I cannot choose but believe They would abominate them
alike; or the Later perhaps the more, for the Infamy Then brought on the
English Name. I know not whether I shall be able, but I am willing to do them
Service, by undeceiving and disabusing them in All the Caveats which ensue.
Being as hopeful our Common Enemies will in Time make us Friends, as I am sure
our Common Dangers ought to make us all intent on our Common Safety. This they
will and must do, in case we will but permit our selves, either in Piety, or in
Prudence, to be provoked by our Enemies to Aemulation. For if All sorts of
Papists, even the Sorbonists, and the Jesuits, the Dominicans, and the
Franciscans, the Professors of the Gallican and Spanish Churches, however
differing in Opinions, and burning in Hatreds of one another, do yet agree
against the Protestants, and in the same Church of Rome, as much as Caiphas a
Jew, and Pontius Pilate a Gentile, did Both agree against Jesus Christ; what
can hinder All sorts of Protestants, All the English ones especially, (however
divided in some Opinions and Disaffections to one another, as much perhaps as
even the Molinists and the Jansenists Themselves,) from meeting together and
agreeing in the same Church of England, whose Reformation is made Authentic by
the Highest Authority under Heaven? Especially when their Agreement is a most
Necessary Preservative of those Four things which are dearest to them, their
Religion, their Liberties, their Livelihoods, and their Lives? What can hinder
them from converting the most Inhumane Combination or our blood-thirsty
Enemies, into an Excellent Security against it self? or from making our
remaining and yet present Dangers become the most Instrumental to our Escape?

There is a trite and stale objection, against the King, and the Bishops, and
against all Inferior Men of the Church of England, that they are Popishly
affected, if not a kind of Cassandrian Papists. And This Objection or Calumny,
how weak soever, has yet been strong enough to be mischievous unto a world of
well-meaning, but weaker Brethren; although it has ever been confuted by all
the Barbarous Combinations, and Diabolical Conspiracies, against the Fathers
and the Sons of the Church of England, from the Days of Queen Elizabeth, to
These we live in. For if there is in any of us such a Tincture of Popery, or of
Papistical Inclination, as the Jesuited Papists have taught our Jesuited
Protestants to say and publish, why should the Emissaries of Rome be more
industriously intent upon our Destruction, (for being men of the Church of
England,) than upon the Extirpation of all other Protestants in the World? Is
it not because the Church of England is still the Ornament, and the Apology,
the Support, and the Protection, of All the Protestant Churches beyond Sea
throughout the World? Is it not that foreign Protestants cannot be rooted out
with Ease, or but persecuted with Safety, whilst there is a Church of England,
to stand as a Rampire in the Way between Them and Ruin? Whereas destroy or
extinguish the Church of England, and All the Reformed Churches abroad will
fall to Ruin of Themselves. If Real Miracles are not ceased, (as some say they
are, and some that they are not,) The Church of England's Preservation (and of
late more than ever,) is the best Argument I can think of, whereby to prove the
Continuance of them. O that our Separatists were wise! that they understood
This! that they would but consider* That Hand from Heaven, by which the chief
Protestant King, and the chief Protestant Kingdom of all the World, and the
chief Protestant Church which is the Security of the Rest, are yet alive at
This Day, to own and Honor their Deliverer, and to be practically thankful
for their Deliverance.

One thing more I have to say, in This Monition to the Reader, concerning both
the Nature, and the Liberty of a Man's Conscience; which He who offers to
invade, and so to violate, does attempt to make a Breach on the Gates of
Heaven. (As the Emperor Hujus sententiam Annals Hanc referunt, nullum enormius
peccatum esse posse, quam in Conscientias exercere velle imperium. Nam
Conscientiis imperare, est Arcem Goeli invadere.
Maximilian thought good to word it.) Only it is every Man's Concernment to
learn exactly what it is, wherein the Nature of a Man's Conscience, and the
just Liberty is to consist. I give a Caveat touching the first, in the Third
Sermon following; and touching the second in the Fourth. To each of which if our
Dividers will but deliberately advert, They will be much better Subjects both
to God and the King, than they are at present; and we who are Lovers of the
Government by Law established, shall have the fairer Quarter from them for That
Conjunction. This (one would think) should be agreed to, even by Men of All
Parties: that if the Consciences of Some (as Some do use the word Conscience)
contend for a Liberty to resist, or at least to contradict, and to defame the
Laws in force, sure the Consciences of others may have a Liberty to obey them
without offense Which yet has been envied, or denied us, we know by whom. If,
where the matter is indifferent, or barely lawful, All the immediate Laws of
Men are also the mediate Laws of God, by being enacted by That Authority, which
God has enacted we shall obey; and if it is a prime part of That Christian
Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, Gal. 5. 1.
to submit our selves (with S. Peter) to every Ordinance of man, and to do it
for the Lord's sake, (as S. Peter bids us,) It Is equally strange, and
unexcusable, that They who call it most falsely their Christian Liberty, to
despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, to live in Schism and
Disobedience to Laws in force, should seek to defraud us of That genuine and
True Christian Liberty, The Liberty to obey such as are over us in the Lord,
and such as Heb. 13. 17.
Watch for our Safeties, whilst we are Sleeping. In this Grand Doctrine of
Jesus Christ, the Doctrine of submission to every Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.
13.
by way of Climax and Gradation from the bottom to the Top of All Authority
upon Earth, (from the Constable or the Tithing-man who labors at the Plough,
to Him who sits upon the Throne as the Supreme Resort of Justice, and to whose
Determination the last Appeal lies,) we have a Principle of Unity, which either
will bind up all our Breaches, or else will make our Divisions innocent. For
our Judgments all meeting in This One Point, (as very easily they may, and
unavoidably they must, if we do heartily and truly believe the Gospel,) All our
other Disagreements in point of Opinion or Persuasion will not be publicly
Inconvenient, much less Pernicious: because when Inbred Insurrections are made
impossible, (as they are in the Case premised,) no Invasions from without can
ever hurt us. On the other side I cannot forbear to prophecy, (wishing my
Prophecy may be false, as it is modest and but conditional,) that if we fix not
on some Expedient whereby to agree among our selves, (nor can I imagine any one
likelier than the Great Principle of obedience to God's Anointed, whose Life is
every day endangered for his Adherence to our Religion,) we shall not have a
way left to keep out a foreign Jurisdiction, or to prevent its coming in with a
foreign Force.

I have the more reason to hope, the greater reason I have to pray, that my
Caveats may find their Readers in so much Temper as to weigh the several
Arguments made use of in This Conjuncture, which are in hopes to outweigh
whatsoever witty Malice may urge against them. And that This may be an Instance
of God Almighty's great Mercy to This most coveted, and endangered, and (not
despised, but) Envied Land, is so far the Hope; as it is the Prayer of

The Reader's well-meaning and faithful Servant T. P.

THE GENERAL HEADS or CONTENTS of the several Caveats.
1 JOHN 4. 1. I. Of Trying the Spirits before we Trust them. p. 1. 2 THESSALONIANS. 3.
6. II. Of the exceeding sinfulness of Schism; in how many great Regards it is
worse than Haeresie; and why more damning than other Crimes. p. 39. EPHESIANS. 5. 15,
16. III. Of Circumspection in Thesi. p. 79. MATTHEW. 24. 4. IV. Of Circumspection
in Hypothesi* p. 115. 1 COR. 10. 12. V. Of Fear as necessary to Faith in the
well-ordering of our Lives. p. 161. HEB. 12. 14. VI. Of Peace and Holiness
united, as equally required to our Salvation. p. 193. 1 THESSALONIANS. 5. 22. VII. Of
Abstaining from all Appearance of Evil. p. 237. 1. PET. 2. 11. VIII. Of
Abstaining in general from Fleshly Lusts. p. 273. 1 PET. 2. 13. IX. Of
Abstaining in particular from Disobedience to Authority in things Indifferent,
as from the worst and the most scandalous of all Fleshly Lusts in S. Peter's
Judgment. p. 317. HEB. 12. 25. X. A Caveat touching the Danger of Refusing
those Caveats our Lord has given us in his Gospel. p. 345. To which is added
an Inquiry, How God is said to be the Object of Real Knowledge, and how of
Faith only; and why Faith (rather than Knowledge) is essentially belonging to
All Religion. p. 389.
A SEASONABLE CAVEAT Against the Dangers of CREDVLITY IN OUR Trusting the
SPIRITS Before we Try them; Delivered in a SERMON BEFORE THE KING AT WHITE HALL
On the First Sunday in February, 1678/9.

By THOMAS PIERCE D. D. Domestic Chaplain to His Majesty, and Dean of Sarum.

Published by His Majesty's especial Command.

LONDON, Printed by E. F. for R. Davis, Bookseller in Oxford. MDCLXXIX.

A SERMON PREACHED before the KING.
1 JOHN 4. 1. But try the Spirits whether they be of God.
1. THERE are Multitudes of Deceivers in these our last and worst Times, by way
of Antidote unto whose Venom These words of S. John are a good Provision. And
however they are numerous, I think they may fall under two general Heads. Vide
Haeresin Jenxuanam apud Maffaeium, l. 16.
Some are so credulous as to believe every Spirit; and some so Atheistical, as
to believe none at all. Both are Enemies to Religion, though not Both alike.
For though the first are bad enough, the last are very much worse. The first
are Meteors in Religion, expressed to us in Scripture by Clouds without water,
and wandering Stars; such as are carried to and fro with every Wind of false
Doctrine; men so unlearned and so unstable, so in love with New Light, and so
given to change, that not contented with one or two, (though the best and
soundest,) they heap up Teachers unto themselves; and by the Novelty of the
Doctrine putting an estimate or value on him that brings it, they are easily
made Proselytes to every New Prophet who next bespeaks them; little considering
with S. John, (in the next words after my Text,) that there are many false
Prophets (many even in His Time, and many more sure in ours,) gone out into the
World. The second sort of Enemies (which are the worst too) are the Disciples
of the Book which is called Leviathan; the greatest Monster in all the World,
excepting only the Author of it. For if the perfectest Definition of Man as
Man, is to be Animal Religiosum, which still includes Rationale, and therefore
makes the most exact Definition, (as many great and good Writers have very
rationally esteemed it;) then He must certainly be a Vid. Arrian. Epict. l. 3
c. 29. and l. 4. c. 5. Plotin. Enn. 3. l. 2.
Monster, more properly then a Man, who is so destitute of Reason, as wholly to
be void of Religion too. And for any one to Teach, (as the Monster of
Malmesbury has been permitted to do in Print,) that there is no Spirit at all,
or that there is no incorporeal Substance, (two Expressions of the same Thing,)
what is it but to pluck up all Religion by the Root? It Is publicly to set up a
School of Atheism. For God (if any thing) is a Spirit; not for This reason
only, Joh. 4. 24.
because our Apostle S. John affirms it, (whom the Hobbists will not believe;)
but for this other reason also, (which even our Hobbists cannot but yield to,)
that, supposing a God there is, (or that it is but possible for him to be,) He
must be Infinite, and Indivisible; and yet, we know, He can be neither, if He
is any way Corporeal. For All Corporeal things have Parts, and so by
consequence are divisible, and so by consequence are finite. And for God to be
finite, or divisible, is for God not to be God; the worst and grossest of
Contradictions. From whence it follows unavoidably, that for any one to teach,
and to teach in public, (not publicly from the Pulpit, but much more
publicly from the Press,) that an Incorporeal Substance is in it self a
Contradiction, (the Positive Doctrine of the p. 214.
Leviathan,) is publicly to open a School of Atheism: It being publicly to
teach There is no Spirit, and (by a Consequence unavoidable) There is no God.
For every thing that is, is either an Accident, or a Substance. (What is
neither, is not.) And every Substance (a nobler sort of Being then any Accident
can be) is either Corporeal, or Incorporeal. That denominates a Body, and This
a Spirit. To say that God is the former, implies the horridest Contradiction;
(as has been shown;) and so He must be the latter, by undeniable Consecution.
To say, He is not a Spirit, or not an Immaterial Substance, is neither better
nor worse then to say, He is not. It is to say, There is no such Thing.

2. Against the dangerous Contagion of the premised two Extremes, S. John in
this Text has timely given us Two Caveats; one expressed, and another implied.
First, it is expressed in plain terms, that, seeing many false Prophets (or
false Pretenders to the Spirit) are gone out into the World, we are bound, for
that Reason, not to believe Every Spirit. Next, it is as evidently implied, (as
if it were expressed in words at length,) that though Many Prophets are False,
we must not thence reckon that None are True: as though many Lines are crooked,
we must not thence argue that none are strait; seeing every crooked Line must
needs presuppose and imply a strait one. Nor may we sottishly disbelieve the
Spirit of Holiness and Truth, for fear of believing with too much ease a Spirit
of Error and Uncleanness. But as my Text is in the middle between an important
Dehortation, [Believe not every Spirit,] and as important a Reason of it, [for
many false Prophets are gone out into the World:] so our Course is to be
steered in a middle way, betwixt the Scylla of Credulity, and the Charybdis of
Unbelief. We must examine all Pretenders, and try of what sort they are. We must
get a Lapis Lydius, whereby to learn the true difference betwixt the two sorts
of Spirits in the sixth Verse of this Chapter, the Spirit of Truth, and the
Spirit of Error: or, (to express it without the Metonymie which our Apostle
here uses,) betwixt a True, and False Prophet; betwixt 1 King. 13. 1.
a man of God, and a Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 3.
Dreamer of Dreams; betwixt a Theopneust, and a Daemoniack; betwixt a real
Possessor of Divine Revelations, and a fantastic Pretender to them. For as
there were Prophets in the Old Testament, both True and False, so are there
also in the 2 Pet. 1. 21. and chapter 2. ver. 1.
New. As there were Spirits under the Law, too many to be good, so there are
also under the Gospel. There was in That a familiar Spirit, (Lev. 20. 27.) a
lying Spirit, (1 King. 22. 22.) and a Spirit of Perverseness, (Isa. 19. 14.)
There is in This a foul Spirit, a deaf and dumb Spirit, (Mar. 9. 25.) a Spirit
of Error and of Delusion, (2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 1 John 4. 6.) a Spirit of Slumber,
(Romans 11. 8.) Still the more and the worse the unclean Spirits are, the greater
need we have to Try them. And though there are also as many Good Spirits, as
there are Angels who never fell; yet all their Goodness is but derivative, from
the one Spirit of God, who is God the Spirit. To Him are ascribed the famous
Gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 4. And amongst all the several Gifts wrought by one and the
same Spirit, the Discerning of Spirits is worthily reckoned to be a chief, ( v.
10.) Which Gift of Discerning 'twixt good and bad Spirits, (as all the rest,)
The Spirit of God divides to every man severally as He will, (v. 11.) to some
in a greater, and to some in a lesser measure. And in this Gift S. Peter did
very mnch excel S. Philip. (For so it is obvious to collect from the 8th. of
the Acts, by comparing the 13th. with the 23th. verse.)

3. Now whatever can be meant by the Subjects of Trial we are to make, whether
Churches or Churchmen, whether Prophecies or Prophets, whether Doctrins or
Doctors, whether Inspirations or men Inspired, or every one of these equally;
however different they may be, or inconsistent with one another; it is plain
they All pretend alike unto the same Spirit of God. And therefore (...), Try
and prove them, (says our Apostle,) whether they are what they pretend: whether
really they are Gold, or do but eminently glister: whether they speak by
Commission, and as the Oracles of God, or only run ere they are sent, inspired
by Avarice, and Ambition, and by the Impulse of the Devil: whether they teach
the sound Doctrins of Christ's Apostles and of his Church, whose Faith and
Doctrins we are to follow; or are but some of the foolish Prophets (in the
13th. of Ezekiel) who follow their own Spirit, Ezekiel. 13. 2, 3, 4, 6, 8, etc.
and prophecy out of their own Hearts; are like the Foxes in the Deserts, have
spoken Vanity, and seen Lies, saying, The Lord says, and the Lord has not
sent them. In any case we must try them, of what sort they are.

4. Nor must we only try Them; but we must also try the Rule by which they All
are to be tried. For several Tests and Rules of Trial (who are true or false
Teachers, and which Doctrins are right or wrong,) have been lately set up to
the hurt of Souls, by the Two sorts of Enemies whereof I spoke in the
beginning; to wit, the Pretenders to Enthusiasm, and the Disciples of the
Leviathan. The first of these will allow of no other Test, than the Sturdiness
and Strength of their own Persuasion, which it is their will and pleasure to
call The Testimony within them. And by running in a Circle they grow so giddy,
that the longer we Catechize, the more we lose them. And it is worthy to be
observed, how they wrest and misapply the Word of Life to their Destruction.
For, If we ask how they know they have a Testimony within them from God the
Holy Ghost; We know it (say they) by This, that 1 John 4. 13.
God has given us of his Spirit. If we ask how they know that He has given
them of his Spirit; We know it (they say) by This, that 1 John 3. 9.
we cannot sin. If we ask how they know that they cannot sin; their Answer is,
Ibid.
We are born of God. If we ask how they know This; We know it, (they will
answer) because we have Rev. 2. 17.
a new Name given us, which no man knows but He that has it. If we ask how
they know of a new Name given them; they will answer, We know it by that Romans
8. 11*
Spirit which dwells in us. If we ask how they know the Spirit of Truth from
the Spirit of Error; their Answer is still at hand, (and still out of the
Scriptures,) He that knows God hears us, 1 John 4. 6.
and he that is not of God hears not us. If we ask them for a Witness whereby
to prove it; Romans 8. 16.
The Spirit (their Answer is) bears witness with our Spirits. If we bid them
produce their Witness; He that believes (they will say) has the witness in
himself. 1 John 5. 10.
If we call for any Witness of men; ver. 9.
they tell us, The Witness of God is greater. Thus they argue by their Circular
and Identical way of discourse, [They have the Holy Spirit of God, because they
are (forsooth) assured; and assured of it they are, because of the Spirit which
dwells in them.] So strongly does the Spirit of Perverseness show it self in
such as are delivered up to believe a Lie. (For that is sometimes the case, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.)

The other Enemies of Religion, (who are withal by much the worst,) in a
derision and contempt of supernatural Revelation, Leviath. p. 36. and 169.
will have no better Test of true and false Prophets, or of right and wrong
Doctrins, than the Warranty and Allowance of the Sovereign Powers, Ibid. p. 232.
in every Kingdom and Commonwealth, of whatsoever Denomination throughout the
world. Which Position of the Leviathan, (fetched as it is from Japonia, and there
from the Sect of the Jenxuani) is so prodigiously absurd, that it either makes
no difference 'twixt Right and Wrong, and infers True and False to be a couple
of empty words, (which signify nothing, or the same thing, the Will and
Pleasure of the Prince;) or else infers this Contradiction, that the same
Things and Persons are in several Times and Places both True and False. So
that according to This Position, the Christian Religion was a false one under
all the Heathen Emperors, who did publicly prohibit the Teaching of it; yet a
most true one under Constantine surnamed the Great, and under all the following
Emperors, who strictly commanded it to be Taught. Jesus Christ (with Mr.
Hobbs) must have been a false Prophet, as not approved of by Herod and the
Then-Emperour of Rome; whilst Mahomed must be a true one, because allowed by
the great Sultan, supreme Governor of the Turks. The Will and Pleasure of the
Prince being set up by That Monster, as the sole Touchstone, or Criterion,
whereby a Prophet, or a Doctrine, or a Religion is to be tried. Leviath. p. 250.
None (says He) but a Sovereign in a Christian Commonwealth, can take notice
what is, or what is not the Word of God. A greater power than is ascribed by
the Jesuits themselves, either to the Bishop or Church of Rome: a power to
abrogate the old, and (as often as he will) to make a new Canon of Scripture,
or none at all.

5. Had such Seducers of the people appeared in public among the Jews, a
present Death without Mercy had been inflicted as the wages of Their Iniquity.
( Deuteronomy. 13. 5. and chapter 18. v. 20.) The Setters forth of new Doctrins in that
Mosaical Dispensation could not escape their public Trials in the Great
Parliament of Israel they called The Sanedrim; and were condemned as false
Teachers, either to be strangled, or stoned to death. Yea, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2*
though they had shown Signs and Wonders, and though their Signs came to pass
too, yet could it not exempt them from suffering Death, in case they tended to
seduce the silly Admirers of their Wonders to worship Idols, or any other way
to enervate the Law of Moses: which none could be allowed to do, and yet be
thought a True Prophet, unless he could do as real Miracles as Moses, and give
as cogent Demonstrations as Moses had given, of his having been inspired and
sent by God. Therefore None but the Messiah, who out-did Moses, and that as
well in point of Miracle, as in Holiness of Life, and in illustrating or
completing the whole Moral Law, could lawfully abolish the Ceremonial. Yea
even Those Divine Prophets or Men of God (as they were called) who still
asserted the Law of Moses, and dissuaded men with vehemence from Idolatry and
Schism, were fain to prove they were of God by unfeigned Miracles. By such a
Real Miracle of the anonymous Prophet at Bethel, 1 King. 13. 4, 6.
Jeroboam's Hand was dried up, and restored to him. By such a Miracle of
Elijah, the Fire of the Lord fell down from Heaven, 1 King. 18. 38, 40.
and consumed the Burnt-sacrifice, together with the Altar on which it lay.
Whereby the People were incensed against the false Prophets of Baal, and
presently slew them all as Cheats by the River Kishon. By such a Miracle of
Elisha, 2 King. 5. 15.
even Naaman an Idolater was suddenly cleansed from his Leprosy, and convinced
of Jehovah's being the only true God. By the like unfeigned Miracles, Moses
baffled all the lying ones of the Sorcerers in Egypt. And if the Prophets Then
had need of showing many and great Miracles, to prove the Truth of That
Religion which the Israelites were then in Possession of; How much a greater
need of Miracles should our Seducers stand in, whereby to make us leave our
Old, and wherewith to draw us on to their New Beliefs? That Doctrine (for
example) of Jesus Christ and his Apostles, [that we must obey them who have the
Rule over us, and that we must submit our selves to every Ordinance of man for
the Lord's sake,] was confirmed by greater Miracles (if any greater can be)
then Moses and the Prophets confirmed theirs by. And by Consequence, if our
Pretenders to supernatural Illumination will have us adhere to their New
Doctrine, [that we must not submit to every Ordinance of man, but rebel against
them; nor obey, but resist such as have the Rule over us; nor do any thing in
Religion with any Decency or Order, but all as rudely and as confusedly as we
can,] they must persuade us by greater Miracles than those of Christ and his
Apostles, whom we believe. At least they must be able to convince us of Error
in Life and Doctrine, Number. 16.
(as Moses did Corah and all his Separatist-Relations,) by commanding the Earth
to open, and to swallow us up quick: or strike us dead without a blow, (just as
Peter did Ananias,) for our usurping That Authority to preach God's Word, which
our Schismatics and Enthusiasts of each Extreme are wont to arrogate as a
Right belonging only to themselves. But (God knows) we have too many, who need
no working of Signs and Wonders to deceive them: so very fond they are of
Novelties in Religion it self, that they are often drawn from it without a
Miracle. Yea, if the True Prophet from Judah could suffer himself to be
deceived by the cunning False Prophet who dwelt in Bethel, (1 King. 13. 18.)
for which (not the False, but) the True Prophet was slain; (v. 24.) how apt are
others to be deceived who are no Prophets at all? Very great need therefore we
have, to Try Pretenders to the Spirit, before we Trust them, whether or no they
have indeed a Prophetic Spirit; and whether they speak the mind of God by any
Immediate Revelation.

6. A general Rule whereby to try them (though it is particularly applied) S.
John sets down in the next verse after my Text; Hereby know ye the Spirit of
God. Every Spirit which confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh, is
of God. A Text whose pithy Brevity makes it difficult and obscure, and so it
stands in some need of an Explication. I take its meaning to be This. Every
Spirit which confesses, or every Pretender who owns our Savior, not only by
word of Mouth, but in Life and Practice, and from the Heart, both as Jesus a
Savior, and as Christ a King too; Every one who does own him as well by his
Faith, as his Confession, and as well by his Obedience, as by his Faith, to be
the only true Shiloh that was to come; Every one who does own him to be come
in the Flesh too, not only in his Divine, but in his Humane Nature also, which
Cerinthus and Ebion and Simon Magus did deny; (unto whom in particular S. John
alludes in this place;) lastly, Every one who owns him in his Exinanition, in
his most despicable Condition, which made his Friends to fly from him, and
Peter himself to disavow him; Every one who does own him in his tremendous
Crucifixion, his Death, and Burial, and confesses him even so to be Mar. 16.
16.
the Son of the living God, or God manifest in the Flesh, It Is plain that every
such Spirit must be concluded to be of God.

So that if any shall here object against S. John's Rule of Trial, that many
Heretics and Schismatics do confess Jesus Christ to be come in the Flesh, who
notwithstanding are of the Devil, and not of God; Two Answers are to be given
for the Objector's behoof and satisfaction; one from Estius, and another from
Tirinus. (Though the Substance of them Both I have anticipated already.) Estius
answers, that S. John did direct This Rule against the Heretics of his own
Times, who denied Jesus Christ to have come in the Flesh: and such were those
Three whom I named a little before. Which Answer is indeed good, but not
sufficient. Tirinus therefore adds fitly, that by our Confessing Jesus Christ
to have come in the Flesh, is meant our Confessing and Believing (to wit, our
practical Believing) that Jesus Christ is the Messiah; Act. 5. 31.
both a Savior and a Prince, (as S. Peter calls him,) who gives Repentance
unto Israel, Ibid.
and Forgiveness of sins. Not Forgiveness without Repentance, nor Forgiveness
before Repentance; but Repentance in the first place, and Forgiveness in the
second. In which very order, both of Dignity and Nature, S. Peter had exhorted
to Both before, ( chapter 3. v. 19.) Repent, and be converted, that your Sins may
be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord. And all sincere Repentance implies. Obedience, as the same S. Peter
argues, Act. 5. 32. This Answer is very good and sufficient too, unless, by
being too short, it may be also too obscure, or not sufficiently perspicuous to
some of the slowest apprehensions; for which defect in the next place I shall
endeavor to make amends.

7. And because where the Touchstone it self is False, all sorts of Trial must
needs be foolish; Therefore Pretenders to the Spirit are to be tried by such a
Touchstone, as needs not it self Another Touchstone for its Trial. And such a
Touchstone is to be taken out of those plainest Places of Scripture, whose
sense and meaning is agreed on even by men of All Judgments; Texts delivered
in such clear and univocal Terms, that opposite Parties do apprehend them in
the very same way; And as they never have been yet, so they never can be matter
of any Cavil, or Dispute. And because I pretend not to teach my Fellow-
Teachers, or such as need not to be thus taught, (though the most knowing may
not disdain to be put in remembrance of what they know,) but only the Ignorant
and the Unstable, who (for want of due Knowledge, or of sufficient
Consideration,) are like Clouds without water, carried about of Winds, (as S.
Jude describes them;) I shall be careful that every Part of the Test or
Criterion I am to give, may be short, and yet easy, and (I hope) without all
Question. The several Parts of the Touchstone will be no fewer than 6 or 7. Nor
are the Spirits to be tried by any one or two of them, but by All put together,
whether or no they are of God.

First, Joh. 14. 17.
The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit of Truth. And therefore if any man,
who is outwardly of a seeming good Life, is yet of very ill Judgment in
Fundamentals, in Points essential to Christianity, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
as in the Doctrine of Obedience to every Ordinance of Man, Romans 13. 1.
to the Higher Powers, to Them that have the Rule over us, Heb. 13. 17.
and do watch for our Souls; (a Doctrine running in a Vein throughout the Body
of the Gospel, and essentially belonging to All Religion;) especially if he
ascribes to a sinful man (not to say, The Man of Sin,) That Incommunicable
Attribute of God himself, [Infallibility,] and gives to every Priest the
Privilege to do a much greater Miracle than ere was done by Christ Himself, so
far forth to transubstantiate a piece of Bread, as first to make his own
Savior, and then to eat him; He must needs be misinstructed by the Spirit of
Error and Fascination, 1 John 4. 6.
the Spirit with which he is bewitched, Act. 8. 9, 11.
(as S. Paul speaks to the Galatians,) Gal. 3. 1.
let his outward Conversation be what it will, let his visible Course of life
be never so plausible, or severe.

Next, Romans 1. 4, 18.
The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit of Holiness and Purity, as well as
Truth. And therefore if any man, who is Orthodox, is at the same time
Dishonest, of some good Opinions, but evil Practice, does hold the Truth, but
in unrighteousness; especially if he takes upon him (by That Viper of Morality
and all Religion, the Jesuits Doctrine of Vid. Les Provinciales 5. 6. and
Caramuel de Theologia Fundamentali p. 71, 72. and Escobar Theol. Moral. Tom. 1.
l. 2. c. 2. p. 34. 39. 43. 160. etc.
Probability) not only to allow, but to encourage and abett the grossest
Villainies in the World, (without exception;) He is not seasoned by the Holy,
but the Mar. 5. 8.
Unclean Spirit, let his Orthodoxie of judgment, as to some Fundamentals, be
what it can. An honest Heathen is not so bad as a Christian Knave.

Thirdly, The Spirit that is of God is Ephesians. 4. 3, 4.
the Spirit of Unity and Love. And therefore if any sort of men shall take upon
them to be Reformers by making Schism, by dissolving the Bond of Peace, wherein
the Unity of the Spirit is to be kept, and shall crumble Religion into as many
small Parcells, as the Caprices of Idle men shall have the liberty to suggest;
especially if they shall labor to separate Subjects from their Sovereign, by
absolving them from their Oaths of Christian Obedience and Fidelity, or by
instructing them to swear, with a Design to be forsworn; They are miss-led by
That Spirit whose Name is Legion, Mar. 5. 9.
even the Spirit of Division, Rev. 12. 9.
That old and cunning Serpent which deceives the whole World.

Fourthly, The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit of Meekness and of Order. 1
Cor. 4. 12.
And therefore if any despise Dominion, 1 Cor. 14. 23.
and speak evil of Dignities, and in pretense of being the Meek ones who are by
right of Promise to inherit the Earth, demurely tread upon Crowns and Crosiers,
and love to be levelling with their Feet, whatsoever (according to God's
special Providence) does overtop them by Head and Shoulders; especially if they
presume to place the single Bishop of Rome above General Councils, invest him
with a Power to excommunicate Kings, and subvert whole Kingdoms, and make the
People hope to Merit by the most prodigious Murders; They must be led by That
Spirit, Rev. 9. 11.
which is called The Angel of the Bottomless Pit, Abaddon, and (...), that is,
Destroyer; even the Spirit which is still working in the Children of
Disobedience. Ephesians. 2. 2.


Fifthly, The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit of Sincerity, induing All whom
He inhabits with an absolute Simplicity and Singleness of Heart. And therefore
They who do hold up their Left hand to God, but their Right against their
Governors; having Godliness in their Profession, but practical Atheism in
their Lives; hating Idols from the Teeth outward, but loving Sacrilege from
the Heart; crying down Superstition, but preaching up the Creature Comforts
flowing from Plunder, which they call Providence; declaring with zeal against
the Prelates, but ever voting up the Papacy of their Superintendents;
declaiming much against the Sectaries who are not of their Denomination, but
breaking down the Hedge of Discipline whereby the Herds are to be kept from
God's Enclosure; especially They who have invented the Art of Aequivocating and
Cheating, the Art of Swearing any thing safely, by mental Exceptions and
Reservations, the Art of Couzenage by the Contract they call Mohatra, and the
like; must needs be acted by that Spirit whom the Scripture has expressed by
the Father of Lies, Joh. 8. 44.
even the Spirit of Hypocrisy, 2 Cor. 11. 14.
That black Prince of Darkness, which transforms himself with ease into an
Angel of light.

Sixthly, The Spirit that is of God is the Spirit of Knowledge, Isa. 11. 2.
and Wisdom, and Understanding. And therefore if any man cites Scripture
against the whole Tenor and Stream of Scripture, and wanders into the wrong
way, even by That very Word which does direct him into the Right one;
especially if he levells the Canon of Scripture with the Apocrypha, and makes
the Pure Word of God to truckle humbly under Tradition, whereby it becomes
Matthew. 15. 6.
of none effect; if men so learned, and so acute, Mar. 7. 13.
and so sagacious as the Jesuits, after all the heinous things they have done
and taught, are so far from discerning what Spirit they are of, that they
utterly mistake an Evil Spirit for a Good one; a Spirit from Hell, for one from
Heaven; the Spirit which reigns in the Court of Rome, for the Spirit which
guides in the Church of England; if they can think it the Top of Piety, to
advance the Lord Jesus quite against the Lord Christ, and make the Christian
Religion the greatest Transgression of Itself (which moves the Jansenists to
call them The Antichristian Society;) if they can take it for the Comble of
Christian Merit and Perfection, to espouse and put in practice this Turkish
Maxim, that Religion is to be propagated (where it is possible) by the Sword;
They must needs be possessed by the Spirit of Slumber, Romans 11. 8.
the Spirit of dead Sleep, the God of this World which blinds the mind: Isa.
29. 10.
for so the Devil is once called, 2 Cor. 4. 4.

What I have thus drawn out at length, our Blessed Lord does wind up into This
short Bottom, (Matthew. 7. 20.) Ye shall know them by their Fruits. But the
Fruits of That Spirit that is of God are reckoned up by S. Paul to be such as
These; Gal. 5. 22, 23.
Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Meekness, Goodness, and the
like. And therefore They who, in stead of loving Enemies, do persecute and
oppress the mystical Members of the same Body whereof Christ is the Head; who
lay the Cross of Christ Jesus on Christian Shoulders, robbing one of a Living,
another of a Liberty, a third of a Life; and this for no other Crime than being
constantly Conscientious, (and very real Friends to All, because the Flatterers
of None, though able to injure, or to oblige them;) must needs be managed by
That carnal and unclean Spirit, which makes them so fruitful and so abounding
in the works of the Flesh: such as Hatred, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21.
Variance, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, and the like.

8. Now if All these Particulars be laid together in our minds, I suppose we
have a Touchstone to Try the Spirits of Pretenders, whether or no they are of
God; and such a Touchstone, as needs not it self another Touchstone to be Tried
by. But because the best Touchstone is nothing worth to such as know not how to
use it, we shall do well to take notice of one Rule more in the using of it.
For, considering how many Troppo confina la Virtu col Vitio.
Vices do too much border and confine upon several Virtues, and how many Lies
are more plausible to flesh and blood than many Truths; and hardly any thing
can be so false, but may have Colors and Probabilities to set it off; (being
neatly laid on by men ingeniously wicked;) and that a multitude of Ignaro's do
often swallow the grossest Errors, (presented to them in the Disguise of the
greatest Truths,) by not distinguishing Words (as they ought) from Things, and
blending one thing with another, and taking them down all at once, without any
masticating or chewing; I say, for This reason, we must not pass our last
Judgment upon Pretenders to the Spirit, until we have made our selves
acquainted as well with their Habits, as with their Acts; as well with the main
or general current of their Lives, as with the mere conduct and carryings on of
their Designs; with the Means they make use of, as well as with the End they
pretend to aim at; with the Building which is erected, as well as with the
Scaffold by which it is raised; with All their Actions in a lump, as well as
with the most specious and fairest of them. And when This is done thoroughly,
Then let the Hypocrites and Impostors be what they will, let the Forms of
Godliness and the Features of Religion be never so artificially and neatly
drawn, let the Colors be laid on with never so delicate a Pencill, and let
that Pencill also be managed with never so exquisite Address; 'twill be most
easy to find the difference between the Picture and the Life. Let Zeuxis his
lively Grapes be never so apt to deceive the Birds, yet the Deadness of his Boy
will unfold the Cheat.

9. The very Truth of it is, We should be utterly unexcusable, if we should
fall into the Snare of The certain men among us crept in unawares, of either
sort, because their Arts of deceiving are gross and obvious; fit to infatuate
Understandings of the lowest size only, and such as are willing to be deluded.
There were Counterfeits in the most primitive and purest Times of the Church,
who were brave Cheats indeed; who, besides their Form of Godliness, besides
their Praying and their Preaching, could also set forth themselves by Signs and
Wonders. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9.
The Devil had taught them That subtle Trick of transforming themselves into
Angels of light; 2 Cor. 11. 14.
and so of deceiving (if it were possible) the very Elect. Matthew. 24. 24.
Such were Barchochebas, Apollonius, and Simon Magus. Whereof the First had got
a faculty even of vomiting flames of Fire; the Second could tell the men of
Ephesus, what in That very Hour was done at Rome; the Third (like a Cherub)
could fly abroad into the Air. So that They had some kind of Color for their
giving out themselves to be the Messengers of Heaven, some Pretenses for their
Broaching a New Theology to the People; because their Counterfeited Miracles,
however derived from below, might seem at least to short Reasons to have been
given them from Above. And to be cozened by such as These, were a more
tolerable Infirmity; a Credulity more to be pitied, and very much more (rather
than less) to be pardoned also. The Magicians also in Egypt were such
admirable Deceivers, that They were able (as well as Aaron) to turn their Rods
into Serpents, Exodus 7. and 8.
and their Slime into Frogs, and their Waters into Blood. So as if Moses and
Aaron (through God's Assistance) had not publicly convicted them of downright
Sorcery and Enchantment, (wherein the Magicians grew eminent through the
Assistance of the Devil;) If Aaron's Rod at last had not swallowed up Their
Rods, and turned the Dust into Lice through all the Land, which the Magicians
could not do, but confessed (to their own shame) that The finger of God was in
it; Lastly, if Moses had not smitten the very Sorcerers themselves (as well as
the rest of the Egyptians) with Boyls and Blains, insomuch that the Magicians
could not stand before Moses; They had had a shrewd Advantage in the deceiving
of the People, and the People so deceived had been excusable a Tanto. Whereas
our modern Enthusiasts, or Pretenders to Revelation, and to a Testimony within
them from God the Holy Ghost, are not so much as good Jugglers; They are
woeful Impostors, and silly Cheats; such as Satan indeed has furnished with
very much Industry, but with very small Wit; whereby He does not more strongly
Tempt them, than he discovers them to be His. They being so far from being
endowed with extraordinary Gifts, whereby to prove to us an extraordinary
Commission; so far from setting out themselves by Signs and Wonders, (like
those Primitive Deceivers of whom our Savior gave all his Disciples Warning,
(in the 24th. of S. Matthew,) or like Those of whom Moses forewarned His
People, (in the 13th. of Deuteronomy;) that they come short of most men of the
Church of England, even in Those very things wherein they would be thought
eminent. The only Gifts of the Spirit which they pretend to, are but Praying
and Preaching; in their Performances of which they signalize themselves by
Nothing; or at least by nothing more, than Noise, and Nonsense. The Gift of
Tongues, or the Gift of Healing, or the Gift of being subject to Higher Powers,
for Conscience sake, or for the Lord's, or any other such remarkable
Apostolical Gift of the Holy Ghost, I never heard that our Adversaries on
either side did ever yet so much as pretend unto. They seem to be as unapt to
obey their Governors for Conscience sake, (which is one special Gift of the
Holy Ghost,) as to speak with new Tongues, or to raise the Dead.

10. Now if those Exquisite Pretenders, in the Infancy of the Gospel,
Barchochebas a Jew, and Apollonius Tyanaeus an arrant Heathen, Simon Magus,
Menander, Basilides, and the like, who by Profession at least were Christians,
were not Then to be believed, notwithstanding their Enchantment and
Magick-miracles; If a false Prophet under the Law, who led the People into New
Errors, (as Vincentius Lirinensis expounds that Passage Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.
Vin. Lir. c. 15.
and applies it to a false Teacher in the Times of Christianity, in particular
and by name, to Valentinus, Donatus, Photinus, Apollinaris,) was not only not
to be heeded or hearkened to, but also was by That Law to be put to Death; yea
(one step farther,) If an Angel from Heaven, who shall preach another Doctrine
than what has hitherto been delivered, (whereby to lead us into Rebellion, or
Schism, or Sacrilege, or any Conspiracy whatsoever against the Government we
are under,) must be no otherwise entertained, than with an Anathema Maranatha;
How much less may our Shallower and Vnskilfuller Impostors be believed to be of
God upon their own single Word, and without a Witness, whilst they cannot
confirm or commend their Novelties, no not so much as by seeming Miracles? no
not so much as That Man of Sin, That Son of Perdition, of whose Coming S. Paul
says to his Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 9.
that it is after the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and (with
stupendous, though) lying Wonders?

But grant they had (what they have not) an Ability to show us some Signs and
Wonders; Matthew. 24. 24.
yet Apollonius Tyanaeus would put them down.

Suppose they preached extremely well, Matthew. 7. 22.
(as it is plain they do not,) yet Photinus and Nestorius would go beyond them.

Do they make very long Prayers? Matthew. 13. 14.
So did the Pharisees for a Pretense, that they might the more slily devour
Orphans and Widows houses.

Have they a readiness and facility in citing Scripture? So had Julian the
Apostate when he disputed against the Gospel. So had Satan in his tempting our
Blessed Savior; Matthew. 4. 4, 6.
when he wrested God's Oracles with as much subtilty and address, as the
keenest of our Recusants (of what strain soever) are wont to do.

Do they pretend their being warranted by an immediate Revelation? So did Numa
the Roman; and so did Eumenes the Greek: so did Mahomed the Saracen; and
Alarichus the Goth: lastly, so did the Pretenders in the Primitive Church;
which made S. John exhort Christians to Try the Spirits; alleging This for his
reason, that many false Prophets are gone out into the World.

Is God's permitting them to be prosperous, Quomodo ob Religionem Magni, quibus
Magnitudo de irreligiositate provenit? Tertull. Apolog. cap. 25. p. 56.
or to sin on with great Impunity, any Argument that he approves them? No, it is
the weakest way of reasoning which our Adversaries of Rome have delighted in.
For, (besides that we find them confuted often by their Afflictions,) God
permits, what he abominates, his own Dishonor. How patiently did he permit the
Disobedience of the First Adam, and Crucifixion of the Second? All the
Villainies in the world do come to pass by God's Permission, however contrary
they are to his Rules and Precepts. And if prosperous Impiety does therefore
cease to be Impiety, because it is prosperous and permitted, (that is) not
hindered by force and violence, (inconsistent with a free and a moral Agent;)
Then the great Sultan; and the great Cham, and the great Mogul, as well as the
great Bishop of Rome, are by an equally-sound Consequence the greatest
Favorites of Heaven. And then the Argument of apud Prudentium ad Valentin. Si
Romanae Religiones regna praestant, nunquam retro Judaea regnasset, Despectrix
communium istarum Divinitatum. Tertull. Apol. c. 26. p. 57.
Symmachus had been unanswerably conclusive against the Primitive Christians,
who for 300 years and upwards lay groaning under the Yoke of the Heathens
Tyranny. Lastly, if Permission were still a Mark of Approbation; Then Dionysius
(or Diagoras) had argued logically well, when, having robbed the Delphick
Temple, and immediately after escaped a Shipwreck, he gave it out, that the
Gods had approved his Sacrilege. Not at all that he believed, but laughed at
Providence.

11. What now can be said farther, in the behalf of our Pretenders to the same
Spirit's Illumination, which cleared the Heads of the Apostles, and warmed
their Hearts? Can it be said they live strict and religious lives, though lives
of Schism and Disobedience to humane Laws and Lawgivers, expressly said in Holy
Scripture to be the Ordinances of God? But admit it were True, (which yet is so
false, that it implies a Contradiction,) 'twere not prevailing. Hieron. ad
Marcellam.
For the Heretic Montanus grew so proud of his Strictness, of his Demure
Course of life in point of Abstinence and Sobriety, and suffering Hardships, as
to believe himself in Time to be The Paraclete downright; Philostrat. l. 3.
not a Godly man only, but even The Holy Spirit of God. In which case it is
very evident, that even his strictness was his Disease: and that the Spirit
which overrul'd him was from his Spleen. The Heathen Brachmans also of India
were so temperate, and chaste, and so addicted to Self-denials, (in Maffaem
Hist. Ind. l. 12. p. 319. and l 14. p. 398. 1 Cor. 7. 31.
order to their gaining upon the opinions of the People with whom they lived,)
that they seemed (in all appearance) to use This World as not abusing it:
(exactly so as S. Paul exhorts the followers of Christ.) Such an
externally-strict Person was the Papalins S. Francis; who yet discovered his
Humility and passive Meekness (as I have read many years since, apud Authorem
nescio Quem, as Cicero speaks in the like case,) to have partly been a Cloak,
and partly an Instrument of his Pride. For, being asked why he rejoiced amidst
the hardships of his Imprisonment, Ideo me exultare noveritu, quia
adhuc-Sanctus per totum Seculum ador ator.
Because. (said he) the whole world will even adore and canonize me among their
Saints. Hereby we see the strict Necessity of the last Rule I mentioned for the
right using of the Great Rule by which the Spirits are to be Tried. For,

Lastly, by neglecting to Try the Spirits of Pretenders, whether or no they be
of God, (and to try them impartially by every part of That Touchstone I lately
gave,) How very many have we known of our poor Separatists in England, (acted
as they have been by the late Emissaries of Rome,) so strangely shallow, and
over-credulous, as readily to imagine that every Schismatic is a Saint, who is
not a Sabbath-breaker, or Swearer, not a Drunkard, or an Adulterer, and is so
or so qualified in point of Judgment; or (to speak more exactly) in point of
Party, and of Opinion? It must therefore be well considered, and carried
constantly in mind by such as These, that of the two it is less intolerable to
be a Swearer, than a Rebel; a Drunkard, than a Thief; a common Thief, than a
Sacrilegious one; and a less horrid thing, to be corporally vile, than to be
spiritually proud of one's own Perfections. We must beware of all the former,
as we ever hope to fly from the wrath to come; but more especially of the
latter, as being much the more Luciferian Sins. Sins which can never attend men
to Heaven, having brought down the Angels of Heaven to Hell. Drunkenness and
Whoredom (however damning) are Sins the Devil cannot commit: but Envy, and
Malice, and Schism, and Sacrilege, Hypocrisy, and Rebellion, and intoxicating
Pride, are peculiar to him; they are the Devil's Sins so properly, that they
are properly called Devilish in Men, or Christians, wherever found. And as
These of all Sins are much the most Diabolical, so they are the most damning of
any other, for ought I can collect from the words of Christ, (Matthew. 23. 14.)
and by the words of S. Peter, (2 Pet. 2. 9, 10.) If they who hate our
Congregations and way of Worship, because they judge the Holy Ghost to have
forsaken our Meetings, and to dwell only in theirs, or because we do not
easily shut the Door against Sinners, (till by Authority authorized,) though
they are under the Reputation either of Drunkenness, or Whoredom, or any other
the like Scandalous and Deadly Sin, but not under the Sentence of legal
Excommunication, (till when we cannot lawfully shut them out from our
Communion,) I say, if the Censurers of our Patience and Longanimity toward
such would but turn their Eyes inwards, or duly reflect upon themselves, and
compare those Sins which the Devil never commits, with those several other Sins
which are proper to him; If they would not only observe, but also remember,
and consider, and religiously lay to heart, 2 Pet. 2. 9, 10.
the terrible Emphasis and force S. Peter puts on the word (...), saying of
Them who despise Government, that they are chiefly, or most especially,
reserved by the Lord unto the day of Judgment to be punished; and the most
formidable Importance of That Greater Damnation, Matthew. 23. 14.
which our Savior has denounced against those Hypocrites, who for a Pretense
do make long Prayers; I say again, if our dissenting and separating Brethren
(in love and pity to whose Souls we pray and preach for their Conformity) would
have the Patience and the Humility to chew enough on these things, They would
think with more Charity of our Communion, and with less Arrogance of their own.
They would not separate from us Then, unless for contrary Inducements than now
do move them. They would separate from us Then, in an humble opinion of their
own Vileness; saying from the heart with the meek Centurion, Luke 7. 6.
Lord, we are not worthy that Thou should enter under our Roof, and are by
consequence unworthy to have admittance under Thine. They would not separate
from us Then, unless in the Spirit of S. Peter, afraid to approach unto Christ
himself, with a Depart from me, O Lord, for I am a Sinful man. They would not
separate from us Then, like those Idolaters in Isaiah, Isa. 65. 2, 5.
with a Stand farther off, come not near to us, for we are holier than you; But
rather, like the Lepers under the Law of Leprosy, would cover their faces with
Confusion, and stand aloof from God's House, Lev. 13. 45, 46.
accusing themselves of their Uncleanness: or, like the (...) and (...) in the
Primitive Times of Discipline, falling down flat upon their faces, (not in the
Church, but the Churchyard, at an humble Distance,) would beg the Charity of
Their Prayers whom they saw entering into God's House at the Times of Prayer.
Were they such Separatists as These, and from such a Principle as This, from
the excesses only of Meekness, and not of Pride, we should receive them with
the Embraces of Arms and Hearts; we should readily afford them even the Right
hand of Fellowship; we should conclude the Holy Ghost had so descended upon
their Souls, as once he did upon the Heads of the 12 Apostles, Act. 2. 41.
or rather upon the Hearts of th^se 3000 who at S. Peter's one Sermon were
added to them: Though not in the Edifying Gifts which were bestowed upon the
former, yet in the Sanctifying Graces which were infused into the latter.

12. But having spoken enough already of Trying the Spirits in other men, I
think it fit to say something of Trying them also in our selves. For
considering the words of the Prophet Jeremy, The Heart of man is deceitful
above all things; and that it is given to very few, (few, I mean, in
comparison,) to know what Spirits they are of; I guess it concerns us all in
general, and every one of us in particular, to resume the whole Text, and bring
it home unto our selves; to search and try our own Hearts, and to examine our
own Spirits, whether or no they are of God. 'Twas the Precept of Pythagoras to
every man of his Sect, that he should bring himself to the Test, or call
himself to an Account, every Evening of his whole Life, with a (...); what he
had done in That Day which he ought to have omitted, (...).
and what good thing he had omitted which 'twas his Duty to have done: Nor was
he to suffer himself to sleep, till he had made up this Reckoning three several
Times. So 'twas the Precept of S. Paul, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
in his 2d Epistle to the Corinthians, Examine your selves whether ye be in the
Faith: (meaning That Faith which does work by Love all manner of Obedience to
the Law of Christ's Gospel:) (...), prove or try your own selves, whether ye
have not yet received the True Faith of Christ; or whether, having once
received, ye still retain it. Know ye not your own selves how that Jesus Christ
is in you, except ye be Reprobates? So S. Paul reasoned with his Corinthians;
and so must we with or within our selves. Know we not that Christ is in us, by
the Presence of his Spirit? and by the Power of his Word? and by the evident
effects of His Operation? Such as our Sorrow for our sins past, our hatred of
our selves in Remembrance of them, and our steadfast Resolutions of better life?
Know we not that Christ is in us by such Evidences as These? If we do, Then let
us treat him in such a manner, as may become so Divine a Guest. But if we do
not, we have some reason to fear, lest we have sinn'd-away our Savior, as
arrant Reprobates and Castaways; as men unworthy to be called Christians; as
men who either are not at all Regenerate, or else are fallen from That State of
Regeneration which we were in; or (to express it with S. Paul) as men who have
received the Grace of God in vain. And as it concerns us on all occasions to
try the Spirit which is in us, whether it is a good, or an evil Spirit; so most
especially does it concern us at such a Time as This is, when we Tread in God's
Courts, to offer up the Gospel-sacrifice of Supplication and Thanksgiving; to
hear His Word, and to partake of his Sacraments (Duties equally belonging to
the first Sunday of the month.) For the Bread of God's Children must not be
cast unto the Dogs; and the Food which is Spiritual belongs to Them only who
can spiritually discern it, and who live not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit. I do not mean after every Spirit, (for there are many more than good,
as I showed before,) but after The Spirit that is of God; The Spirit of
Holiness, and Truth; The Spirit of Unity, and Love; The Spirit of Meekness, and
of Order; The Spirit of Singleness, and Sincerity; The Spirit of Wisdom, and
Understanding; The Spirit of Counsel, and Ghostly Strength; The Spirit of
Knowledge, and true Godliness; Isa. 11. 2.
and lastly, The Spirit of God's Holy Fear; (as the divine Prophet Isaiah
expresses him resting upon Christ, of whom the good King Hezekiah was but a
Type in That place.) Unto all which if I should add, The Spirit of Promise,
Ephesians. 1. 13.
(with S. Paul,) and The Spirit of Prophecy (with S. John,) Rev. 19. 10.
The Spirit of Grace, Zech. 12. 10.
(with holy Zachary,) 1 Pet. 4. 14.
and The Spirit of Glory, (with S. Peter,) I should but say, The same Spirit,
in the vindicating of whom from the many False Spirits, which (in this last Age
especially) have been debauching the Christian World, I have employed the
little Time which is allowed for this Part of our Morning Service.

To Him therefore with The Father in their Unity with The Son, Sing we
Hosannahs, and Hallelujahs, Blessing, Glory, Honor, and Power, To Him that
lives for evermore.

OF The exceeding Sinfulness OF SCHISM; In how many GREAT REGARDS It is worse
than HAERESIE; AND Why more damning than other Crimes.
2 THESSALONIANS. 3. 6. Now we command you, Brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks
disorderly.
1. A TEXT exciting us to a Duty which does equally invite and command
Attention. For the Duty is introduced with as important an Obtestation, as is
any-where used in S. Paul's Epistles: and it must certainly be a matter of
exceeding great moment, which could extort from our Apostle so great and signal
an Obtestation. He calls us Brethren, (for we are now in the place of the
Thessalonians,) to win our Love, and to show his own. But withal he commands
us, as God's Ambassador, that he may make as good impression upon our Fear too.
We may take his whole Meaning in This plain Paraphrase.

(...), We charge you, and that by virtue of our Commission, or in the power of
our Apostleship, in the name and the behalf, by the Bowels and the Authority
of our Lord Jesus Christ, as ye will answer it at the great and terrible Day of
Discrimination, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9.
the Day wherein the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels in flaming Fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that
obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with
everlasting Destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power; by every thing that is dreadful, or dear unto you, (...), we
declare, we denounce, we command you, Brethren, that if ye observe any
Professor of the Christian Religion (who for that reason only is called a
Brother) to forsake his proper Calling, his Place and Station, and to meddle as
a Buisybody in other men's Matters, ( v. 11.) and so to cast off all Obedience
to the Rules of Direction which we have given; (especially if ye observe him to
leap from the Shop into the Pulpit, or out of the Church into a Synagogue
consisting of the most factious and disorderly Opiniators, who, under color of
serving God, despise the Ordinances of Men;) ye presently Note him, and mark
him out, as a Disorderly Walker, as a Disturber of Society, as a Disseminator
of Discords, the very Bane of all Religion, and the Discredit of Christianity;
most unworthy to be admitted to any Commerce or Conversation with regular
Christians; but to be shunned like any Leper, and to be cast out of your
Company, as if he had a Plague Sore. (v. 14.)

Thus I paraphrase the Text, as I find it relating to the Context; and by
comparing our Apostle's with our Savior's own Rule. For (...), A Brother
walking disorderly, in this present verse, does seem to be the same unruly and
irregular Person, who is expressed by the word (...) 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. Which
being a Military expression, and of peculiar use in Tacticks, does properly
signify a Soldier who runs away from his Colors; quits the Service he
undertook and engaged in; denies obedience to his Commander; not only to his
Lieutenant, but Captain General; (that is to say, without a Metaphor,) depraves
the Doctrine, disturbs the Discipline, disowns the Government of the Church: By
any one of which Three he is disorderly in his Walking, however they are
commonly all Three in one.

2. Now when a Brother, (that is) a Christian, (at least in Profession and
Pretense,) is so disorderly in his Walking, as that he will not hear the
Church, but is a Contemner of Authority, and Public Order; He is, by the Rule
of our Blessed Savior, to be looked upon and dealt with, just as Matthew. 18. 17.
Heathen-men and Publicans were looked upon and dealt with amongst the Jews: We
must avoid him, as a profane and an impious person; as one who is void of all
Religion, and as it were without God in the World. Thus we must brand and
stigmatize him for two good Reasons, and pious Ends: first, that himself may be
ashamed, and being ashamed may be converted; (2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.) next, that
others also may 1 Timothy 5. 20.
fear to do, and suffer, by his Example.

3. That This was the meaning of our Lord, (Matthew. 18. 17.) seems to me very
evident from Two especially of his Apostles; I mean, the most learned, and most
beloved. They tell us Both, that when a Brother is become contumacious, and not
reclaimable either by private, or by public Admonitions, we must not only not
religiously, but not so much as civilly entertain commerce with him. We must
not 1 Cor. 5. 11.
eat with such a Brother, or keep him company; must not 2 John 1^
receive him into our Houses, or bid him God speed. And there is reason for
this Severity, which S. Paul and S. John have thus enjoined us. For can there
be any thing more apposite, more pertinent, or proper, than to deny them our
Company in private Houses, who disdain to afford us their own in God's? Why
should we eat and drink with Them, either at Their, or Our Tables, who are
therefore too unworthy, because they think they are too Good, to eat and drink
in our company at the Table of the Lord? Why should we any-where go with Them,
who will not go with Us to Heaven; and hate the means of Salvation, so far
forth as we enjoy them? Is it any way consistent either with Charity, or
Reason, that we should bid a man God speed in the ways of Corah; or affect his
Society, who hates our Religion, and our God? No, he is rather (says our
Apostle) to be put away from us, 1 Cor. 5. 2. and 13.
and from among us, (as a foul, pestilential, accursed thing,) and even
delivered up to Satan by the Censures of the Church: 1 Timothy 1. 20.
although it be to this charitable and wholesome end, that he may learn not to
blaspheme; that he may learn to be conformable to Rules and Rulers; 1 Cor. 5. 5.
and so that his Spirit may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus.

4. It Is true that All vicious persons are disorderly Walkers, who walk as far
as they are able from the strait Path of God's Commandments: and from All that
are Scandalous we are commanded to withdraw. For so says S. Paul, (1 Cor. 5.
11.) I have written unto you, not to keep company, if any man that is called a
Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a
Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one no not to eat. No not in one of
your private Houses, much less in the Sacrament, and House of God. But I do not
here speak (nor does S. Paul) touching absolute Apostates, who do renounce and
fall away from the whole Faith of Christ, and the very Profession of
Christianity; because They are not so much as called, or accounted Brethren.
Nor do I speak of Jews, or Heathens, who, because they are avowed and open
Enemies of Christ, may with much the more safety, or rather with much the less
danger, be traffick'd with. (And accordingly S. Paul has excepted Them, in the
very next verse before my Text, and the next verse after.) But I speak of gross
Sinners, on whom the name of Christ is called. And amongst Them, in special
manner, I aim at two sorts of men who are called Brethren; and so (like Judas
downright) do betray the whole Cause of Christianity with a Kiss. I mean the
Haeretick for one, who breaks the Unity of the Church in point of Doctrine, by
denying one or more of her Fundamentals: I mean the Schismatic for another,
who breaks the Unity of the Church in point of Discipline, by doing as much as
in him lies to overthrow her very Government, Laws, and Order. The First of
These we must reject, and withdraw our selves from, in case he shall not reform
himself, after a couple of Admonitions: Tit. 3. 10. Much Nulla ab iis tanta
potest fieri corruption, quanta est Schismatis pernicies. Iren. l. 4. c. 62.
more the Second, as the more Scandalous, and the more mischievous, and the
more impious of the two. And being by much the most irregular of all disorderly
Walkers my Text intends, he is the fitter to be the Subject of my Discourse at
this Time. For an Haeretick, as he is such, does only offend against Faith and
Truth; and keeping his Error to himself, (as very easily he may, and very many
there are that do,) so as it never shall run out, either at his Tongue's or his
Finger's end, is no body's Enemy but his own; is a regular Citizen, and a good
Subject, living friendly with his Neighbors, and in an uniform Obedience to
his Superiors. Whereas a Schismatic, as he is such, does also offend against
Peace and Charity; and cannot possibly keep his Schism unto himself, but needs
must hurt others with it, because it is public in its own Nature, and cannot be
Schism, unless it be so. For he separates himself from the public Worship;
affronts the Governors, and scorns the Government of the Church; cuts himself
off from the Communion of the Body of Christ; sets up Altar against Altar, Dan
and Bethel against Jerusalem and Sion; sets up a Ministry of his own making,
against a Priesthood ordained by God; abetts a Conventicle prohibited by God
and Man, against a Church set apart by the Laws of Both; like Jeroboam
downright, whose Sin consisted in This especially, that he made Israel to Sin.
Now an active Divider in and of the Church of God, must needs be worse than any
other, who is but passively divided and cut off from her. And to destroy a
whole Society by subverting the whole Legislative power, must needs be worse
than to violate a particular Law. And That which makes way for all the
Haeresies in the world, as well as for all the Immoralities of life, (which
Schism does evidently do,) must needs be worse than any Haeresie, which does
only make way for itself. And so a Schismatic is the more impious, and the
more mischievous of the two. Again, a Schismatic is worse than a simple
Haeretick as such, not for this reason only, because a vicious Practice is
naturally worse than a wrong Opinion; (though that is reason great enough;) but
for this other reason also, (not so commonly observed as I wish it were,)
because a Schismatic ipso facto is mostly an Hieron. ad Tit. c. 3. See Dr.
Ham. of Schism, c. 1. p. 7.
Haeretick into the Bargain. For besides his renouncing the Ninth Article of
the Creed, (that Form of sound words delivered to us by Christ's Apostles,) The
holy Catholic Church, and The Communion of Saints; (duly expounded and
understood;) I say, besides That, He flatly despises, and detests (for it is a
little thing to say, he disowns, and disbelieves,) That principal Doctrine of
the Gospel, That Fundamental of Christianity, That great Essential to All
Religion, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15.
that we must heartily submit to every Ordinance of Man; and that as well for
the Lord's sake, as for our own; nor only for fear of Wrath, but for Romans 13.
5.
Conscience sake.

5. Why I choose to call This, a principal Doctrine of the Gospel, a Fundamental
of Christianity, and the great Essential to All Religion, I seem to my self to
have so many and great Reasons, that if they were everywhere urged, and laid
to heart, (especially by the Parties who are the least aware of them, but most
concerned to take them in,) they might suffice to put an end to those numerous
Schisms, which now do threaten to put an end to our whole Religion. The Doctrine
of Obedience to humane Governors and Laws, is certainly the aptest of any
other, (next to that of our Obedience to God himself, whereof this Doctrine is a
most necessary part too,) Ephesians. 4. 3.
to keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace; and to congregate into
one Body the most disjoynted and scattered Members in Church and State. A
Doctrine laid for this purpose by God the Father, from the Foundations of the
World; and that in the Law of the first Creation. A Doctrine propagated by
Moses, as Taught of God to teach others. A Doctrine perfected by Christ, as by
the Wisdom of the Father, who prayed his Followers might be one, even as his
Father and He were one: (Joh. 17. 11.) which yet without Obedience to this very
Doctrine can never be. A Docctrin inculcated and enforced by God the Holy Ghost,
as by the Spirit of Love, and Meekness, of Peace, and Union. A Doctrine extended
to All Authority upon Earth; not only Regal in the first place, (1 Pet. 2.
13.) but Ecclesiastical in the second, ( Heb. 13. 17.) To sum up all in a
word, There is not a Doctrine in all the Gospel, either more earnestly, or more
assiduously, either more plainly, or more expressly prescribed to us, (and that
under pain of Damnation too,) than that of our uniform Obedience to All that
are over us in Authority. I say, to All; not only to the Best, (the Good and
Gentle,) but as well to the worst, and most 1 Pet. 2. 18.
froward Governors.

6. It is not only most foolishly, but most nefariously pretended, that the
Piety, or Impiety, the Religion, or Irreligion, of them that are over us in the
Lord, can either widen, or contract our divine Obligation to strict Obedience.
For never was any incarnate Devil more incomparably impious than those
Emperors of Rome, Tiberius and Nero; whom yet our Savior and S. Paul
commanded their Followers to obey, and obeyed Themselves. For Obedience to
Magistrates being of Divine right, strongly founded upon the Will and the Word
of God, and even a part of our Obedience to God Himself, (whilst it is paid to
that Authority which God has commanded us to pay an Obedience to,) cannot
possibly be due to the men, as men, or to the Good, as they are Good; but to
the Magistrates or Masters reduplicative, as they are such: It Is due to the
Governors as they are Governors, Romans 13. 1, 2.
and as the Ordinance of God; let their Practices and Opinions be what they
will.

7. It Is true, when our Governors are Usurpers, or (being None) do command us
what God forbids; There there lies an Exception to our Obedience, due to God,
rather than Man. But This Exception makes strongly for all I have hitherto
said; and that by virtue of the old Axiom, Exceptio firmat Regulam in non
exceptis. So that by this Rule and Reason, that when God and His Deputies do
stand in competition for our Obedience, God must have our whole Active, and His
Deputies our Passive Obedience only; It cannot but follow, that when our
Governors are rightful, and do only command what God does nowhere forbid,
or do only forbid what God does nowhere command us, There we must obey God,
by obeying Man: there being no other way of paying God our Obedience, in such a
case. For There our Governors Command is the Command of God too. There the
very same Law which is immediately Humane, is also mediately Divine; Because we
There are commanded by That Authority upon Earth, which in the Old and New
Testament God has commanded us to obey. Nor is there any one Duty, belonging to
us as Men or Christians, which God is pleased to make a stricter Provision for.
We are no more commanded to fear God, than to honor the King: nor are we more
forbidden to worship Idols, than to resist or disobey such as are over us in
Authority.

8. This I do the rather insist upon, in my Design upon the Welfare and the
Conversion of our Schismatics, (the most Disorderly Walkers of all my Text
alludes to, or comprehends in its Importance,) because I can no more separate
(no not so much as in my Conception) the Sin of Schism from Disobedience to
just Authority, than Disobedience from Rebellion against the Gospel, or a State
of Damnation from either of them. They are all three united in the Schismatics
of old, as S. Jude describes them. For, speaking in his Epistle of Certain men
crept in unawares, Jude 4.
despising Dominion, 8.
and speaking evil of Dignities, 12.
Clouds without Water carried about of Winds, 13.
raging Waves of the Sea, foaming out their own shame, wandering Stars, to whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever; He proceeds in his Description
to call them Murmurers, 16.
Complainers, Walking after their own Lusts, 19.
Separating themselves [from the Church Established,] and pretending to have,
but indeed having not the Spirit. This is S. Jude's Hypotyposis or Description
of the Gnostics, who were the first and worst Schismatics, the first and
worst Haereticks, the first and worst Rebels in the Primitive Church; the first
who separated themselves upon this account, that they thought themselves
perfecter and purer Christians than others were; the first who preached up
Christian Liberty to consist in an Exemption from all Authority upon Earth,
from all Superiors whatsoever, whether Masters, or Kings, or Apostles and
Governors of the Church; The first we meet with in all the Gospel matched and
paralleled (for wickedness) with Cain and Core, yea with Sodom and Gomorrah,
yea with Those Schismatics in Heaven, the Angels that kept not their first
Estate, but left their own Habitation, (v. 6.) and were thrown headlong by
their Schism from Heaven to Hell; Briefly, the first in the New Testament, who
are set forth for an Example, (as Sodom and Gomorrah were in the Old,) of
suffering the Vengeance of eternal Fire, (therein tormented day and night for
ever and ever, Rev. 20. 10.) And so they are paralleled (for their Misery, as
well as Sin,) with them that separated themselves from the Church Triumphant;
Jude 6.
reserved therefore by the Judge in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the
Judgment of the Great Day. In all this S. Jude agrees exactly with S. Paul, (1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.) and as exactly with S. Peter, (in his whole 2d Chapter of his
2d Epistle,) as if the one had taken Notes out of the other. No less terrible
are the Expressions of the Epistle to the Hebrews, concerning such as persevere
in the Sin of Schism, Heb. 10. 23, 25. to v. 30. where They that do not hold
fast the Profession of the Faith without wavering, (v. 23.) but forsake the
Assembling of themselves together, (at the Stated Times and Places by just
Authority appointed,) as the manner of some is, (v. 25.) are inferred to sin
wilfully, after they have received the knowledge of the Truth, (v. 26.) and
there remains nothing for such, but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment
and fiery Indignation, (v. 27.)

9. Nor indeed is it a wonder that the Holy Ghost's Penmen and Amanuenses
should set themselves, as 'twere on purpose, to terrify Schismatics from
their Schisms, and to persuade them into Conformity, 2 Cor. 5. 11.
by showing the Terrors of the Lord; by thundering out Damnation, more to That
single Sin, than to all the rest: For a wilful and a Groundless Separation
from the Catholic and Apostolic Church, or from a National Church only,
which is a true Part of the Universal, (such as is the Church of England, where
nothing sinful is required as the Condition of our Communion,) whether by
Breach of that Communion in which a man ought to have continued, or by a
Refusal of that Communion which it is his Duty to be of, (and that as well by
Divine as by humane Laws,) is so infinitely far from walking orderly, or
according to the Tradition we have received of S. Paul, (that is, according to
the Rule of a Christian Life, delivered to us in the Scriptures,) that it is to
give the greatest Scandal which can be given to Christ's Enemies, and tends to
make the whole Gospel of none effect. It helps to justify the Turks; the Jews,
and Gentiles, in the Praejudices they have to the Christian Name. It helps to
harden them in their hatreds, and even tacitly forbids them to be Believers.
It Is true that Haeresie and Schism do so agree in one generical Signification,
that Haeresie is Schism in point of Doctrine, and Schism is Haeresie in point of
Use. But they are so very different in their specifical acceptions, that Schism
is many ways the worse, as I said before. And if S. Paul by the word Haeresies
does Note that (...) placed after (...) may well signify Schisms, because the
word is so taken Romans 16. 17. and because Schisms are a kind of Ecclesiastical
Seditions.
not signify them Both, it follows that Haeresie of itself is ranked with
Hatred, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Murders, Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. And then how
damning a Sin is Schism, whereof Haeresie is but a Part, as I showed before?
This is also there reckoned among the Works of the Flesh. For Hatred, Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, what are they all, but several Members or
Concomitants of Schism? implying Schism to be a System or Body of Sin
epitomized. S. Paul accordingly speaks of Schism, as of a complicated
Carnality, which (like the proverbial Trojan Horse) carries an Army of
Impieties within its Bowels. 'Twas That (by way of eminence) S. Paul accused,
of having made his Corinthians carnal. 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4.
And the Character which is given to the Double-minded man (Jam. 1. 8.) belongs
as well to the Schismatical or Carnalminded man, that he is unstable in all his
ways. For such exactly is the Schismatic by way of peculiarity; who having
fallen from his Center, [The Church of God,] knows not after where to fix; but
wanders about from Sect to Sect, from Party to Party, from Haeresie to
Haeresie, from Schism to Schism, and so indeed does try all things, (in a most
perverse and peevish sense,) as never to hold fast what is good. Experience is
the Mistress by which we have been taught This. (I mean the woeful Experience
of Six and Thirty years old.) And we are most prodigious Dunces, if after so
many years Instruction in the School of Affliction and Experience, we are no
whit the wiser for such a Lesson. For what things are there in Holy Writ, (how
essential soever to Christianity,) which have not been questioned, and
disputed, if not denied, and rejected, since Schism took place in the Chair of
Scorn? To this alone we owe the raging of the Sea, and the roaring of the
Waves, whereby the Madness of the People is often expressed. To this alone we owe
the Legion, I do not say only of Creeds, of Religiosities, of Dogmatizings
here in England, (since the year 41. in especial manner,) but even of
Skepticism, Apostasy, and of Atheism it self.

10. Now if any are desirous to know the Reasons, why our Schismatics, rather
than others, (however Scundalous in their lives,) are singl'd out from the
whole Herd of Notorious Sinners, to be paradigmatiz'd as disorderly Walkers,
from whom we are Pejus hoc crimen est, quam quod admisisse Lapsi videntur.
Cyprian. de Vnitate Ecclesiae. -- (...) -- Eusch. l. 6. c. 36.
most to withdraw ourselves; I shall endeavor their Satisfaction by these 4
Reasons. They seem to be the most destitute of Christian Meekness and Humility.
they are the most void of Christian Charity, as That is Superior to Faith and
Hope. they are the greatest Underminers of Society and Government; the greatest
Adversaries to God, as the God of Order; the greatest Disturbers (and the most
dangerous) of private Propriety, and public Peace. England are the most
barbarously ungrateful, and most deplorably unexcusable of any other. I am
very much mistaken, if I have not great reason for these 4 Reasons. But whether
so, or not so, I leave to the Judgment of my Superiors; and content my self
with This, that (without any passion) I speak mine own.

11. To the first of my 4 Reasons I premise S. Paul's Character touching
Schismatics in general; 1 Timothy 6. 3.
to wit, that they consent not to wholesome words, and the Doctrine which is
according to Godliness; 4,
but are proud, knowing nothing, dote about Questions, and Strifes of words,
whereof comes Envy, Strife, Railings, evil Surmises, perverse Disputings of
men of corrupt Minds, 5.
and destitute of the Truth. From such (says he to Timothy) withdraw thy self.
S. Peter adds, They are presumptuous, 2 Pet. 2. 10, 15.
selfwill'd, despise Government, have forsaken the right Path, and are gone
astray. Now from Scripture thus speaking, let us reason the case a little, and
then apply it. Can any be farther from Humility, than They who know nothing,
and yet are proud of their Knowledge? Can any Pride be more prodigious, than
that by which the very basest and the most despicable of Subjects do not only
abhor, but despise their Governors? nor only the Persons, who are but Men,
but even Government it self, which is avowedly Divine in its Institution? The
Apostle's Expression is rich and elegant, as well as true. For to despise, or
contemn, to depretiate and scorn, and as it were to look down upon Those above
us, does not savor of a vulgar, or of a middle-siz'd Pride, but of Pride in
its Exaltation. Can any Pride be more monstrous, than for vile Dust and Ashes
even to Deifie It self? yet the Schismatic seems to do it in Three respects.
For first, he arrogates to himself God's Incommunicable Attribute, whilst he
founds his grossest Errors upon an Infallibility: which he does not only
ascribe (as others do with more modesty, and show of Reason, although it is no
more than a show of Reason,) to the whole, either diffusive, or representative
Church; but to his own individual Person, acted (forsooth) and over-acted by
That which he calls (speaking out of his own Heart) the infallible Spirit of
God. In any Controversy arising touching the sense of any Scripture, He does
not appeal to the Original, or Context, to Fathers, or Councils, or
Commentators, (all riffraff in his Esteem,) but to Illumination, and
Revelation, and The Testimony within him. Nor can I imagine what should keep him
from returning into the Church he has turned from, unless it be the worst
Effect of the greatest Pride, a shamefulness to confess he has ever erred. Next
he Deifies himself by not enduring God's Yoke, or indeed that God should reign
over him. For if the Powers that are on Earth are ordained by God, (as S. Paul
affirms,) it is evident that we live under a (...); that God, by Them, does
reign over us: and they that resist shall receive Damnation, because they will
not be under God. This is certainly at the Bottom both of S. Jude's, and S.
Paul's, and S. Peter's reasonings, when they infer eternal Torments (as they
everywhere do) from Disobedience to the Authorities, and the lawful Commands
of Men. Besides, the Schismatic seems to Deifie himself, by seating himself on
the Throne of God, and undertaking to be the Judge of Quick and Dead; by
opening the Seals of the Book of life; and expounding God's Decrees of
Particular men's States from all Eternity. He takes upon him before the Harvest,
to sever the Wheat from the Tares, and the Sheep from the Goats. He forsooth,
and his Party, and none besides, are the Elect; whilst all from whom they All
separate, are Vessels of Wrath and Reprobation. Again, how far is That
Professor from Christian Meekness, who says as the Schismatics did of old, in
the Prophet Esa. Isa. 65. 5.
Stand farther off, come not near me, for I am holier than Thou? thanking God
that he is not as other men are, neither a Sabbath-breaker, nor Swearer, nor
even as this or that Publican; no Conformist, no Royalist, nor even as this or
that Excize-man, gathering Tribute-money for Caesar: and proudly taking to his
Party the name of Saints at every turn, which he denies to the Apostles in all
Discourse he makes of them on all occasions. Briefly, for a Person of very low
Parts, and little Learning, of contemptible Education, and small Improvements,
to separate from a Great and Admired Church, The Church of England, and from
the Devotions of the same in her Public Liturgy, All contrived by the Wisdom,
directed by the Learning, embraced by the Piety, established by the Authority
of such a Nation, confirmed by at least 33 Acts of Parliament, and by as many
Convocations, or Representatives of the Clergy, signed and sealed by the
Sufferings of many Confessors and Martyrs, lastly, asserted and defended
against the Wit and the Malice of all Opponents; I say, for a person grossly
ignorant, and knowing nothing in comparison, to scorn or pity all his Teachers,
as Fools and Blind; for him to think he sees more or better, than the two
Universities put together, commonly called the two Eyes of this National Body,
(which is as if the silliest Sheep that ever leaped out of a Fold, should take
upon them both to guide and to feed their Shepherd;) This does argue such an
Arrogance, Self-conceitedness, and Pride, as no Rhetoric can express, no
Charity excuse, no Humility not censure. Although Novatus was made a
Schismatic by a proud opinion of his own Purity, and by his carnal Ambition to
head a Party, as Simon Magus did the Gnostics in the Apostles own Times, on
the same account; yet now the Copy and Translation has so outdone its Original,
that our Schismatics have accused the Laws and Canons (for Uniformity) of
being Such. They could approve of most things, in case they were not imposed by
Law. The very Reason why they ought, is the Reason they will not serve God in
order. They dare not do what they know they may lawfully, for fear they should
seem to think an human Law binding. The only fault of our Liturgy, is its
having been composed, Authorized, and made use of, by the wisest and the Best
of our English World, especially by the Governors in Church and State. They
will have Parliaments and Synods strike sail to Them. Whatsoever is Great or
Sacred is marked out for the object of their Contempt. Unless Antiquity and
Authority will condescend and stoop to them, yea unless they may tread upon
Crowns and Scepters, there is not any thing will please them, or give them
rest. Forsooth They want a main part of their Christian Liberty, unless they
may not only be suffered to cast away their Cords from them, but also to bind
their Kings in Chains, Psalm. 149. 8.
and their Nobles with links of Iron.

12. Nor are our Schismatics only arrived at the Top of Pride, (which is my
first reason,) but they are also sunk down even below the very Bottom of
Christian Charity, (which is my second.) 1 Cor. 13. 5.
For Charity thinks no evil, but our Schismatics nothing else. They cannot
see their own Eyes, much less the Beams that are in them; but in the Eye of a
Conformist they can see every Mote, and easily look it into a Mountain. They
perfectly hate, whomsoever they have injured for being blameless; that is, for
refusing to walk with Them in the ways of Corah: And if we strive to do all
things (in the public worship of God) with any Decency or Order, as S. Paul
and our Governors do strictly bind us; they pretend to see nothing, (such is
the yellow, or black Jaundise of Malignity and Prejudice,) but either Popery or
Paganism in all our Service. Hence they separate from us, (though not
Christians only, but Protestants,) with no less aversion (in all appearance,)
than from Papists, and Pagans, and Limbs of Satan. Nor can they rationally
deny, that they esteem us as bad as either: for if they judge not our Communion
to be as absolutely Unlawful, as they do their own Communion to be of absolute
Necessity to their Salvation, they cannot separate from us, and excuse
themselves at the same time. They will not pretend they are unwilling to go to
Heaven in our Company; but that they leave us as going on in the way to Hell.
This must needs be their meaning, or else they cannot excuse themselves unto
themselves. So as they must be void of Charity by either side of the Dilemma.
For either they really do believe us to be as well their fellow-Saints as their
Fellow Subjects, or they do not: truly if they do not, they then are void of
all Charity to Us, in thinking nothing but evil of us; not the best our Case
will bear, but the worst to be imagined. And (on the other side) if they do,
they are at the least as void of Charity to Themselves, and do despise their
own Souls, by excommunicating themselves from their fellow-Saints. For what
Pretense can they have for their separating from us, if they think us Christ's
Members, as well as They? The terrible Saying of S. Cyprian, Etsi tales occisi
in Confessione nominis fuerint, Macula ista nec sanguine abluitur; Inexpiabilis
culpa Discordiae, nec passione purgatur. Cyprian. de unit. Eccl. 1 Cor. 13. 1,
2 3.
[that Martrydom is not sufficient to make amends for a man's Schism,] is as
true, as it is notorious, and as rational, as it is true. And yet it can be
neither, unless it be on this Ground, that Schism is exclusive of Christian
Charity: on which supposal S. Cyprian did strongly argue out of S. Paul. Though
I speak with the Tongues of Men and Angels, though I have the Gift of Prophecy,
Faith, and Knowledge, though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, lastly,
though (by Martyrdom) I give my Body to be burnt, and have not Charity, it
profits me nothing. But if I live in Schism, I have no Charity; because I
separate my self (as from the Children of the Devil) from many Thousands of
thousands better Men, better Christians, better Protestants than my self. And
so my Alms in that case are but Ostentation: my yielding up my self to be burnt
alive, is a mad kind of Martyrdom in such a Case; it is but a Sacrifice to my
Humor, to my Obstinacy, and Stomach, like that of Clement and Ravilliac, who
died Martyrs to the Popedom, and not to Christ; or like the Martyrdom of
Hierocles, who writ a Book against Christ, and after That at Byzantium died a
Martyr to his Stoicism, as our English Regicides to their Fanaticism, and
Vanninus to his Atheism. Those alone were the Deities which they adored, and
died for. It Is not the Bravery of the Sufferer, but the Divinity of the Cause,
which makes a Martyrdom meritorious (if any properly can be such) in any
measure: and so S. Cyprian said rightly, (being but rightly understood,) that
even Martyrdom cannot expiate the Sin of Schism.

13. Thirdly, Schism is destructive, (in its Tendency at least,) not only of
Government, wheresoever there is any; but of Society itself, upon a supposal
that there is none. Every body knows, (as well as Machiavel,) that to divide,
is to infeeble, and so the very shortest way to destroy a Nation. The Church of
England is but one, and in its Unity lies its Safety, because its Strength. But
many and many are the Sects, which Schism has made by dividing from her; and so
it is a Devil whose name is Legion. For the effects of which Legion, we shall
not need consult more, than our own Memories and Experience. For from the year
41 till 60, all our National Calamities began in Schism; in Schism they
continued; and if ever they are completed, 'twill be in Schism too. Schism was
ours, as it was Corah's first Crime. For though Mutiny and Rebellion were the
natural Issue of it, (as Schism in the Church does ever carry Faction in the
State along with it;) yet 'twas chiefly as a Optatus l. 1. p. 25.
Schismatic, that Corah was swallowed up alive, and his separate Congregation
together with him. 'Twas Schism which did set up The Assembly of Divines,
against our regular Convocations and National Synods of the Clergy. 'Twas That
that set up the Directory, against the Liturgy of the Church. 'Twas Schism made
Sacrilege, and a Sale of the Crown Lands, and killed God's Anointed in order to
it. But for Schism, we had not heard either of Plunder, or Sequestration; the
sound of those Names had never reached our English Ears. 'Twas Schism called
Strength the Law of Justice. 'Twas Schism which founded all Right in Dominion,
and Right of Dominion only in Grace; and so (by their Doctrine of irrespective
and necessitating Decrees,) inferred the Great Turk to have much more Grace
than our Christian Princes, because more Right, by more Dominion. Finally,
Schism was the Dam of all the Blasphemies, both of those and the present Times.
The Leviathan itself was but the Spawn of That Parent. Behind the Veil of
Toleration, which Schism begot too, and under the Protection of Christian
Liberty, which Schism expounded into what we now see it, Horrid Ochlocracy, and
Chirocracy, and ugly Anarchy itself, has been hatching, or ingendring, ever
since Monarchy was restored. For some are longing after the Onions and the
Fleshpots of Egypt, as much as ever. And as we have lived to see a Triumph
without a War, or a Skirmish, (in the most happy Resuscitation of God's Spouse,
and his Vicegerent;) so do we live to see a War too, within the Bowels of
Church and State, without other Weapons than those of Schism. For our
Schismatics are an Army, however yet without Arms. Happy we, that they are so;
and most unhappy, if they are otherwise. For hardly ever were there
Schismatics (in any Part or Age of the Christian World) without this Turkish
and Popish Principle, that Religion is to be propagated (where it is possible)
by the Sword.

14. Lastly, our Schismatics here in England are of all others the most
ungrateful, and unexcusable in their Schism. The most ungrateful; because by
Those very Laws, and under the Protection of those Legislators, which they
hate, and despise, and conspire against, they hold the greatest Enjoyments that
men are capable of on Earth; to wit, their Liberties, and their Safeties, their
Livelihoods, and their Lives. Again, the most unexcusable; because they cannot
but know, yea they cannot but acknowledge, (and their Chieftains do it in
Print,) that we are Christians, and Protestants, which they also pretend to be:
that we have all the Fundamentals (which they pretend also to have) of the true
Religion; whether as it consists of Faith, or Practice: we own the Creed, and
the Commandments, and the whole Word of God, as all (or most of) our
Schismatics pretend to do. We agree in all Essentials with All the Protestant
Churches of Christendom, as The Harmony of Confessions will convince every
Creature who will but read them. Whence then the Murmurings and Disputings
(against Authoritative Commands) so strictly forbidden by S. Paul, Philip. 2.
14? or what excuse can be found for a Separation? Let us examine the whole
Affair from Top to Bottom; and let us consider what they would have to make us
worthy of their Society; and why they separate from Us of the Church of
England, as from Papists, if not Pagans, and Brands of Hell, as I said before.
It Is plain, we do not worship Idols; and it is plain, we have none to worship.
We add no Articles of our making to the Apostles own Creed, (as we know who
do.) Nor do we pare away one of the Ten Commandments, and slit another in the
midst, to complete the number. Nor do we equal the Apocrypha with the Canonical
Books of Scripture. We have but two Sacraments; and pray in English. Wives are
permitted to our Clergy; and by Them to the Laity the Cup of Blessing. We do
not buy and sell Pardons; nor do we trust in any Merits save those of Christ.
We pray for none at all who are departed this Life; and much less to them. We
renounce the strange Doctrine of Transubstantiation, as we do all Pretensions to
Infallibility upon Earth. If we yield the Bishop of Rome a naked Primacy of
Order, we do refuse him at the same Instant all Supremacy of Power; and do
limit his Jurisdiction within his own own Dioecese, or Province. Then what
Pretense can any have, (who are not Papalins Themselves,) to dread, or hate a
Communion with us? If some things indifferent, and uncommanded in Holy Writ, do
make them separate from us of the Church of England, They must not only
separate (for the very same reason) from all the Reformed Churches of Europe;
but they must separate from Themselves too, and from their separate
Congregations, wherein some things must be Indifferent. I hope they will not
here allege, They love Division quatenus ipsum; and that to cross S. Paul's
Precept, they love as much as in them lies to live unpeaceably with all men;
Romans 12. 18.
or think it their Duty to be Disturbers. They will not say, they are obliged
to turn the World upside down, as once the Apostles were said to do, by
Ill Will. They will not pretend they are bound in Conscience, to set up That
Partition Wall our Savior came to break down; and throw the World into a Chaos
of Confusion, worse and wilder than That, out of which 'twas first taken. Nor
do I think that they will plead, They were decreed to love Schism, and cannot
help it. They will not say (whatever some think) that any man's Avarice was
decreed to midwive Schism into the World, for the Love of sweet Sacrilege, or
other Spoils: or that his Envy was Praedetermin'd to sow the Tares of
Dissension for sweet Revenge: However Envy and Ambition are as probable
Impellents, as any other. For, had Aerius been timely made a Bishop himself, he
had not envied That Order, much less headed a Sect against it. And were our
Schismatics Legislators, they would enforce such a Conformity, as now they
will not forgive, much less comply with. They seem to reckon themselves
oppressed, in that they are not permitted, much less made choice of, to be our
Rulers. Which yet by their Principles of Liberty and Conscience, (as They
expound them,) they are incapable of being, should we desire them. For if
things which are Indifferent are not properly the matter of Human Laws, (as
human Laws are contradistinct unto Divine,) Nothing else with any reason can be
pretended so to be. For Necessary things are all sufficiently commanded by God
already in his World: and All things unlawful are There as evidently
forbidden: and things impossible are not commandable at all. It Is very evident
that the Former, both affirmative and negative, are the Divine Laws of God, and
in no wise human. So that if our disobedient and Schismatical Brethren should
now be chosen or admitted our Legislators; Then by the Principles they are of,
(would they be but true to them,) there would be but one Law (precisely human)
which They could possibly enact, and it must be This; That every Christian man
living should be a Law unto Himself. Every man's Reason should be his Guide;
and every man's Will should be his Reason. Therefore, according to their own
Principles, they cannot possibly be our Rulers, if we would have them. For
every man's Reason would be his Royalty. All besides would be Rulers, as much
as They. And so for Them to be our Governors implies a gross Contradiction; by
nothing in the world to be avoided, but by their quitting Their Principles, and
owning ours.

Now I am tempted to appeal to our Schismatics themselves, whether they are
not (...), Sinners in whose behalf no Apology can be made. Whether they are not
the worst Recusants, because the most unexcusable. Whether they are not worse
than Those who were accused by the Apostle of being tossed to and fro by every
blast, and carried about with every Wind of false Doctrine, when (not our
Doctrins, true or false, but) even our Surplices can scare them, and Organs
blow them out of the Church. Whether it will not be more tolerable in the
tremendous day of Judgment, for them that never were Members of Jesus Christ,
than for them, who having been Members, did excommunicate Themselves, and even
cut themselves off from his Mystical Body, which is his Church. Whether, when
the public Safety cannot evermore subsist without public Peace, nor public
Peace without Compliance on one side or other, it is not fitter that such as
They should meekly comply with their Superiors, than that their Superiors
should bow to Them? Whether an yielding can be made better, than by the
ignorant to the most learned, by the fewest to the most numerous, by the Shrubs
to the Cedars, or by the Subjects of Law to the Legislators. Indeed Obedience
to one another, that is to Equals, and Obedience to Inferiors, or People
exceedingly below us, might be grievous and vexing with some Excuse. However
Christians are ( in love) bid to serve one another; and Christ did wash his
Disciples Feet; and England has had her Saturnalia; during which, some of the
greatest and noblest Masters did endure a December of Twelve years long, and
did contentedly see their Servants to bear Rule over them. But Obedience to
Superiors, to men above us (not against, but) according to the Laws of Heaven
and Earth, (such as was the Obedience of Christ to Caesar; for Christ according
to his Manhood was but a Subject, though King of Kings in regard of his
Divinity; and Caesar was one of those Mortal Gods, who lived like Devils, and
died like Men;) I say, Obedience unto Superiors whom the Scripture calls Gods,
is the most noble, and the most natural, and the most necessary Duty; such as
bears up upon its shoulders (by God's Assistance) both the whole Fabric of the
Church, and all the Kingdoms of the Earth, and of Heaven itself. Whereas
Schisms are Pioneers, which digging below their very Foundations, do clearly
strive to undermine and subvert them All.

15. I have now done with my 4 Reasons, why our Schismatics rather than
others, (however scandalous in their Lives,) are singl'd out from the whole
Herd of Notorious Sinners, to be made the chief Exemplars of disorderly
Walking, from whom we are most to withdraw our selves. These (I say) are the
chief reasons, why by this Precept of S. Paul, compared with Those of S. John,
and our Blessed Savior, we are chiefly bound to separate from Separatists. Yet
would I not here be thought to mean, that every Subject should be a Judge, from
what kind of Separatists (in Civil Conversation) he ought to separate. (For
public disorder and confusion might Thence ensue.) But I would be understood
to intend Those Schismatics, who are censured by their Governors and proper
Judges to be Such. From a civil Commerce with such (and a commerce of free
choice) I think it a Duty to abstain, and to abstain in such a measure, as our
Lord and His Apostles have marked out to us.

16. And now I may have done with my Sermon too, but that I have remaining an
hearty Wish, that our Separating Brethren would unpassionately consider Three
obvious Truths. First, that if Obedience to Christian Governors and Laws is
not really so essential to Christianity itself, but that still it is possible
(as some imagine) that Saints may be Schismatics, and Schismatics Saints, Then
our Faith, and our Preaching, yea and our Scriptures are all in vain. Welcome
Anarchy and Disorder; and Farewell to all Society. Next, that however Sin and
Error are very different in themselves, yet a Wilfulness in Error does make
such an Error become a Wilful Sin too. And the contemning of Authority,
linked with an obstinate contumacious fomenting of Divisions, is such a
Monster, that the least Error of Judgment which had been venial in itself, is
by these Aggravations made great and grievous, and contracts unto itself as
well a Diabolical, as Damning Quality. Thirdly, that Schism, were it no Sin,
were very well worthy the parting with, for the purchasing of so precious and
so inestimable a Jewel, as Public Peace; the fruits of which (rightly used)
are Piety, and Prosperity, Strength, and Safety. 'Twas for the purchasing of
This, that S. Paul has his Compliances with Jews and Gentiles. 'Twas for This
that he yielded to circumcise Timothy; and 'twas for This that he refused to
circumcise Titus; (as well as for the showing his Christian Liberty and
obedience to the Conciliar Constitution Then first Enacted.) 'Twas his great
Business and Design, 1 Cor. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
to make the most adverse Parties agree in Christ. To gain the Jews therefore,
he denied himself the use of his Christian Liberty: and as well to win the
Gentiles, he resumed the use of it with equal Care. 'Twas to unite dissenting
Parties, and make them meet in one Church, that the Apostles (meeting together
in a full Council at Jerusalem) thought it requisite to establish Things
Indifferent by a Law. Thereby giving a Act. 15. 28, 29.
Necessity a part post, to things Indifferent a part ante. It was to gain
both Jews and Gentiles, that our Lord in some things complied with Both. And to
hope that our hitherto-dissenting Brethren, who now do enfeeble and endanger
both Church and State by their Disobedience, will one day comply with their
Superiors upon the Reasons I have given, (if by any fair means they may be
brought to their knowledge, and laid before them,) is at present the greatest
Charity I can have for those men, who are void of All Charity, till That is
done.

17. Finally, Brethren, farewell: and suffer a word of Exhortation from S. Paul
and S. Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 8.
Both joined together. Be ye all of one mind, having compassion one of another;
love as Brethren, be pitiful, be courteous: so S. Peter:) to which I add out of
S. Paul, (...), 2 Cor. 13. 11.
be knit-together and compacted, ( so the Greek,) or be ye perfect, ( so the
English,) because your being perfect, must consist in your being well
knit-together and compacted in one Communion. Phil. 3. 16.
Therefore walk by the same Rule, and mind the same things, live in Peace; and
the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

To Him be Glory for ever and ever.
OF CIRCUMSPECTION In THESI.
EPHESIANS. 5. 15, 16. See that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise,
Redeeming the Time, because the days are evil.
1. AS Philostratus once said of Apollonius Tyanaeus, (...), That he writ not
his Life, but his Peregrination; after the very same manner may I say here, The
Life of man is but Genesis 47. 9. Heb. 11. 13.
a Pilgrimage, and that Pilgrimage but a Walk; A going uphill on one side, and
down-hill on the other. First of all he walks up-hill, until he comes to his
30th. or 40th. year; And from thence he walks down-hill, until he comes to
fourscore. For All, after That, is a Descending into the Pit, (or if it must
needs be called walking,) a kind of walking in the Valley of the shadow of
Death.

2. First then (...), be sure to walk: do not faintly lie down, or yawningly
lean upon your Elbows: (...). Hippocrat. Aphor. 1. (...). Jam. 4. (...); Sophoc.
for your Journey is long, and your Time but little. Therefore up, and be doing.
Set your feet in his steps, who went about doing Good, and rejoiced as a Giant
to run his Course. For rather than be benighted, we must not walk only, but
run too. So says the Author to the Hebrews; Heb. 12. 1.
Let us lay aside every weight, and the sin that so easily besets us, and let
us run with patience the race that is set before us.

3. And yet withal we must remember Vespasian's Motto, (which deserves to be
engraven in all our Rings,) Quam impense etiam Octavius Augustus Caesar eodem
Dicto delectatus fuerit, videre est apud Aul. Gell. l. 10. c. 11. and Macrob.
Saturdal. l. 6.
(...), to make haste slowly; that is, to make no more haste than may consist
with good speed. Because the way we are to walk in is not sleep only, but
slippery. Therefore look to your footing, and mark your steps as you walk
along: for the footing of a David had well-nigh slipped. Nor is the way only
slippery, but narrow too. Nay our Savior says farther, (though it is not
expressed in our English Bibles,) It Is (...), a way encumbered as well as
narrow, It Is very difficult to find it, and very easy to tread aside. And
therefore (...), see how ye walk. (So it is in the Greek, though somewhat
otherwise in the English.)

4. And then in the next place, (...), see how circumspectly ye do it, (as it
is in the translation,) or see how exactly, (as it is in the original.) The
word (...) is of an higher signification, than our ordinary Bible does here
express. It imports a Providence, and a Caution, which being joined with
Circumspection, make up the Integral Parts of a Christian Prudence. Now we must
walk so exactly in all these respects, (with so much Providence, and Caution,
and Circumspection,) as not to turn an hair's breadth to the right hand, or to
the left. We must not be Latitudinarians in point of Practice; but must rather
(...), walk with such regular and upright Feet, as to abstain (...), in either
notion of the word; not only from all the kinds, but all the Appearances of
evil.

5. Not at all like those Hypocrites, who are indulgent to the Evil, and only
abstain from the bare Appearance; not like Him in the Epigram, who put himself
to Death, for fear of Dying; not like the Pharisees of the Times, who think it
their Duty to rebel, for fear of a little Disobedience; and greedily swallow
the greatest Camels, for nothing else but their avoiding the smallest Gnats.
This is a foolish Circumspection, to be so shy of a Ceremony, as to run
headlong into a Schism; and for fear of Superstition, to swallow practical
Atheism. For are not they the greatest Atheists, who (to use S. Paul's words of
the ancient Gnostics) profess to know God, but in their works deny him? And
They deny him in their works, who quite disown him in his Word, where it calls
for Compliance (in All things lawful) with his Vicegerents. For sure the same
Spirit that says, Obey God rather than Man, does also say, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake. The same
Spirit that says, Call no man Master upon Earth, and Be ye not the Servants of
men, does also say, Servants obey your Masters in all things, that the Name of
God be not blasphemed; nor only with Eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as the
Servants of Christ. Again, the same Spirit that says, Thou shall have no God
but me, does also say, Heb. 13. 17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, Romans 13. 1, 2,
5, etc.
etc. for the Powers that are, are ordained of God, and He that resists,
receives Damnation. From all which it follows, that for a Professor of
Christianity to disobey the Laws of men, under pretense (rather than fear) of
disobeying the Laws of God, when this is one of God's chiefest Laws, That we
obey the Laws of men, shows such a spirit of Contradiction, as it is not Charity
to endure. We must be circumspect of our ways, as well as of our walking. For a
Circumspect Walker in the ways of Corah, who dares not do as God bids him for
fear of Sin, and shows a Zeal to serve God by his Disobedience, who craves for
Liberty of Conscience to break the Bonds of Society, which are the Laws of the
Nation wherein we live, (that is to say, in the Consequence, for a Liberty of
Conscience to cut men's Throats,) and because the Meek shall inherit the Earth,
does think it a part of his Humility to set his foot upon Crowns and Scepters;
such a Circumspect Walker is the greatest Monster to be imagined. He may
profess to know God, as the Gnostics did; but in his works he denies him, like
any Gnostick. And as a practical Atheist is still the worst, so such a
Boutefeux is the worst of all practical Atheists. 'Twas by so foolish a
Circumspection, and too easy a Connivence at all such Folly, that so many of
our days have been so evil, and stand in need of a Redemption. And therefore
for the future, See that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise,
redeeming the Time, because the days are evil.

6. The words are seasonable and fit in a threefold respect. In respect of the
Counsel which our Apostle here gives; in respect of the Occasion on which he
gives it; and in respect of the Reason wherewith he does enforce it on those
that read him. The subject matter of the Counsel is Christian Prudence. The
Counsel is given upon Occasion of great and manifold Temptations, whereby a
Christian is ensnared on every side. The principal Reason why it is pressed, is
the present Corruption of the Time. A Time wherein there is required the
Wisdom and Wariness of the Serpent, whereby to preserve the Inoffensiveness
and Integrity of the Dove.

7. Now though Prudence is a thing which does consist of three parts, to wit,
of Providence, Caution, and Circumspection, (which though commonly confounded,
are very different in themselves;) yet in the Tenor of my Discourse, I shall
keep to the style of our English Bibles; and so far comply with the popular
usage of the word, (which is apparently Synecdochical,) as to name
Circumspection in stead of Prudence.

8. And first, because our Inadvertency appears to be the very Root, from which
the whole Stock of Sin (with all its Fruit and its Branches) does seem to grow;
(...), See how ye walk circumspectly.

9. Next, because there is such a thing, as an Inconsiderate Circumspection,
for want of a necessary regard both to the manner, and method, and measure of
it; See therefore that ye walk circumspectly, (...), not as Fools, but as wise:
(...), walk in wisdom, Colos. 4. 5. And as your Speech, so your Behavior is
to be seasoned also with Salt, v. 6. Ye must behave your selves exactly betwixt
your Scylla and your Charybdis; Corruption of Soul upon the one side, and
Destruction of Body on the other. But still the first and chiefest heed is to
be taken of the former; that the better part may be in safety, whatever
Disasters befall the worse.

10. And then in the last place, because the worse the Times are, by so much
the better and the more circumspect men ought to be; Therefore it follows in
the Text, (...), Redeem, or buy out the Season. For it is not (...), the Time
at large, but precisely (...), the Nick of Time. And so the meaning of it must
be, Be ye sober, and vigilant, and watch at all opportunities; use such
Providence, and Caution, and Circumspection, as to fly from Sin on the one
hand, and causeless Suffering on the other.

11. This I think may suffice for an explication of the Text; and by this a man
may easily discern the Links, which will make up the Chain of my whole Design.

12. For first, considering how we are placed as so many Sheep amongst Wolves,
we must walk for That reason with Circumspection. And then, because there are
Errors on either hand, as well on the Right, as on the Left; we must therefore
walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise. And this we must do in a
threefold respect; to wit, of Things, and Persons, and Opportunities: of evil
Things, of evil Persons, yea of all the very Occasions and Appearances of evil.
Our walking is to be circumspect in respect of All Persons; and as of all other
persons, so especially of our selves. It must be in respect both of our
Enemies, and our Friends; and as of all other Friends, so especially of those
who pretend a Friendship unto our Souls. And this must be, as at all times, so
more especially in These. Our days being likely to be as evil at least in one
sense, as the Days in my Text are said to be evil in another.

1. Before I can orderly come to speak of Circumspection in Hypothesi, as it
stands in relation to This or That Station or State of Men, (which to do will
be the work of another Text,) I must consider it in Thesi, or in the gross. And
this the rather, as well because it lies first in the order of Nature; as
because Heedfulness in the General should be as well known to be strictly
necessary, as That Triumvirate of our Enemies (The World, the Flesh, and the
Devil,) is universally acknowledged to be Deceitful. And how deceitful These
are, one may conjecture even by This; That there was hardly ever any such
Golden age, as had not its portion of Iron in it. For no sooner had God
Almighty imprinted his Image upon the Creature, than his Competitor or Rival
began to ingrave his Superscription. No sooner had the true Coin received its
Stamp from God's Mint, but straight the Tempter turned Althymist to embase the
Metal. There was a Serpent even in Paradise; (or else our first Parents had
not so soon been kept out with a flaming Sword;) and a stumbling block in
Heaven; (for else so great an Host of Angels had not fallen headlong into Hell:)
Yea the blessed Conversation of Christ Himself was no such Amulet or
Preservative, no such conquering Prophylactick against the Contagion of this
Disease, Mar. 14. 68, 69, etc.
but that there was a Peter to deny, yea and a Judas to betray him. Genesis 3. 22,
23.
And if these things are so, 2 Pet. 2. 4.
That S. Peter himself, the first and chief of the Apostles, was not all his
life safe in a state of Grace; Nor the Protoplast for a day in a state of
Innocence; No nor Lucifer for a week in a state of Glory; Lord! how fitly may
any Monitor say That to us, which our Apostle thought needful (not only
useful) to his Ephesians, (...), See how ye walk circumspectly? If it is as
true in things spiritual, as it is thought in things temporal, That the one
half of the world is deceived and cheated by the other; and that if there are
no more than an Hundred Sects, Ninety and Nine of That hundred must needs be
sick of some Imposture; (unless Christ can be divided, or the Truth of Religion
be more than One;) If in our hovering condition 'twixt Grace and Nature, we are
placed in the Confines of two implacable Enemies, Romans 7. 23.
the Law in our Members, and the Law in our Minds, whereof the one is still
warring against the other; And if the Author of this Caveat against Supineness
and Nonchalance, though the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and also a Vessel of
God's Election, was yet so brought into Captivity to the Law of Sin, (as the
7th. to the Romans is very commonly understood, though perhaps not so happily
as might be wished,) that he was forced to break forth into That tragical
Ecphonesis, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of
this Death! O then what a Necessity must needs be incumbent upon us, that we
repeat this holy Caveat, and reinforce it on one another, (...), Jam. 2. 10.
and chapter 3. 2.
See how ye walk circumspectly? If in many things we offend all, and He who
offends but in one Point, is someway guilty of all the rest; Matthew. 12. 36.
If an account is to be rendered of every idle word spoken, and sure much more
of every wicked one; Matthew. 19. 17. and chapter 7. 14.
If none shall enter into life but He that keeps the Commandments, and life
does dwell in That City, Luke 13. 24.
to which the Gate is as streit, as the way narrow; insomuch that of the Many
who seek to enter into life, many shall miss it for all their seeking; Rev. 2.
7, 17.
If only He that overcomes shall have the privilege to taste of the hidden
Manna, 1. Pet. 4. 18.
so as the righteous man himself shall be scarcely saved; and all for want of
being heedfull both of the way he treads in, and in the ordering of his steps,
and as to the sureness of his footing; Methinks we need no other Sermon, than
the constant repetition of this one Text, (at least 'twere well if This Text
were called to mind at every Sermon,) (...), See how ye walk circumspectly. If
S. John thought fit to preach no other Sermon to the Convert Eusebius speaks
of, than the Psalmist's Resolution of Psalm. 39. 1.
taking heed unto his ways, which made his Convert not sollicitous to be
enriched with more Lessons, whilst he found that That One was sufficient of
itself to employ him wholly; If we live in an Age of so much fallacy and
Deceit, and yet for all that of so much Heedlesness and Security, that no
abundance of Caution can be too much; It follows then that This Caveat cannot
be thought upon too much, or inculcated too warmly, or unexcusably offend in
the Repetition, but that we have such prurient Ears as cannot forsooth be
pleased without great variety, and such capricious understandings as will not
easily be quieted with Truth and Plainness; but must have Altitudes and Depths
for their Entertainment.

2. All our Sins and our Miseries seem to have entered into the World at this
one Door, even the want of That Heed which is here enjoined. Other Defects may
be as fibers, but This is sure the Main Root, (as I said before,) from which
the whole Stock of Mischief (with all its Fruits, and its Branches,) does
clearly grow. 'Twas merely for want of Circumspection, that our first Parents
fell; and still it is for want of Circumspection, that all their Posterity is
ever stumbling. It Is but for want of Circumspection, that many Professors are
so blind as to be led by the blind, till both the Leaders and the Followers
fall all together into the Ditch. In the whole Body of Christianity,
Circumspection may fitly be called the Eye. Now as our Eyes are put in our
Heads to direct our Feet; and as good be quite blind, as be always winking: so
Circumspection in our Hearts is to guard our Actions; and as good be none at
all, as unwary Christians. For what with those powerful Impellents which Satan
uses from without, and those bewitching Allectives wherewith he charms us from
within, we are so smoothly drawn aside with great contentedness into some
dangers, and so vehemently dragged with equal reluctance into others, that we
do not only (like Janus) stand in need of four Eyes, but (like Argus) to be
Eyes all over. And just as the Builders of the second Temple at Jerusalem were
so encompassed with Enemies on every side, (the Chaldaeans before, and the
Philistines behind, the Moabites on the right hand, and the Edomites on the
left,) that they were taught by their Necessity to hold a Sword in the one
hand, for the defending of the Workmanship which they advanced with the other;
Even so we Christians, who are dignified with the Title of (...), 1 Cor. 3. 9.
Fellow Laborers with God, whilst we are building up our selves in the most
holy Faith, Mar. 16. 20.
and building up our selves into Temples too, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.
(for Temples we are of the Holy Ghost,) must have one Eye upon our Enemy, as
well as another upon our work; still looking upward toward God, but withal
downward toward our Tempter; still looking foreward toward Virtue, but
withal backward toward Vice. We must not only have an Eye unto the right and
left hand of our Spiritual Poyse (like a man walking upon a Pope,) but like a
Thief at high Noon, just in the Act of his purloyning, must look exactly quite
round about us.

3. And the reason of This is extremely evident. For if we only look upwards,
we shall be easily apt to stumble, like Mother Eve; who, whilst she fixed her
whole Aspect upon the goodness of the End, did overlook the manifold Evil
which lay concealed in the Means. So praeproperous was the Haste which she made
toward Knowledge, that she left Obedience behind her back. Or if we only look
forewards to shun a Praecipice, we may at that very instant be attacqu'd behind
us with a Wolf. Just as Judas was so intent upon the Money lying before him,
that he was blind to the Despair which dogged him closely at the heels. And we
may guess by That Threat of God Almighty to the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15.
[It shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his heel,] that commonly the
Devil does come behind us; and loves to surprise us in a part the farthest
distant from our Eyes; that is to say, at such a time, as in which we are
remotest from Christian Prudence. Or if we look only upon the left hand for
the avoiding of a Shelve, we may be our Negligence of the right be swallowed up
of a Quicksand. Like some Pretenders to Reformation, who taking heed of
Superstition, but nothing else, are so much the apter to grow profane; Taking
heed but of one extreme, they run into the other, which is many times the worse
too; and to prevent an Inconvenience incur a Mischief. Thus we see how it
concerns us on every side, not to look upwards only, or downwards, not only
backwards, or forewards, not to the right hand only, or to the left, but at
the same point of Time to be both provident, and cautious, and even circumspect
in the letter, which [a circumspiciendo] is to carry our Eyes quite round about
us.

4. Nor must we be only looking round, but be always looking. The word is
(...), See; But See we cannot, whilst we are sleeping. And by our Savior's
Admonition, we are to watch, as well as pray, lest we enter into Temptation. So
S. Peter to all in General, who are concerned for their own Safety, does
recommend a strict Vigilance, as no less requisite than Sobriety; and that for
this reason, because the Devil is still awake, whilst we are sleeping. Be
sober, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
be vigilant, because your Adversary the Devil goes about as a roaring Lion,
(and that by Night as well as by Day,) seeking whom he may devour. Whom resist
steadfast in the Faith. So that in our Christian Warfare, besides the manning of
our Works, we need our Scouts, and our Countermines. We must besiege our very
Besiegers; And as that Sophister, The World, does surround us with Fallacy, so
must we the World with Circumspection.

5. Nor does the Prudence of a Christian end only Here. For Circumspection is
to be used both in the manner, and in the method, and especially in the measure
of being circumspect. It being obvious to infer from the following Words, Ephesians.
5. 15.
[See that ye walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise,] that there is in
the World a kind of accurate folly, an inconsiderate Circumspection, a
capricious sort of Wariness, of which we are also to beware. Such as is lying
all Night out of Doors, to be sure that our Houses shall not fall upon our
heads: Destroying Vineyards, to prevent Drunkenness: Pulling down Discipline
and the Hierarchy, to shun the Tyranny of a Pope: Distrusting the Fathers of
the Primitive Church, because of Antichrist's being at work in the Apostles own
Times: Making the Laws and Lawgivers conform themselves to Nonconformity, for
fear the Church should want a Breadth whereby to support her Superstructure:
Eating of nothing but Nuts and Shellfish, for fear the Cook should be a
Sloven. There are some uneasy Souls, who seem at least to be encumbered with
so incomparable a Niceness, that under color of respect to the Word of God,
they take The Scripture to be the Rule, I do not say of the most weighty, (for
so it is,) but even of their trivial'st and slightest Actions; looking on every
thing as Sinful, to which the Plain Word of God does not immediately direct
them. From which fundamental Mistake it is, that They dare not call it
Wednesday, but the Fourth day of the Week; nor Nine of the Clock, but the Third
hour of the Day. A Surplice or a Sacrament must not be mentioned, because there
are not such words in all the Scriptures; no more a Sacrament, than a Surplice.
And by the very same reason, (as our judicious Mr. Hooker does well observe,)
If a Master commands his Servant but to take up a Straw, the Servant shall not
be obliged in point of conscience to obey, until his Master has found a Text
for that one particular. For though the Scripture says to Servants, Obey your
Masters in All things; yet That Precept is but General, and Dolus latet in
Generalibus, There are very few Generals which have not a fallacy lurking in
them. Now by such a way of arguing, or at least by one as good, if Pontius
Pilate was not a Saint, because his Name is in the Creed; at least the Scribes
and the Pharisees must pass for very good men, because they have their Names
writ in the Book of life. But for the men who thus argue, and are circumspect
in their walking, not as wise men, but fools, we can in charity call them no
worse than Hypochondriacs in religion; men whose Souls are directed by the
Infirmities of their Bodies; and are fitter for the Pity than Indignation of
their Superiors, because the Distempers of their spleen may be sincerely
thought by Them to be the Scruples of their Conscience. Thus the jealous
Mithridates stood in such fear of being poisoned, that even his Meals were all
Antidote; and so his Body in tract of time became a walking Pharmacopoeia. This
indeed is a great, but an heedless Caution. Such as does cross and confute the
Proverb, because abundance of this is hurtful. Some heed therefore is to be
taken, not to be heedless and imprudent in the extravagant excess of our taking
heed; and that we do not deceive our selves with too immoderate a fear of our
being deceived.

6. But This is certainly a Caution, to which a small portion of Rhetoric will
be sufficient to persuade us. So unapt we are to err on the farther side of
This Duty, that our usual fault is, we are too much behither it. Our greatest
danger commonly is our opinion that there is none; and we are most likely to be
unsafe, by our too great aptness to be secure. Indeed in matters of little
moment, concerning the Body, or the Purse, we need no Sermons against Security,
or excitations to Circumspection. Very few there are that travel in times of
danger, without a Pistol, or a Sword; or that in places of infection will walk
the streets without an Amulet. Few Families go to bed, till they have made fast
their Doors; and in the morning when they arise, their first care is to shut
out Nakedness and Hunger. So that if it were a Sin to be in Poverty, or a
scandalous matter to suffer Pain, there would be nothing so difficult, as not
to abound in this Duty of Circumspection. But, alas! we do not consider
(heedless Creatures as we are) how it fares with our Souls, as with so many
Ships, wherein the very least Crevices (if undiscovered) are too sufficient to
drown us all. And yet how partially we prefer the care of our Bodies and
Estates, before the Care and Concernment we ought to have of and for our Souls,
we may conjecture by the Practice of the Physician, and the Lawyer, above That
of the Divine. For one Scruple in the Conscience, how many are there in the
stomach? How many Empiricks are sought to, for here and there a single
Confessor? and how many real Patients are in all places to be met with, for
one true Penitent? Be there never so slight an Ulcer in any part of the Body,
we straight desire the grim Artist to use his Corrosive and his Probe; perhaps
his Lance, and his Caustic too. But be the Soul never so ulcerous, we are
content either with none, or a palliate Cure. So again it is in the other
Instance; That though we have little or no solicitude about the making of our
Calling and Election sure, (which in my Text is expressed by walking
circumspectly, as Wise, and not as Fools,) nor trouble our heads with an
Inquiry, what shall become of us hereafter; what kind of Interest we may have
in the Blood of Christ; what kind of Title we can pretend to the inheriting of
a Kingdom, a joyful Aeternity in Reversion, and how we shall plead it at the
Assizes which will one day be held in the Court of Heaven; Yet be there never
so small a flaw in any Title to an Estate, Lord! how sedulous we are to have
the matter made up? How many Counselors are consulted, and set on work, for
one Casuist? How many Cases are tried in Law, for one in Conscience? I will not
call it the universal, but usual Custom, that when Luke the good Physician
has little hope of our Bodies, we send for Gamaliel the able Lawyer, to take
care of our Estates. And (That being done,) Then for Barnabas the Divine, (who
is a Son of Comfort too,) to make provision for our Aeternity.

7. Thus we see the most of men have Circumspection very sufficient; but it is
sufficiently misapplied too. And in the Misapplication lies all the Mischief.
Just as the Pharisee in the Parable was very free of his Confessions; But he
applied them to his Virtues, and not his Sins. He made confession of his
righteousness, to wit, his fasting twice a week, and paying Tithes to a
Pin's-worth of Mint and Cummin; He very ambitiously confessed that he thought
himself holier than other men, (for which he gave God thanks too, and not
himself:) But of his manifold impieties we do not hear a word from him. So the
greatest numbers of men are very circumspect, and wary: But they are wary of
their Duties, as of dangerous things; things which probably will betray them to
the disfriendship of the world; (esteeming Him an imprudent man, who dares
adventure on what is strait, when the Times are crooked; and to stand his old
Ground, when new is temporally safer, and more in vogue too.) Men are wary of
loving Enemies, or doing good to such as hate them; very wary how they part
with a sinful Pleasure, or send a bill of divorce to a beloved Passion.
Extremely heedfull they are and cautious, how they fall from a station of
wealth and honor; how they beat down their Bodies, and bring their Flesh into
subjection; how they crucify the world unto themselves, and themselves unto
the world: (as if there were nothing more ridiculous than That primitive
Criterion, by which a Christian was distinguished from Jew and Gentile; nor any
thing more to be avoided by one of Quality and Parts, than such a seriousness
of life, and such a tenderness of Conscience, as may expose him to the Censure
of his being little more than a well-bred Quaker.) And as it is commonly
observed of the Lacedaemonians, that they stated the guilt of Stealth, not so
much in the Act, as the Apprehension, and therefore reckoned it a Sin, not to
steal, but to be caught: So the greatest heed taken by the Majority of
Professors, is not so really to be innocent, as not to be censured for being
guilty. As if, their Prayer were like That of the famous Hypocrite in the Poet,
-- Pulchra Laverna,
Da mihi fallere, da justum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice Nubem.


O my Goddess, give me the Grace to seem as religious as the best, and to be as
deceitful as may be possible. The greatest Mischief to be avoided in most men's
judgments, (if yet their Judgments may be judged of by their Practice,) is not
the ocular Sin, (I mean the Eye full of Adultery,) but the auricular
Confession; Not the Protestant's Impiety, but the Popery of making it known.
Now such as These should be exhorted, not so much to increase, as to direct
their Caution; not so much to make it greater, as wiser and better than
heretofore; to change the Object and the End of their Circumspection; that what
is now a merely Carnal, may suddenly pass into a spiritual and Christian
Prudence. For this will be to walk circumspectly, not as Fools, but as Wise.

8. And for the bringing this about with the greater Ease, we must be
circumspect Walkers in two general respects: In respect of the Persons with
whom we are conversant, and in respect of the Rules by which we are to be
directed. I therefore say in respect of Persons, (by way of distinction from
all other objects,) because our Days cannot be evil, but as we our selves are
such: and therefore by the evil Days in which it is our Lot to live, must
needs be meant the Evil men of the Days we live in. And our Walking is to be
circumspect, as in respect even of all men, so of Those more especially to whom
we bear the greatest kindness. (But This is a Point I must refer to another
subject of Discourse.) The Rules by which we are to walk, not as fools, but as
wise, are especially these two; Conscience, and Discretion. And for the better
using of These, we must warily occurr to two grand Fallacies, whereby the
greatest part of Men are wont to prevaricate with Themselves.

9. Some are so thick of understanding, as to measure their Conscience by their
Confidence; their being lustily persuaded a thing is lawful, or unlawful.
Esteeming all without Sin which is said or done without Scruple; and all things
sinful of which a scruple may be made. Neither discerning any difference
betwixt a Conscience which is tender, and misinformed, nor yet betwixt a mere
numness, and Peace of Conscience. Such were our Regicides here in England, who,
how scrupulous soever in things indifferent, were not scrupulous at all in the
point of Murder; But sturdily pleaded at the Bar, that they believed they had
a right to try, and execute their King; and that they did Both in the Integrity
of their hearts; it was no more than their Consciences did dictate to them;
their Consciences were satisfied in what they did; and by consequence they
would do it, were it for ever to be done. Meaning still by the word Conscience,
the strength and sturdiness of their Opinion; which might indeed be called
Witchcraft, as well as Conscience; (I mean with an equal impropriety, and an
easier pardon to the word.) Thus it was with the Conspirators of our
Gunpowder-Treason, and with the two infamous Murderers of Henry the Third and
the Fourth of France, who taking That for their Conscience which was indeed but
their Caprice, made no doubt but their Murders were Meritorious. And thus it
was for some time with furious Saul, the Blasphemer and Persecutor of Christ;
who grew so mad, and transported, with giddy zeal without knowledge, (as
himself confessed freely against himself from after the time of his
Conversion,) that he thought it his Duty to be destructive of whatsoever was
called Christian. Like Them of whom our Savior tells us, who thought
(forsooth) they were bound in Conscience to execute Murder on the Apostles,
because it was, in Their Judgments, to do God Service. Where by the way we may
observe, how much it is every man's duty to fear himself, and to suspect his own
Judgment in diverse cases.

10. Now the way to walk circumspectly not as fools, but as wise, and to free
our selves from That Fallacy, which is so generally swallowed by other men, is
first to consider what Conscience is, (a thing the most talked of, but the
least commonly understood, of any principle or faculty to be imagined,) and
after That to be careful how we walk by that Rule. For whilst the Rule itself
is false, the Circumspection must needs be foolish, and can only serve to make
us the more disorderly Walkers. Conscience indeed is the Rule of Action; But to
be sturdily persuaded a thing is lawful or unlawful, is not at any time the
Rule, and not at all times the work of Conscience. For Conscience is not a
Persuasion, but Knowledge rather; Nor is it any kind of knowledge, but
knowledge compared with a Rule; (as (...) in the Greek, and Conscientia in the
Latin, do Both import:) And yet how many of those men who pass for Instructers
of the Ignorant, and Eyes to the Blind, are wont to use the word Conscience
(before the people, and to themselves,) by that dangerous Catachresis I just
now mentioned? But before I say fully what Conscience is, I proceed to show
what it is not. I say, it is not a being so fully persuaded in our minds, as
not to have any regret or scruple; to be void of all Doubt, or haesitation; for
we know the Seared Atheist has none of That. And when our Savior Christ said,
The time comes that whosoever kills you, shall verily think he does God
Service, he did not mean, they shall be conscionable Murderers, or Persecutors
of Men in the fear of God, and so shall break the Commandment in the Integrity
of their Hearts; (for That had been to say, They shall be innocently guilty,
which had flatly implied a contradiction in Adjecto.) But his meaning was
clearly This, that some men's hearts shall be so hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin, as to mistake the very worst for the best of actions.
Their Understandings shall be so dark, and their Souls so benighted with their
customary impieties, as to grope after Murder instead of Sacrifice. Just like
them of whom we read in the fifth of Esa, (lately matched with the Readers and
Admirers of the Leviathan,) who had so lost the distinction of right and wrong,
as to put evil for good, and good for evil, bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter, darkness for light, and light for darkness. The Custom of Sin had so
paved their Palates, as that they had utterly lost their Taste. Now it is not a
satisfied, but seared Conscience, which is not startled at such impieties. As
many silly men's Consciences are too full of scruples, not because they are
tender, but ill-instructed; so many wicked men's Consciences are void of
Scruples, not because they are clear, but callous; and so must every thing be
that is cauteriz'd. Yea give me leave to say farther, Many desperate
Malefactors have mounted the Gibbet without regret, not so much because they
had no scruples in their Consciences, as rather because they had no Consciences
to be scrupled; since one that is seared with an hot Iron (to use the figure of
our Apostle) is in effect none at all.

11. For (to show briefly what it is, having showed largely what it is not,) A
Man's Conscience is his Knowledge of what he has done, or not done, which the
known Law of God (written within him, or without him,) has either commanded, or
not commanded; and so by consequence it is a Witness either for him, or against
him, after the measure that he has done, or has omitted to do his Duty. From
whence it follows unavoidably, That as Conscience properly so called is the
Rule of Action, so the known Law of God is the Rule of Conscience. And from
hence again it follows as unavoidably as before, That for any man to say he is
bound in Conscience, (as we know who did in the worst of times,) not only to
covet his Neighbor's goods, but at once to kill, and to take possession, (the
thing with which the holy Prophet upbraided Ahab,) is as much as to say in
directer Terms, That he thinks it his Duty to be a Devil.

And so much for the first Fallacy, by which a Multitude of men are led indeed
to walk circumspectly, but as Fools, and not as Wise, because against the true
Notion and Rule of Conscience.

12. And as some do thus foolishly offend against Conscience, so do others
against Discretion. For many Professors are very willing to be in possession of
the End of their Christianity, who yet are very unwilling to use the Means.
They would with all their hearts embrace the Service of Christ, but not abstain
from those things with which his Service is inconsistent. Desirous they are to
do the thing that is good; but they cannot abide to depart from evil. Or if
they have a woulding to cease from That too, yet they are fond of the Occasions
which still do tend and lead toward it. There is nothing in the world either
more serviceable to Satan, or more pernicious and destructive to the Kingdom of
Christ, (which he would gladly set up in the Souls of men,) than That most
pleasant, but killing Fallacy, which the far greatest part of men are wont to
impose upon themselves, [That they need not scruple at the doing whatever is
lawful to be done, and has not any thing in it which can be properly called
Sin.] A fallacy the apter to be swallowed down glibly, (and that by good
Logicians too,) because it delights whom it indangers; and as it finds men
disposed (yea greedily willing) to be abused, so it makes them well-pleased
with the hurt it does them; as being suitable and compliant with all the
Appetites of the Flesh. When men are tempted to do a thing which is not
formally unlawful, as being no where forbidden by God or Man, they will not be
at the pains to meditate about the Tendency and Bias of such a thing. For it
would rob them of the pleasure they take in Sin, if they should patiently admit
but of this one Consideration, (which is commonly distasteful and irksom to
them,) That there was hardly ever any unlawful thing, which did not arise from
the Admission of something or other that was lawful. Yea that sometimes the
greatest and damning'st Sins have taken Rise from the least and most
contemptible Occasions. I shall at once make it plain and useful too by some
examples; and that especially out of Good will unto the younger, and more
illiterate, and less considering part of Those that shall chance to read me.

13. No doubt 'twas lawful enough for Eve, at least to look upon the fruit
which was forbidden, (for God forbad her only to eat it;) And as lawful for
her it was, to lend the Serpent an empty hearing; (that is to say, upon
condition she did not give him her Assent too:) But how much happier had it
been, if, like Ulysses in the Odysses, she had stopped her very ears against the
Voice of That Charmer, and had not suffered her self to look? For her Eye and
her Ear became the Panders to her Palate, and then her Palate betrayed her
Heart. Holy men have This property, Greg. Mag. Dial. l. 4. c. 11. fol. 37.
(says Gregory the Great,) Quod ut semper ab illicitis long sint, a se
plerumque etiam licita abscindunt; That they may still be far enough from doing
any thing unlawful, they abstain from many things which are lawful too.
Certainly Job could be no such Idiot, as to think it a thing unlawful for a
man to look upon a Maid, who yet did covenant not to do it, not only with his
Heart, but with his Eyes too. Nor may we think it was for nothing, that S. Paul
so solemnly did distinguish betwixt things lawful, and things expedient:
clearly intimating unto us, that there are very many things to be left undone,
not because they are unlawful, but only because they are unfit; not because
they are actual Sins, but because they easily may become so; not because they
are vicious, but dangerous things. And it belongs to Circumspection or
Christian Prudence, to mind the Counsels of Scripture, as well as Precepts:
as, Prove. 5. 8.
not to approach the very Door of an Harlot's House; Jude 23.
to hate the very Garment spotted of the flesh; Psalm. 1. 1.
and not to stand in the way of Sinners. We may not be Haunters of the Tavern
and other places of Debauch, because there are some who come out sober; But
rather of the two we must beware of such Places, because there are others who
come out drunk. For it is a mocking of God, and a reproaching of our selves too,
to run without warrant upon Temptation, and at the same time to pray, Deliver
us from evil. We know that many most tender Parents correct their Children,
not only for doing what is morally evil, but merely for coming in Harm's way;
for not being so Circumspect, as to be afraid before they are hurt. And though
no doubt it is barely lawful, for a man to walk upon a Praecipice, or to stand
on a Pinnacle of the Temple; yet whosoever dares do it deserves a Rod. We
cannot say it was unlawful for Herodias to dance, or for Herod sitting by to
behold her motions; But yet Herodias and Herod were both deservedly to be
blamed, because if She had not danced, nor He beheld her, she had not so easily
(as she did) stolen his heart out of his Bosom, and Then the Innocent Baptist
had kept his Head upon his Shoulders. Will any man say it was unlawful, for
the women of Israel to hold up their chins, or set one foot before another? But
yet God smote them with Isa. 3. 16, 17.
scabbed heads, because they minced their steps as they went along, and because
they walked with stretched-out Necks. It was not certainly unlawful for Mother
Monicha, (the famous Mother of S. Augustine,) to drink a cup or two of Wine now
and then with her Neighbors; But yet by little and little practice grew into a
Custom; and Custom justled out Judgment; and so she grew out of Permission,
into Delight; an arrant Wine-bibber at last, and vulgarly known so to be; sadly
purchasing unto her self the odious Title of Meribibula. Which, without more
Examples, may serve to teach us, with what kind of Circumspection we ought to
walk, to save our selves as from the Mixture, so from the Neighborhood of
evil.

14. And being thus far secured from the two grand Fallacies of which I spoke,
with which there is hardly any thing commoner than for Christians to cousen and
cheat Themselves; We have found the way to walk circumspectly by the Rules of
Conscience, and of Discretion; or (as our Apostle does here express it) not as
Fools, but as Wise. And truly upon a supposal, that as many as have heard, have
also minded what I have spoken, I think I have spoken at least enough of the
praevious part of my Design, which was only to discourse of Circumspection in
Thesi. To consider it in Hypothesi, 'twill properly belong to another Text, and
must therefore be deferred till another Time.

OF CIRCUMSPECTION In HYPOTHESI.
MATTHEW. 24. 4. Take heed that no man deceive you.
1. THE words in general are the Non primis verbis respondet ad ea de quibus
fuerat interrogatus; sed illud primum admonet, quod inprimis fuerat
observandum, ne imposturis hominum abducamur a fide. Clarius in locum.
Preface of our Savior's Answer to his Disciples. Their Question was, what the
Signs of his Coming should be, (v. 3.) Which Coming of his having a double
Signification, either the end of the Age, (as the Greek imports,) or else the
end of the World, (as we commonly read in our English Bibles,) This Inquiry of
the Disciples may have in proportion a double Prospect. The first and more
immediate on the Destruction of the Jews; the second and more remote on the Day
of Judgment. And it is possible that the Prognostics our Savior gives them may
be equally appliable to Both acceptions of his Coming; as well to the Scepter's
departing from Judah, which in the Prophecy of Jacob should be when Shiloh was
fully come, as to the End of All things, when Christ shall come with his Holy
Angels, to judge the Secrets of all men's Hearts.

I have so very good Authority for Both these Notions, that I am not very
willing to leave out either, although I cannot but in Judgment prefer the
first: and that as for many other reasons, V. Tertull. de Praescript. adversus
Haeres. cap. 45.
(too many, and too long to be here inserted,) so more particularly for one, in
which the words of This Text are more particularly concerned. For I observe
Three Periods or Parts of Time, pointed at by our Savior in several parts of
this Chapter: in the first of which he gives warning of bare Deceivers, (v. 5.)
in the second of false Prophets, (v. 11.) in the third of false Christ's, (v.
24.) such as would set forth themselves in so plausible a manner, with so
bewitching a Parade, and such astonishing advantages of Signs and Wonders, as
to deceive (if it were possible) the very Elect, had not our Savior
countermin'd them with an (...), Behold, I have told you before they come, (v.
25.) and with a (...) in my Text, Take heed that no man deceive you.

2. Now if to satisfy the Desire and Curiosity of the Inquisitive, I may
examine and give account, who the Deceivers, and the false Prophets, and the
false Christ's were by Name, whom our Lord in this Text may seem in particular
to intend or allude unto; The first I find was Origin contra Cells. l. 2. Act.
8. 10.
Simon Magus, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 12. and l. 3. c. 20. and l. 4. c. 6.
who called Himself The Power of God; and Helena, his Harlot, A piece of Deity,
A Claudio Cas. honoratus, a multis quasi Deus glorificatus esse dicitur. Docuit
se esse qui inter Judaeos quasi Filius apparuerit, in Samaria quasi Pater
descenderit, and in reliquis gentibus quasi Sp. Sanctus adventaverit. Helenam
primam ejus (...) fuisse dixit, and generasse Angelos and Potestates per quas
Mundum hunc factum esse ait. Iren. l. 1. c. 20.
flown forsooth from His Bosom. He was a very bewitching Sorcerer, in great
Esteem with the Emperor Claudius, and worshipped by many as a God. Nor would he
be thought to be only one, but every Person in the Trinity; The Father in
Samaria, The Son in Judaea, The Holy Ghost among the Gentiles. Yet This was
That Simon who is said to have believed, and by the Sacrament of Baptism had
been admitted into the Church. Act. 8. 13. Such another was Dositheus, who
called himself The very Christ. A third was Menander, who would needs have been
thought The common Savior of the world. A fourth was Barchochebas, who
preached up himself as The Messiah that was to come, and whom the Jews were
Followers of, as of I know not what Star dropped down from Heaven. These were
(...). Polycarp. ad Philippens. p. 20. 1 John 4. 3.
properly false Christ's. Then for Deceivers and false Prophets, who are alluded
to in the Text, I shall but name some of the Chief. One was Theudas in the Time
of Claudius, who pretended to separate the Waters of Jordan, as Moses Those of
the Red Sea. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 20.
Aegyptius was another in the Time of Nero, who (with 30000 Followers) was by
Felix cut off at the Mount of Olives. Iren. l. 1. c. 25. and l. 3. c. 3.
A third was Ebion, who contended that Jesus Christ was an arrant Man, the
offspring of Joseph as well as Mary. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 23.
A fourth was Cerinthus, who taught his Followers to expect a Thousand years of
Sensuality, which (forsooth) were to commence from after the general
Resurrection. (The like to which was said of Papias, who had been Scholar to S.
John.) A fifth was the Sect of the Nicolaitans, who exhorted their Disciples to
the promiscuous use of Wives. Iren. l. 1. c. 1. etc. 24.
A sixth was Carpocrates, and all his Gnostics, (for Epiph. Haer. 20.
Nicolaus bred some, and Hieron. lib. de Script. Eccles. Augustine. Haer. 6.
Valentinus bred others,) who commended Uncleanness, as one great Requisite to
Man's Redemption. (meaning his being freed from his Confinement to The Body.) A
seventh was Eusebius. l. 4. c. 7. and l. 6. c. 28.
Basilides, who held it lawful in Times of Trial, to renounce the Doctrine of
the Gospel, and did set up in Egypt an open School of this Heresy: which was
afterward espoused by the Eusebius. ibid. Iren. 1. c. 1. 22. 23.
Helcheseitae. An eighth was Saturninus, who did the like to this in Syria. And
though some of these did flourish after the sacking of Jerusalem, yet the Jews
received Massacres even after that time of their Desolation. Witness That in
the Days of Hadrian, whereof Barchochebas was the occasion. For God it seems
had designed them to such an absolute (...), such a Consumption of the whole,
that even their Ruins were to be levelled, and their Graves buried. They were
prohibited by Hadrian, Judaeis nec Advenarum jure Terram patriam saltem
vestigio salutare conceditur. Tertull. in Apol. c. 21. p. 45.
to do so much as to look on their Native Country. Yea Jerusalem was decreed
to be called Aelia, and its Name to be blotted out from the Common Register of
Time. So that All those Deceivers I just now mentioned, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6.
were either the Harbingers, or the Attendants, of That so matchless a
Devastation; and did literally fulfill this famous Prediction of our Lord, in
the 5th. the 11th. and 24th. verses of this Chapter.

3. All which being premised by way of general Explication, may serve to guide
our Attentions into Three Subjects of Discourse.

First, an Heedfulness, and Prudence, to which our Savior thought fit to
exhort his first Followers; the Exhortation as it were reaching, through Them,
to Us. (...), See, or Take heed.

Secondly, the Danger, or Ground of fear, which more particularly calls for
this Christian Prudence. To wit, the Multitude of Deceivers gone abroad into
the World; which by their Subtilty, and their Number, will be so likely to
prevail, that there is no little need of our greatest Care, (...), lest any Man
deceive us.

Lastly, the Time is very observable, wherein the use of this Care will be most
in Season: and this we may gather from the Context to be before a Destruction
of Church and State. For Imposture and Deceit will be Then most rife, and
therefore the Prudence of a Christian will be Then most needful.

The first Observable of the Three I have insisted upon at large on another
Text; whereon I showed the strict necessity of circumspect Walking in the
General, in respect of evil Things, and all that have Tendency unto evil.

It now remains that I proceed to the second Observable I proposed; and so to
consider Circumspection or Christian Prudence, as relating in Particular to the
Deceitfulness of Persons. Nor can it be severely imputed to me, if still I
continue to deal in Caveats. For,

4. If ever there were an Error to be commended out of a Pulpit, it is the
right-handed Error of too much Caution. And if ever there can be any, This is
certainly the Time, when no abundance of Caution can be too much. When perhaps
the very greatest a man can use, may prove the very least he shall stand in
need of. At least I take This to be a satisfactory reason, why having spoken
enough already of Christian Prudence in Thesi, I am led by the love of Method
to consider it also in Hypothesi; as it stands in relation to this or that
Station and State of Men. For as Charity is the greatest of Christian Virtues,
so (in a secular Consideration) it is the most dangerous, and ensnaring, and the
most difficult to be managed of all our Duties; because it has This peculiar to
it, that it thinks no evil; but bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, endures all things. (1 Cor. 13. 5, 7.) I will not say it is
the weakness or fault of Charity to be Credulous; But yet exposing its owners
to many Risques, and Inconveniences, it stands in need of great Prudence to
keep it safe. The Disciples therefore did very wisely, Act. 9. 26.
in being afraid and suspicious of Paul himself, till Barnabas gave him a
Testimonial, ver. 27, 29.
that by his preaching boldly at Damascus, and by his disputing against the
Graecians, he proved himself an unfeigned Convert: as if the repentance of an
Enemy were never to be trusted until it is tried; nor any other Trial could be
sufficient, but That of bringing forth fruits meet for repentance. Our Blessed
Savior himself would not entrust himself with some who believed in him; Joh.
2. 23, 24.
because he knew their Belief was such, as would not bear any stress in a time
of Trial. Seeing the Miracles which he did, they believed in his Name: but he
knew that they were not Temptation-proof; that they would not hold out at his
Crucifixion. How much more might his Apostles be distrustful of Believers, who
knew them not? And yet so unguarded was their Simplicity, (I mean the
Simplicity of the heart, not of the head, or the understanding; as opposed
only to knavery, and not to knowledge;) that they made their own Innocence the
usual measure of other men's. Hence it was that their Master did call them
Matthew. 10. 16.
Sheep; because they knew not, till he had told them, that they were going out
as Sheep in the midst of Wolves. And the more he had observed they were unapt
to be suspicious, by so much the rather did he exhort them to use the wisdom
of the Serpent, whereby to set a constant Guard upon the Innocence of the Dove.
For as Wisdom is Jam. 3. 15.
devilish, without Simplicity, so This, without Wisdom, is never safe. It is
the property of the one, not to do any Injury, and the benefit of the other, is
not to suffer it. Indeed as Fear is opposed to Fortitude, it is a childish
unmanlike Passion; still betraying those succors which reason offers. Wisd.
17. 12.
Again, as Fear is opposed to Faith, it is an heathenish and carnal Passion;
That that made so many Compliers in the evil days passed, with the Spirit which
Then was working in the prosperous Children of Disobedience. Ephesians. 2. 2.
But as Fear is opposed to Folly, (I mean Imprudence, and want of Heed,) it is
at once a very generous and Christian Thing. There being no true Faith, no nor
any true Fortitude, which has not a mixture of such a Fear. As Fear is opposite
to Reliance and Trust in God, it is indeed a great Duty to laugh at Danger: But
as it is opposite to Rashness and a defect of Circumspection, it is as much a
man's duty to provide against danger by timely fear. For the same Spirit that
says by the Royal Priest, Matthew. 10. 28.
Fear not them that can kill the body, does also say by the Royal Preacher,
Prove. 28. 14.
Happy is the man that fears always. All which being compared with the
Importance of my Text; and the evil of those days, which in the Context are
spoken of, being duly compared with these I speak in, (for in truth the whole
Chapter which lies before us may very well serve for an English Mirroir,
wherein our Modern Deceivers may partly see how they look;) I think I may say
(without impertinence) to the most prudent Congregation, what our Savior
esteemed needful, not only pertinent to his Disciples, (...), See, or take
heed: and (...), Take heed ye be not deceived: and (...), Take heed that no man
deceive you.

5. That thus the Emphasis is to be put, I am confirmed in my opinion from
other words of our Lord to his 12 Apostles, when being about to send them
abroad to an inhospitable world, he did not speak in this manner, (which yet he
might very well have done,) Beware of those foolish and hurtful Lusts, which
drown the Soul in misery and perdition. Nor did he choose to say Thus, (which
he might very well have done too,) Beware of the Inticements of worldly
Greatness, of Riches, and Pleasure, and Reputation. He did not say, (with S.
Paul,) Beware of Dogs; Not yet, (with S. Peter,) Beware of Devils: But (as a
greater Mischief than either,) Beware of Men. (Matthew. 10. 17.) For as
Deceitfulness, and Fraud, and all the dire effects thereof, do give us a very
true Character of the Greater World; so Man, being a little world, is a little
world of Deceits too. The falsest Crocodile in Egypt is not Hypocrite enough
to become his Emblem. The reason is, because the best things debaucht are the
most transcendent evils. Those Angels that fell from as high as Heaven, could
not therefore fall less, than as low as Hell. And so Angelical was the Nature
of Man undeprav'd, by enjoying a Rectitude both of Intellect and Will, that he
admitted not of a middle betwixt a Devil, and a Saint. So that Man's being the
worst on this side Hell, as well as the best of God's Creatures on this side
Heaven, does help to adjust and reconcile the seeming contradictory Proverbs,
(...). Polyb. Hist. l. 1. and Legate. 122. (...). Plato de Legibus l. 6. (...).
Homo Homini Deus, and Homo Homini Diabolus. Man to Man is a kind of God, and
Man to Man is an arrant Devil. All the rest of our Fellow Creatures are very
innocent Neighbors; Nay, whenever we have occasion, they are our most
obedient and faithful Servants. But Man to Man (for the greatest part) is
either a very fierce Enemy, and so the worst of Wild Beasts; or else a very
false Friend, the worst of Tame ones.

6. So far therefore as we are men, I think our first and greatest head is to
be taken for our selves against our selves. Not for this Reason only, because
we love our selves most, and so are most apt to deceive our selves; (the Devil
commonly using us, as the Empress Agrippina her husband Claudius, whilst she
poisoned That Dish, with which she knew he was most delighted, and on which he
was likely to make the plentifullest Meal;) But withal because the Soul, like
the Eye of Man, is least of all able to see itself. (...) etc. Diod. Sic. l.
20. p. 778.
And this I think the best Moral, (though I know there is another,) of Diodorus
his Mythology concerning Lamia, who did put on her Eyes, when she went abroad;
but always coming home, put them up into her pocket. We are blind to the
greatest Beam, if it be in our own Eye, though we can spy the least Mote in
another man's. Nor is it only the Eye, but the Heart of man also (if we
believe the Prophet Jeremy) is deceitful above all things. Jer. 17. 9.
And this is that which makes him his own worst cheat; whilst either he falls
without a Tempter, like Lucifer in heaven; or else (like Peter upon earth) he
is endangered by a temptation from the mere Confidence of his safety. Amongst a
Thousand which might be given, I cannot name a fitter Instance of
Self-Deceiving, than that of Eldavid the Fanatic in Rabbi Mosche Ben Maiemon:
Vid. Buxtorph. Thesaur. Lingu. Hebr. qui historiam recenset integram ex libro
Shevet Jehuda.
who was so very sincere a Cheat in the couzenage of himself, and did so
seriously believe he was the Prodromus of the Messiah, that he offered to be
tried by a Decollation, and died a Martyr to his Delusions. So much it is every
man's duty to fear Himself, and to suspect his own Fantasy, or Imagination,
which he takes to be his judgment in diverse cases.

7. Next and immediately after our selves, we must be circumspect and wise in
respect of one another. And as of other men in general, (for this very reason
that they are Men,) so of Those in special manner whom we have most of all
trusted, and most obliged; who have mingled their Projects and Prayers with us;
who have eaten of our bread, and as it were lain in our very Bosoms; who are
apt to hate us for the favors they are not able to requite, and for exceeding
their Gratitude, will not allow us their Humanity. Of such ill-natured
Creatures we read in Tacitus, quibus beneficia eousque laeta, dum videntur
exolvi posse; sed ubi antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur. Little Courtesies
and good turns they take very well, and are thankful for: But when a
Munificence is excessive, and far beyond their possibility either to
recompense, or deserve, Then they only love the benefits, but perfectly hate
the Benefactor, and wish Him Dead, because (according to that of Aristotle,
(...),) as often as he sees them, he makes them blush. Now it is very sound
arguing from the Act to the Aptitude; such Things there may be in these our
days, because there were such in the days we read of. And special heed is to be
taken that we be not deceived by such as These; because by Courage and easy
Caution a man may be saved from his Enemies; But God alone can keep him safe
from his dearest Friends. Thence said God by the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 9. 4, 5,
6.
Take ye heed every one of his Neighbor, and trust ye not in any Brother: for
every Brother will utterly supplant; and every Neighbor will walk with
slanders; their habitation is in the midst of Deceit. So said Jesus the Son of
Sirach, Ecclus. 6. 13.
Separate thy self from thine Enemies, and take heed of thy Friends: Julius
Caesar was more endangered from Brutus, and Cassius, his Bosom Friends, than
from Antony, and Cato, his open Enemies. Pompey the Great could never hurt him
with all his Armies, because he was a brave and a generous Enemy. But his
Friends were such Flayls, as against which there was no Defense. Even the
Serpent himself was not more treacherous to Eve, than Eve was unto her Husband,
and her Husband to his posterity. For although she derived Her Body from His,
and so might seem in some regard to have been his own Daughter, before his
Wife; (as it were joined to him in Wedlock by a kind of lawful Incest;) yet no
sooner had that Woman received Life from out his Side, than she (in a
lamentable Requital) returned Death into his Bowels. David did not complain,
Psalm. 55. 12, 13, 14.
That an open Enemy had dishonored him, or that an Adversary had magnified
himself against him: for (said he) I could have born the one, and have hid my
self from the other. But his Cordolium and his outcry was against his
Companion, and his Guide, with whom he took sweet Counsel, Psalm. 41. 9.
and walked with as with a Friend in the House of God. I wish it may prove a
very groundless and weak Suggestion, that both our Jesuits, and their
Journymen, (passing commonly under the name of fanatic Protestants,) are by
much the most innocent, because they are (...), (as Aristotle words it) the
most undisguised and barefaced Enemies, at once to the Monarchy and Church of
England. Such as declare themselves in Conser Buchananum, and Junium Brutum,
cum Catalogo Scriptorum apud Is. Casaub. Epist. ad Frontonem Ducaeum.
praesertim p. 11, 12, 14.
print for the Deposing of our Kings, and the Disposing of their Kingdoms. In
this respect the more innocent, that by professing themselves implacable and
ungainable Antagonists, they give us an Helmet before they strike. We know the
Thirtieth of January stands as execrably black in our English Calendar, as the
Fifth of November has ever done. Which proves the Truth of what was written by
Beatum illum, qui non vidit mala Patriae quae parant duo genera hominum,
Jesuitae (...), and (...). Deus misereatur Ecclesiae suae. Casaub. Epist. 116.
Confer etiam Thuani l. 54. A D. 1572. cum ejusdem l. 17. A. D. 1556. and l. 18.
A. D. 1557.
Isaac Casaubon to Heinsius before our days, (and when the days were less evil
than we have lived in,) that we have Jesuited Protestants, as well as Papists;
equally Haters of the Government of Church and State here in England; equally
poisoned with an Opinion, that the worst of all Murders is the most highly
meritorious; equally Practicers and Patrons of That Hildebrandine Divinity,
which has cost so many Monarchs their Lives and Fortunes. I say, 'twere safer
than now it is, if all our Enemies were such, ut professa prodant odia
vindictae locum; that by knowing our utmost Danger, we might Timely stand upon
our Guard. Were I at leisure to rifle Story, I could name several Hundreds,
besides the Emperor Darius, and Charles the first of these Realms, who were
betrayed by those most, in whom they most trusted: and whilst they thought the
best way to make men Loyal, was not to doubt of their being such, most
unhappily have died by their Credulity. It is indeed a very generous and
Princely Error, (as being the Error of a Great and a Candid Soul,) not at all
to be capable of Fears and Jealousies; and rather to run the greatest Hazards,
than either to fear, or to be feared. But yet the oftener I reflect upon what
was once said by a Duke of Florence, [That He reckoned All Subjects, who were
Principl'd by the Jesuits, would rebel if they could, and therefore (said he)
for mine, let them do it if they can;] And comparing therewith the several
Caveats of our Lord, Be wise as Serpents, Beware of Men; And considering that
Distrustfulness is the chief Wisdom of the Serpent, as well as a necessary
Safeguard to the Simplicity of the Dove; Lastly, the less I have been able to
free my self from an opinion, that in the Wariness of the Prince the People's
Interest and Safety does chiefly stand, (for sure it is our greatest Interest,
not to be able to be damned for our Disobedience, and, by a consequence
unavoidable, not to be able to Disobey the Lord of Hosts in his Vicegerents,)
the more I think there is place for an Epicharmus, to bring That Motto to
Remembrance, [(...), that is,] forget not to be Distrustful.

8. And as of all other friends, so above all beware of Them, who pretend a
Friendship unto the Soul. For there is no Devil to the white one. That Serpent
is the most deadly, which covers over his malice with the seeming simplicity of
a Dove. Matthew. 7. 15.
A Wolf is ever most Ravenous, when clothed in sheep-skin. Nor is there any
such dangerous Highway-Thief, as he who follows that trade in the Reverend
Habit of a Priest. There are no Jugglers in the world to be compared with false
Teachers; those Spiritual purloyners, who commit a kind of Burglary upon men's
Souls, and even plunder their very Consciences; who first steal into their
Heads, and carry away from thence their true Opinions in point of faith; then
creep into their Hearts, and steal away from thence their right Affections in
point of practice. Such as these heretofore were Nestorius, Photinus, and
Apollinaris. All three very learned and frequent Preachers, Vincent. Lirin.
cap. 17, 18, 19.
of eminent wit, and elocution, highly approved by the Clergy, as well as
admired by all the people, until infected with an Itch to be the Authors of so
many Sects, or the Heads of so many Factions, they polluted all their
Excellencies with the Leprosy of Error; and of three great Shepherds became
three Dogs, whose constant business was nothing else, but to be barking and
snarling against the Truth. Photinus (even with vehemence) against the Trinity
of the Godhead; Nestorius against the Unity of our Savior's Person; and
lastly, Apollinaris against the Duality of his Nature.

9. From whose examples we may learn, not only to beware of such as creep into
Houses, 2 Timothy 3. 6.
and there lead captive those Silly women, who again do lead captive their
Silly men; But of such as domineer in their factious pulpits, and like the
great Red Dragon in the Revelation, Rev. 12. 3.
do draw after their Tail, perhaps a whole third part of the Stars of Heaven.
(I cannot be thought to speak of fixed, but of erratick and wandering Stars.) The
common fallacies of the world do only cousen the peoples senses, and so impose
upon their Reason. But these at first dash do even bewitch their very reason,
and so beguile them of their Religion. A spiritual Cheat, or false Teacher, is
so incomparably hurtful; (especially when his false and seditious Doctrine is
such as easily runs out at his fingers ends,) that Lucifer himself, to become
such, did first of all turn Devil. For as if his Devilship were his
Qualification, He was first an Apostate, and then a Preacher. The forbidden
Tree was his Text, forbidden Knowledge was his Doctrine, Horrid Rebellion was
his Use, and so he concluded with just Damnation.

10. Now we shall find such Impostors to have been still very rife, whether we
look into the Jewish, or Christian Church.

In the Jewish it is observable, that for one Elijah, (that man of God,) the
Prophets of Baal were four hundred and fifty. 1 Kin. 18. 22.
For one Micaiah, Chapter 22. v. 6, 8.
who prophesied Truth, four hundred there were that daubed with untemper'd
Mortar. The ways of Apostasy in Israel were chiefly two. The first was the way
of Jeroboam, who adored the true God, but in the similitude of a Calf; nor that
at Jerusalem, but Dan and Bethel. In that lay his Heresy, in this his Schism.
The second way was the way of Ahab; who besides the public worship, common to
him with Jeroboam, did farther worship his Baalims or Godlings also. Now there
was never any Apostasy, no nor Idolatry in Israel; in which their False
Prophets had not still a great hand. No nor any false Prophets who prophesied
Lies, but they pretended to derive them from the mouth of Truth. The work of
Satan still was done in Jehovah's name. An example of which we have 1 King. 22.
where though Ahab's lying Prophets were Prophets of Baal, yet still they
ushered in their falsehoods with a [Thus says the Lord.]

Come we hastily from the Jewish to the Christian Church, which we shall find
to have been infested, from her first 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
Infancy and Childhood, with such Deceivers. A Simon Magus was found at Rome,
to resist the doctrins of S. Peter; An Apollonius also at Ephesus, to check the
preachings of S. John. Besides Menander, and Cerinthus, Barchochebas, and
Dositheus, Carpocrates, and Ebion, Saturninus, and Basilides, and the most
venomous Crew as well of Gnostics, as Nicholaitans, (whereof the greatest part
did flourish in the Apostles own times, and all pretended to be Reformers,)
there were not wanting amongst the Heathen, who did endeavor the setting up a
New Messiah of their own; and that by craftily diverting the clearest
prophecies of the Old Testament, from that natural Aspect which they all fasten
upon the New. V. Justin Mart. (...). p. 70, etc.
Justin Martyr in his Paraenesis to the Emperor Antonine, does make this
appear by an Induction of particulars. That famous prophecy (for example) of
dying Jacob, [The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come, binding
his Asse's Colt unto the choice Vine, and washing his Clothes in the blood of
Grapes, Genesis 49. 11.] which is so manifestly fulfilled in Jesus Christ the Son
of God, The Heathen Greeks applied to Bacchus, their Son of Jupiter; not only
because his Rites were solemnized with an Ass, and because he was worshipped as
the God of the Vintage; but because he was feigned to have been torn in pieces,
to have suffered many things, and to have entered into Glory. So what is spoken
by the Prophets of our Savior's riding into Jerusalem upon an Ass, (Zech. 9.
9.) They apply to Bellerophon (another Son of their Jupiter) riding to Heaven
upon Pegasus, a winged Horse. And that praediction of Isaias concerning a
Virgin's bringing forth, (Isa. 7. 14.) They will needs apply to Dance in the
Brazen Tower; where having carefully been sequestered from the Society of men,
and yet for all that grown big of Perseus, she got the fabulous repute of a
Mother-Maid. So that passage of the Psalmist, [He rejoiced as a Giant to run
his course, Psalm. 19. 5.] Those Idolatrous Greeks apply to Hercules, whom they
affirm to have ran through all the habitable world. And those distinct
praedictions of the Prophet Esa touching our Savior's healing Virtue over all
manner of Diseases, they apply to Aesculapius, their God of Physic. Not to be
endless in particulars, All the Prophecies of our Messiah, excepting that of
his Crucifixion, (which their Poets could never parallel in all their fabulous
Sons of Jupiter,) have by the wicked Ingeny of Deceivers, been profanely
misapplied to the bolstering up of their Idolatries, and that by having been
wrested from those Completions they all do find in our Blessed Savior.
Insomuch as without, and within the Church, both under the Law, and under the
Gospel, This has ever been a pertinent, if not a necessary Caveat, Be wise as
Serpents; Beware of Men; or (...), Take ye heed that no man deceive you.

11. We stand in need of This Caveat, in respect of All Persons without
exception: not only of the worst, but the Best of men. For as the worst may
deceive us by their very good Words, so may the Best of men too (though without
any design, and even before they are aware,) by their evil Deeds.

To begin with the worst, let us first of all attend unto that Caveat of S.
Paul to his Ephesians, Ephesians. 5. 6.
Let no man deceive you with vain words. A Caveat extended to many things of
great moment, however expressed by our Apostle in the style of vain words. He
does not mean by vain words, such as are but unprofitable and impertinent to
the Hearers; such as are to no end, and purpose: but such as are filthy as well
as foolish; and withal such as are false, or fallacious words. Such as blind a
man's Judgment; such as pervert his Understanding; such as impose upon his
Reason; such as mislead him from the true Faith; and even cousen him of his
Religion. In all these respects, though in the last above all, S. Paul is
careful that his Ephesians be not deceived with vain words.

They who call foolish or filthy Talking, by the plausible names of
Facetiousness, or Drollery, Vrbanity, or Burlesque, are the first fort of such
as do deceive with vain words. These are called by the Greeks (...), and by the
Latins Ridicularii, in French and English, Drolls, and Railleurs; such as
think it a mark of Wit, never to speak a serious word, but to turn all into
Ridicule. By foolish talking and jesting, (two words for one thing) is meant
such insipid and unsavory discourse, as has not in it any Salt either of
Charity or of Prudence to make it useful. It Is true that Aristotle does reckon
(...) (which is here S. Paul's word) a Semivertue in Conversation. But being
usually coupled with Scurrility, or Obscoeneness, or some degree of
Profanation, (for mala sunt vicina bonis,) it is prohibited, and condemned, and
heavily censured by our Apostle, as inconsistent with the seriousness and the
gravity of a Christian, whose Conversation should be in heaven, and his Joy in
the Holy Ghost; not in jesting, and buffonery. Mortification and Repentance and
Amendment of life should be His Business; and Praising God his Recreation. The
Study and Contemplation both of the Wisdom, and the Will, and the Word of God,
should be his Labor, and his Divertisement, his daily Exercise and Delight. To
them that place their present happiness in the contrary to This, in sparing
nothing to break a Jest, neither the holy Word of God, nor the good Names of
Men, nor the modest Ears of Women, but sacrifice all considerations to Sport
and Laughter, as to the Idol they most adore, To Them our Lord's Denuntiation
belongs of right, Woe be to Them that laugh, for they shall mourn and weep. As
for such things as These, impious Jests to cause laughter, and filthy Talking,
(v. 4.) let no man deceive us, (says S. Paul,) as if they were altogether
Venial, and such as easily consist with a Christian state: For even because of
These things, ver. 6.
(as arrant Trifles and Peccadilloes, as by too many they may be thought,) the
wrath of God comes upon the children of Disobedience, either in This, or the
World to come.

Again, Let no man deceive us with vain words, that is, with false ones (says
Estius,) or with fallacious ones (says Menochius.) And so the Caveat is
extensible to All the Deceitfulnesses of Men, who with the Sophistry of words,
or the words of man's Wisdom, (which is the wisdom of the Flesh,) seek to
impose upon the Consciences and minds of those they speak to. As in calling
vicious Fear by the Name of Prudence; in calling Avarice, Frugality; Luxury,
Nobleness; Lightness, Affability; Ambition, Greatness of Soul; Sheepishness,
Humility; Insultation, Courage; and devilish Envy, Hatred of Evil. For now and
then a great Vice does so Ape-out Virtue, and several Virtues in some degrees
do so border upon Vice, that for want of due Heed to the vain words of men,
many mistake them for one another. Let no man therefore deceive us (as many
will, unless we stand upon our Guard,) by giving vain Subtilty the name of
Wisdom; and Cruelty the name of Corrective Justice; by calling Rashness,
Resolution; and Giddiness, Zeal: Let no man lead us into Intemperance, under
the style of Goodfellowship; nor seek to lessen the guilt of Wantonness, by its
being intitl'd a Trick of youth; nor withdraw our Obedience to public Parents,
in pretense of Sacrifice to God; no nor our Sacrifice to God, (when That is
due,) because Obedience indeed is better. Let no man persuade us to leave
undone the smallest Duties, under color of our doing the weightier matters of
the Law; nor wilfully to admit of a lesser Sin, in a sophistical Pretense of
avoiding greater. For That saying of Aristotle, (...), that of two Evils the
least is to be chosen, is not meant of two Moral, but of two Physical, or civil
Evils. It Is true when two Evils are Both of Punishment, or when of any two
Evils, the one is of Sin, and the other of Affliction, Reason prompts us to
choose the lesser. But of two moral Evils, or of two formal Sins, Religion bids
us choose neither: But rather suffer the greatest evil, than submit to do the
least.

12. Should I adventure to reflect upon all sorts of Men of this first rank, of
whom an heed is to be taken in this last Age, (though this at first was my
Design,) I should heedlesly engage in a new Sea of matter, and wear out the
Patience of all that hear me. I shall therefore choose to spend the little
Remainder of my time, in giving notice of two or three of the most plausible
Deceivers, which seem to have had the chiefest hand in all the Miseries of the
late Times. For till the Errors they have sown, and sometimes planted, be
rooted out of the people's Minds, I cannot imagine how it is possible to keep
our Peace any longer, than whilst the persons so imbued want Power to break it.

13. Take we heed then in the next place of such Deceivers, as sow the seeds of
Discontent in their credulous Congregations, by feeding the People with
Apprehensions, fears, and jealousies, of Superstition, and Popery, and
impositions upon Religion by the Commandments of Men. This has been a sore Evil
under the Sun, (ever since the Days of Queen Elizabeth,) by fictitious and
pretended, to make a Broad way for real Popery. When a Protestant resolves to
espouse a Schism, a Separation from the most perfect of Protestant Churches in
the World, He must accuse her either of Popery, or of Papistical Inclinations,
for fear of being found out by all, to drive a Trade of Animosities, either for
Revenge, or for filthy Lucre; or for fear of being known to be Satan's chief
Journy-man, in being passionately amorous of breeding Hatreds, and a Lover of
Schism as it is Schism. Neither Christ nor his Apostles were used otherwise or
worse than the Church of England, whose Accusations were adapted to their
Enemies Ends, which were only to make them odious, and thoroughly fitted for
Destruction; as far from Truth, or Probability, as Truth can possibly be from
Falsehood. Nor could it sure be more impossible, that Christ himself, blessed
for ever, should be a Conjurer, or a Glutton, (who yet was accused of being
Both,) than that His Spouse the Church of England should be Popishly affected,
whose first Reformers were put to Death for resisting Popery, and whose Sons at
this day are the Sole Persons that keep it out, and whose Communion is detested
by none so much as the Popish Party, who are not wont to hate men for their
kind affections. A man would think that all Protestants should unite themselves
with us, because the Romanists will not. A man would think that no Protestant
should separate from us, because the Romanists all do. A man would think our
common Enemies should make us Friends. But when the Primitive Christians were
to be baited, and torn in pieces, 'twas but suitable for them to be put in
Bears Skins too. And it is as suitable for our Church to be very well clothed
with the worst of Calumnies, by such as aim at her Ruin, and are resolved on
her Condemnation. The many Divisions and Subdivisions of our Sectaries in
England cannot be easily reckoned up, they are so numerous; (for there are
hardly more Divisions amongst the Romanists themselves.) Every Sect is desirous
to have the new-modelling or new-moulding of our Church: and there is not one
of them but has as much pretense for it, as any other; if not an equal right,
yet an equal want of right to be our Reformers. They being equally void of; and
as equally Dissenters from all Authority; abounding All equally in a preference
of their own to Superior Judgments; equal Admirers of Themselves; and as
equally contemptuous of other men. There is not an Anabaptist, or Quaker, not
an Adamite, or a Behemist, no nor any other Sectary of whatsoever Denomination,
but thinks it hard, and takes it ill, we are not All of Their Opinion, and do
not conform to Their way of Worship. Now what a Monster would our Church be, if
every one of these Sects had the shaping of her? and how much worse would our
Babel be, than That which they call The Whore of Babylon? What then is to be
done, or to be said in this case of our present Breaches? They that are over us
in Authority must tell us what is to be done; But what is fittest to be said I
suppose is This: That such of our Englishmen as own themselves Protestants, and
yet divide from the Church of England, do contribute a great deal more toward
the bringing in of Popery, than all the Emissaries of Rome could have done
without them. And if ever we live to see the Abomination of Desolation,
standing as heretofore in our holy Places, it will enter in at That, and at no
other Door, than what our Schisms and Separations have opened to it. Nothing
but our Divisions can bring in Popery; and I had almost said too, that Nothing
but our Union can keep it out. But united we cannot be, (whilst they that have
divided from us are so strangely subdivided among themselves,) unless it be by
All Parties, from every part of the Circumference, concentring themselves in
the Church of England. And this the proudest of them may do, not only without
a Blush, but with the greatest honor and reputation to be imagined. For what
(I pray) is the Church of England, but a most Renowned and National Church? A
National Church the most peaceably and the most regularly reformed of All the
Churches. The chief Reformed Church of Christendom, which has publicly been
Established by Law, and Canon. The only Protestant Church in Europe, which has
been able as well as willing to protect other Churches in their Distresses. In
a word, The Church of England has ever conquered, and confuted, and (if her
fugitive Children do not unnaturally betray her,) will ever keep us all safe
from the Church of Rome.

14. Take we heed in the Third place of such Deceivers, as would have it
thought a mark of the most reformed, to preach up an Exemption from human Laws,
(such especially as relate to the externals of Religion,) and so a
Licentiousness of Life, for Christian Liberty; ever pressing their Hearers to
stand fast in it, Gal. 5. 1.
that is, to be obstinate and sturdy Rebels. As if the Liberty of a Christian,
wherein the Galatians were bid to stand fast, were not at all a Manumission
from the Bondage of Sin, and from the Empire of Satan, and from the Rigor of
the Law as 'twas given by Moses, But a freedom from Christ, and Christianity it
self. Not only from the positive, but from the Moral Law of Moses, which is as
well the Law of Nature, and the Law of Christ too; and which, he tells us most
expressly, He came not to abrogate, but on the contrary to fulfill; and also
(...), to fill it up. As if the Liberty of a Christian extended it self even to
Libertinism it self; rendering every man free to judge the Laws, and
Legislators, and (with a greater force of reason) the learned Judges of the
Land: free to regulate the Laws by their several Humors, (which by the way is
a thing impossible, and flatly implies a Contradiction,) rather than to
regulate their several Humors by the Laws; which is not only possible, but so
absolutely necessary, that He who will not do this, (conform his private humor
to public Laws,) is fit to live in a Desert, in the Company of Creatures which
have no Law at all; not in a Kingdom, or Commonwealth, not in a City, or a
Church, where Human Laws (under God's) are the Life of Liberty, and Propriety,
nor only of Livelihood, but Life it self. Whosoever has been protected from
any injuries of men by the Laws in force, must needs confirm, by his
Experience, the Truth of what I now say: That such a Subject as will no longer
allow the Laws, than the Laws allow him in his being Lawless, or no longer than
they are pleasing and useful to him, (as when they avenge him upon his
Enemies, defend him in his Liberty, and assert him in his Estate,) deserves not
those Benefits of Propriety and Safety the Laws afford him. The Laws (I say)
not only under which, but by which he lives. It Is very plain, that such Laws
deserve but ill from all others, if they do not deserve from Him an uniformity
in his Obedience. Where human Laws command That which God does no where forbid,
and vice versa, where they forbid what God does no where command, Nothing is
plainer in all the Scriptures, than that The Ordinances of Men are also the
Ordinances of God: Romans 13. 1, 2.
and to submit our selves to Them, 1 Pet. 2. 13.
not of necessity, but of choice, not so much for fear of wrath, as for
Conscience sake, is no small part of our Christian Liberty, wherewith Christ
has made us free. Gal. 5. 1.

15. Take we heed in the fourth place of such Deceivers, as would beguile us
into a faith, apt to make us unfaithful in all our ways; a faith that all
things coming to pass were antecedently unavoidable; and that by consequence
when we have sinned, we have only done That, which we could never have
prevented the doing of: and this by the force of a most absolute irrespective
irreversible Decree, which did eternally so determine both the End, and the
Means, as to necessitate our Impieties as well as Punishments. So that if we
are Elected, all our Vices cannot hurt us; and if we are not, all our Virtues
cannot avail us. So again, if we are Reprobates, we cannot repent although we
would; and if we are not, we must repent, do what we can; and by consequence,
as we were born, so we may live without care. Take we heed of being cozened by
such false Logic, as may help us either merrily or despairingly to Hell, by
making us careless of our Actions, and neglectfull of our End. By way of
Antidote to the Venom lying hid in this Doctrine, we must so think of God, as
becomes his Godhead. We must think nothing of God, which is dishonorable in
Men. We must believe nothing of Him, which we would not be very willing to have
believed of our selves. And we must so speak of God in the Ears of Men, as to
beget in them a love and a reverence of him. And this we shall be sure to do,
if we speak of his Promises and his Threats as we find them in Scripture to be
General, and by consequence Conditional; of his Sovereignty, as Just; and of
his Mercy, as extensive to all his Works; of his Will, as Wisdom; sincere, and
uniform, not repugnant to it self, whether as signi, or beneplaciti, revealed,
or secret; of his Decrees from all Aeternity, in proportion to the Rule by
which they are executed in Time; exclusive of his being a Respecter of Persons,
and inclusive of his dealing with All according to their Deeds; of Faith, as
dead, without Works; of Repentance, as false, without Amendment; of
Justification, as in Time, not (as say the Antinomians) from all Aeternity. For
hence it is logically inferred by some of Eminence in the world, (who would not
be thought to be Antinomians,) that their Sins were forgiven before committed;
and that Repentance does not praecede, but follow Pardon. A Doctrine as
dangerous as any other that can be named; and which does not adorn, but
disgrace the Gospel, (as far as Some at least are thought to be Preachers of
it,) which S. Peter on the contrary thought good to preach in This Order;
Repent, and be Converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. Clearly intimating
unto us, that a blotting out of Sins can never follow, unless Repentance and
Conversion do go before. They that teach otherwise, are apt to beget a
Disbelief, or (which is worse) an ill Opinion of the Almighty. Take we heed
therefore that we be not deceived by such as These.

16. Again take we heed of those Idol-Shepherds, Zech. 11. 17.
(to use the phrase of the Prophet Zechary,) whose left Eye at least is sharp
enough sighted, but only their right Eye is full of darkness. They have human
Learning enough, enough and too much of worldly Wisdom, but have no Divine
light whereby to guide it. Such are they of whom I spoke in the later part of
my Last Discourse; who call their Confidence or Caprice by the name of
Conscience, and teach the people under their charge, as 'twere to regulate
their Lives by that crooked Rule. I do the rather speak twice of this grand
Fallacy, because I take it to be That, of which we can never be told enough.
For till men are catechized in the point of Conscience, made to know its true
nature, and the signification of its Name, (if I may speak mine own judgment
with due submission to my Superiors,) they will not only go securely, but
even greedily to Destruction. Be their Sins never so many, and in weight never
so great, yet if they can get themselves to think that they are conscionably
committed, (as Clement did, and Ravilliac, and many more nearer Home,) they
will reckon upon a Saintship, from nothing else but the absence of lesser Sins
than they delight in, and dote upon. They will imagine they have made their
Election sure, or rather that they have made themselves sure of their Election,
(as they love to mistake the Text,) even by such a kind of partial and painted
innocence, as (being seriously considered) is common to them with the Devil;
who is not a Swearer, or a Drunkard, or a Committer of Adultery, and yet he is
not the less a Devil. But such Professors not considering, that Spiritual Pride
with her two Daughters, Sacrilege, and Rebellion, are Sins more ancient than
Hell itself, make no doubt but Those things will not only accompany, but (as
the Angels did Lazarus) will carry them up into Abraham's Bosom. If we consider
by what Impieties some Bigots have expected to merit Bliss, and what others
have understood by their following Providence, and Conscience, and by their
being over-acted to do the Work of the Lord, (for so they cant it,) we cannot
but say the greatest Mercy which can be shown to such Criminals, is to make
them less nocent (if not innocent) unavoidably. Which being not to be effected
by congruous Grace, because it is not irresistible, should by consequence be
effected by that which is; that if they will not choose the Glory, they may be
mercifully compelled to enjoy the benefit of their Obedience; and that however
they may perish by other Crimes, they may yet be disenabl'd to damn themselves
by their Rebellions.

17. Lastly, take we the greatest heed, of being led into The Error that it is
impossible for us to Err, whilst we believe as we are bid by the Church of
Rome, which deceives the most incurably, by getting her Children to believe,
she is divinely undeceivable. Take away This, and all her other Impositions
will fall to ruin of Themselves. But by the Help of This Error, All the rest
must needs be swallowed, how gross soever. To wit, That the 2 Books of
Maccabees (and All the rest of the Apocrypha) are as much the Word of God, as
the 5 Books of Moses, or any other: at least since the Canons of the Council at
Trent, to whose Authority (forsooth) The Holy Scriptures owe Theirs. That in
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, it is the Interest and the Duty of every
Christian to be a Canibal; even materially and grossly to eat and drink the
Flesh and Blood of The Man Christ Jesus. That the single Bishop of Rome is the
Universal Pastor, Head, and Monarch, over the whole Catholic Church, both
Diffusive, and Representative, though in an absolute Contradiction to Four
famous Councils, (which with the Papalins themselves do pass for General,) to
wit, of Pisa, Constance, Basil, and Siena. Not to insist on those other
Councils, of Chalcedon, Constantinople, Antioch, and Africa. That there must be
an Infallible Judge of Controversies on Earth, over and above the Word of God;
Though they who say it are not agreed, who the Judge of them should be: See the
two short Discourses of Mr. Dodwell, especially the First, and the excellent
Praeface to it.
whether the Diffusive, or Representative, or (That which They call) the
Virtual Church Catholic, or Their Principium Vnitatis, (as they call the
Bishop of Rome,) who proudly Lords it over them All. That though nothing is to
be added to The Apostles own Creed, consisting of but 12 Articles, (Each
Apostle casting in One, as Ruffinus tells us,) yet the 12 more at least,
thereto added by Pius Quartus and the Council of Trent, are to be sworn to, and
Believed, as of equal Necessity to Life Aeternal. To sum up all in a word, No
Contradiction can be so gross, no Absurdity so great, as not to be readily
entertained by Those Jesuited Bigots, who have beforehand devoured and
swallowed down without chewing That Breeding Blasphemy and Falsehood, Thesis
propugnanda in Aula Collegii Claromontani, die 12. Decembris A. D. 1661. See
the plea of Monsieur Talon Advocat General against This Thesis, in the New
Haeresie of Jesuitism, p. 242, 243. and of the same Book, p. 3. and 4.
That the Pope is as Infallible as Jesus Christ, as often as he speaks ex
Cathedra, even without a General Council, not in Questions only of Right, but
in those of Fact also. Let no man therefore deceive us with his pretended
Infallibility, more than with his being God, or wholly Impeccable upon Earth.
For He who cannot be deceived, can as little Sin; they are Attributes peculiar
to God alone.

18. But now it is time that I proceed to the second general Member of
Sub-Division, by which a Caveat was entered against Deceipts of all sorts, as
well of the best, as the worst of Men. For

As heed is to be taken that no evil man deceive us by good Appearances and
Praetenses; so there is use of as great heed, that no good man deceive us
(against his will) by the evil Example of his Miscarriage. There being at least
as much danger of the one, as of the other. If we allow our selves to Ab
exemplo and simili tot sunt experimenta fallaciarum, quot hominum capita: dum
quilibet assequi vult quemlibet, dum exemplo dicit se vivere talium, quos
approbat Ecclesia and canonizat, etc. Gerson Tract. 8. de custodia Angelorum
partitio 3. super Magnificat.
think we may safely do, what some very good People have done before us, the
consequence of it will be This, that we shall imitate the worst in the best of
Men, and leave the best to be Their peculiar. And therefore here it is very fit
for our observation, that 'twas not said by our Savior ( Matthew. 10. 17.)
(...), beware of Men, that is of Some men, (Those of the Consistories or
Sanedrim amongst the Jews, who yet are aimed at in especial manner,) But with
an article praefixt, (...), beware of Men, that is, of all men in general, not
excepting the very best. For let Erasmus and Vatablus say what they will, the
praefixing of the article seems to import the whole species; as Tostatus and
Casaubon at least do judge. Let us not say therefore with Non credibile est
Saram foeminam sanctissimam id facturum fuisse, nisi licitum esse scivisset.
Bellarm. lib. de Matrimonio cap. 2.
Bellarmin, that so good a Woman as Sarah had never prompted her Husband to lie
with Hagar, if she had not well known it to have been lawful. No nor yet with
a Augustine. in Genesis Quaest. 26. and contra Faustum Manich. l. 22. c. 23.
greater man, that Abram might dissemble and tell a lie to save his life. Nor
think the better of Adultery or wilful Murder, for being committed even by
David after a state of Regeneration. Nor look upon Incest itself as venial,
because 'twas acted even by Lot, who in the holy Scripture is styled Righteous.
Nor imagine it does the rather consist with Wisdom to be Idolatrous, for that
Solomon Himself did worship Idols, who is renowned for his Wisdom throughout
the World. Nor be so illogical as to conclude in the behalf of Polygamy,
because so honest a man as Jacob had two Wives at once, and is no where
reproved in all the Scripture. Nor may we give an ear to Them who do excuse the
worst Impieties of all such men as have been Regenerate, by imputing them
wholly to the infirmity of the flesh, and not as well to the filthiness of the
Spirit. Some there are who are serious in the use of such Logic, (be it spoken
to the disgrace of their wit and learning,) though it is patcht up of nothing
but one gross Fallacy, a been divisis ad male conjuncta. Many things are very
false in a compound sense, which being divided are very true; and many are true
being compounded, which in sensu diviso are very false. David was holy, and
committed wilful Murder in conjunction with Adultery; But it was not
committed by holy David. (for This would imply a Contradiction in adjecto.) He
was holy before, and holy after, but in a state of Unholiness and Condemnation
whilst he lay snoring in his impieties (as he did for some months) without
repentance. So Solomon was wise, and a Worshipper of Idols; But he was not Then
wise, when he stood guilty of Idol-Worship. Solomon and Solomon were just as
different, as Peter in the Hall, and behind the Door: or as the Book of Kings,
and the Book of Ecclesiastes. When That impiety was committed, it was by
Solomon the Fool, who recovered not his Wisdom till he repented; that is to
say, till he amended, and changed his life, till he became a new Creature, and
brought forth fruits meet for Repentance.

19. And if heed is to be taken that no good man deceive us, we may not sure
neglect Him who has nothing of good but in bare appearance. If the former may
deceive us by the example of his Sin, well may the later deceive us too by the
lying sanctity of his life. Then let not any man deceive us by any means. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
Neither by giving smooth Speeches, nor by wearing rough Garments; Zech. 13. 4.
Neither by using Foxes words, Ephesians. 5. 6.
nor by having Sheeps Clothing; Matthew. 7. 15.
Neither by Spirit, nor by Letter. Not by the current of his Prosperity, not by
the reddiness of his Praying, not by the commonness of his Preaching, not by
the plausible Demureness (called the Godliness) of his Practice. For the Devil
were but a Dunce, in case he could not fish (whilst he is angling after Souls)
with more Baits than These; and too contemptible a Mimick, if amongst all his
cunning Actings he could not personate a Saint.

20. But this is not All which does properly belong to a Christian's Caution.
We must not only take heed that no man deceive us, but as great heed is to be
taken that we our selves deceive no man, and (more than That) that we undeceive
others who are deceived. We must contend for the Faith, and we must do it also
with earnestness, (as S. Jude exhorts us all in the 4th. verse of his Epistle,)
not only be in the right our selves, but labor to bring into the way of Truth
all such as have erred and are deceived. We must labor by our Arguments, as
well as Prayers, to strengthen them that already stand, to comfort and help the
weak-hearted, to lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble Knees, to
raise up such as we know are fallen, and by any means possible to Tread down
Satan under all our feet.

21. We see there is Danger on every side, both within us, and without us, both
in solitude, and in company, whether our Company does consist either of evil,
or good men, we had need have our Eyes and our Wits about us. We have need of
it at all times, but above all in such as These, to which our Lord does here
allude in the Text and Context which lies before us. And This would lead me, if
I would follow, to the Third particular in the Division; to wit, the Time, or
Occasion, wherein the use of this Care will be most in season. But This I
confess is such a difficult and such a slippery kind of Doctrine, as of which I
had rather make a very private use, than run the public risque of an
Application. For in such an Auditory as This, (consisting of All that is Great
and Prudent,) for Me to adventure to make a Search into Those particulars, out
of which our public dangers are most arising, were to discourse concerning
Tacticks to such as Hannibal and Scipio; or to Demetrius the Poliorketick
concerning the Taking of a Town. And therefore leaving to men of Counsel their
proper Business, which is to sit at the Helm of Church and State, and wisely to
provide for the Good of Both; I keep my self within the Modesty which is
expected from a Divine. Abruptly concluding my present Sermon, just as S. Peter
his first Epistle, with a (...), 1 Pet. 5. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Be sober, be vigilant; because your Adversary the Devil as a roaring Lion
walks about, seeking whom he may devour; whom resist steadfast in the Faith.
And the God of all Grace who has called us to his aeternal glory by Christ
Jesus, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you. To him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

OF FEAR As Necessary to FAITH, IN THE Well-ordering of our LIVES.
1 COR. 10. 12. Wherefore let him who thinks that he stands, take heed lest
he fall.
1. A Caveat evermore in season, and of necessity to be pressed, and that upon
every sort of Persons of all Conditions and Degrees, and this in what sense
soever we please to take it.

It has its value even in That wherein the Apostle never meant it, and which
(to say Truth) was much below his Consideration, to wit, as applied to any
secular or worldly Station. For had we the leisure to make reflection upon all
Times and Places, as far as Historians have brought them to us, we should find
the observation to be as general, as it is wholesome, That the greatest Things
and Persons, (the greatest Monarchies with their Monarchs, the greatest
Statesmen as well as States,) have Then been nearest to a Downfall, when they
have been in all appearance the most established. How many are there in the
world in whom Extremities have concentered? And as the two Globes of Heaven and
Earth do mutually touch in a single Point, so there is nothing more frequent,
than for Conditions of as great Distance as the Nadir and the Zenith to meet in
one and the same Man. Nebuchadnezzar the most exalted, and the most abject in
all Assyria. Apries the best provided, and the most destitute thing in Egypt.
Polycrates the fortunatest and the unfortunatest man of Samos: Deified one day,
and crucified the next. Polydorus the most beloved, and the most hated of
Lacedaemonians. Periander the very wisest, and most besotted of the
Corinthians. Sejanus the most admired, and most contemptible man in Rome.
Dionysius the fiercest Tyrant, and tamest Paedogogue in Greece. Therefore the
Apophthegm of Solon was not so witty, as it was true, That no man's happiness
can be certain before his Death. Diog. Laert. l. 1.
And 'twas for this reason only, that Cleobis and Biton were praeferr'd before
Croesus in point of Bliss, that They were dead, and died well; whereas He, with
his Prosperities, was yet but living; And neither knew how he should End, nor
what Evenements might befall him 'twixt This and That. My Text had therefore
been very pertinent and of moment, had it exhorted to nothing better, than
human Prudence; or provided for nothing more than an outward Safety.

2. But as nothing can profit a man to purpose, Prove. 11. 4.
which cannot profit him at all in the day of Wrath, so no Prudence can be
sufficient, but That by which a man stands in the Evil day. Ephesians. 6. 13.
Not in the day of Temptation only, But in the hour of Death, and the Day of
Judgment. Nor can we pronounce of our Condition, as it is spiritual and
aeternal, but by beginning our Account from our later End. Which because
without Prophecy we cannot do, (as Jeremy did by Zedekiah,) Prove. 28. 14.
therefore happy is the man that fears always, as Solomon by his experience
was taught himself to teach others. Prosperity is one thing, and Happiness
quite another. We may be sure, whilst we live, that we are more or less
prosperous; But whether more or less happy, we must live and die too to assure
our selves. Death alone is That Point, in which the Terrestrial and Celestial
Globes meet, if they meet at all. And as the Tree falls, just so it lies. S.
Paul himself, whilst yet a Passenger, and not within sight of his Journy's End,
(whilst he was yet but in the Valley, far enough from having ascended unto the
Top of Mount Nebo, from whence he might have seen his Crown of righteousness,)
was so afraid to loose his Station, and to fall from his own stedfastness, 2
Pet. 3. 17.
(which S. Peter provides against too) that he did beat down his Body, and
carefully bring it into subjection, and all for this momentous, 1 Cor. 9. 27.
though modest reason, lest whilst he preached unto others, He himself might
become a Castaway. And being as careful of other Men's, as of his own aeternal
Interest, he did as tenderly admonish them as he had done his own Soul. Giving
this Caveat to all in general, though written in special to his Corinthians,
Let him who thinks that he stands, take heed lest he fall.

3. In which words we have Three things observable. First, a tacit Dissuasive
from carnal Confidence and Security. Next an explicit Exhortation to Christian
Prudence. Lastly, the Reason of Both at once from a great Danger on the one
side, and in consequence of That, from as great a Necessity on the other The
Danger is not so trivial, as That of falling with holy Job, from an high Pitch
of Wealth to the Depth of Poverty; or with the brave Aristomenes, from a
Pinnacle of Glory into the Gulf of Lacedaemon; Nor is the Danger no more
affrighting, than That of falling with Jeremy into Jonathan's Dungeon, or with
Daniel into the Den of the hungry Lions. But here the Danger is of falling from
Light to Darkness; from an high pitch of Grace, the Favor of God, into a
Bottomless Asphaltites of Fire unquenchable. Some there were who did not think
there could be any such Danger, to them that stood as They did (or as they
thought they did at least) in a state of Grace. Such were the Gnostics alluded
to in several verses before my Text. But it is below S. Paul's Reason, and
inconsistent with his Sincerity, to write of Danger where there is None; or to
forewarn us of a Mischief which cannot possibly come to pass. In bidding us
look unto our footing, he takes it for granted that we are liable to a Fall.
And accordingly it is the sense of our common Mother the Church of England, (in
the 16th. of her 39 Articles,) That after we have received the Holy Ghost, we
may depart from Grace given, and fall into Sin, though by the Grace of God too
we may rise again. Now the greater our Danger is by carnal confidence and
security, the greater need we stand in of a Christian Prudence. And This,
though but One, is such a Cardinal virtue, that it is really a Guardian to all
the rest. Especially as consisting of those three parts, Providence, Caution,
and Circumspection, without which it is impossible (as nicely distinguished by
the Aquin. 22. q. 48. c. and 22. q. 49. art. 6, 7, 8.
Schoolmen) for Christian Prudence to be complete. For first of all we must
have Providence, to cast about for such means as are conducing unto our End.
Next we must have Circumspection, whereby to attend to every Circumstance
wherewith the Means are to be clothed. Last of all we must have Caution, for
the avoiding of those Impediments, which may otherwise hinder our Course of
virtue, and unhappily interrupt us in bringing the Means unto the End.

4. Now to These three parts of a Christian Prudence, there are three sorts of
men who are here exhorted; either directly in the Text, or in its relation to
the Context.

First, consider we the Text in its mere literal importance, (...), Let him who
seems to himself to stand, and that as fixed as an Antinomian, even by Grace
irresistible; by having been justified from Aeternity; by having had all his
Sins forgiven, so long before they were committed; or by being not able to Sin
at all; so as in His imagination he cannot possibly depart from the Living God;
Heb. 3. 12.
(which yet the Epistle to the Hebrews does bid him take heed of;) who seems to
himself to stand so firmly, as that he cannot fall a little, much less totally;
much less finally from Grace; Let Him, (I say) as well as others, take heed
lest he fall.

Next, consider we the Text as it looks back upon the Context, (from the first
Verse unto the eleventh,) and thereby acquaints us with its more rational
importance. Let him, (who does not only seem to himself to stand, but) who
stands in good earnest by ghostly strength; by having had his feet shod with
the preparation of the Gospel; Ephesians. 6. 15.
by having been cleansed from his Sins in the Blood of Christ, and in the
Baptism of Tears, which arise from the Spring of sincere Repentance; Let him
not think it a thing below him, to take great heed, that he do not fall. For
the Israelites from the first to the tenth verse of this Chapter, were all in
Covenant with God; did all partake of those privileges which he vouchsafed
them as his Children; were all baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the
Sea; did all enjoy the same Miracles; were fed with Manna sent down from
Heaven; refreshed with Water out of Horeb, gushing forth from a dry and a
barren Rock; They mystically tasted of Christ Himself, (v. 4.) But yet as
firmly as they stood, we find their feet slipped. For first they staggered in the
Faith; Then they stumbl'd into Idolatry; Next they fell in the Wilderness, (all
excepting two persons,) and were destroyed of the Destroyer, (v. 5. and 10.)
All which things (says our Apostle) happened to them for Ensamples, and are
written for our instruction on whom the ends of the world are come, (v. 11.)
From whence He rationally draws This signal Corollary and Caveat, (for we see
it is Both at once, and is accordingly brought in with the Causal Wherefore,)
Let him who thinks that he stands take heed lest he fall.

Yet one step farther. Let him who stands faster than other men who do truly
stand, almost as fast in reality, as the Gnostics in the Context did in their
proud Imagination; as fast as David and S. Peter in their high pitch of Grace;
as fast as Adam in That of Innocence; or as the bright Morning Stars in That of
Glory; Let him (I say) as well as others, yea let him above others take heed
lest he fall. The reason is, because His Fall, if he falls, must needs be the
greater and less excusable, the higher and firmer his Station is, and the
greater his Ability to stand his Ground. The Angels that fell from as high as
Heaven, and that without a Tempter too, even for this very reason (as I
observed once before) could not fall less than as low as Hell; and so Their
Fall was without Recovery. For when God was in Christ reconciling the World
unto himself, he did not take upon him the Nature of Angels, whereby to give
the fallen Regiment a Capability of rising, (however Origin and his Disciples
would have given it had they been able,) and that for the reason I just now
hinted. Whereas the lapsed Man Adam, newly taken out of the Earth, and whose
Foundation was in the Dust, had both the Subtilty of a Tempter, and the
Strength of a Temptation, and (together with his Innocence) a Frailty of
Nature; all which did excuse him at least a Tanto; whereby he became the
properer object of God's Compassion as well as Justice, and so the more fit for
a Restoration. From whence I humbly conceive I may infer with good Logic,
that by how much the firmer our footing is, by so much the greater, and not the
lesser, our heed ought to be that we do not fall.

I have hitherto showed the Meaning and the Cohaerence of the Text, and how
it is necessary for all, of all Conditions and Degrees, by whichsoever of its
handles men please to hold it. And I have laid out the several matters to be
meditated upon in its Prosecution.

5. But being seriously desirous to speak as usefully as I can, and that within
the Time allowed, I am to take and give notice of three sorts of Libertines in
these our days, who either have wilfully transcribed, or else have stumbl'd
accidentally upon some of the worst of Haeresies in the Primitive Times; and
are as dangerous to others, as destructive to Themselves. Some are of opinion,
that if Vessels of Election, they Manichaeus electos suos, quos inter animas
Platonis in coelestibus collecat, dicit omni carere peccato, nec si velint,
peccare posse. Hieron. ad Ctesiph. adversus Pelag. Tom. 2. p. 252.
cannot Sin do what they can. They are placed in such a state of Impeccability,
that on a supposal of their willingness, they are not able to do amiss. And
This expressly was the Haeresie of The infamous Manichaeus, as S. Jerome tells
Ctesiphon; adding also that Priscilian was a Bird of that Feather. Others are
of opinion, that though they can commit Sin, God cannot see it in his Elect.
And This expressly was the Haeresie of Marcus, who taught the poor and rich
Women whom he debauched and made His, that they might fearlesly and freely be
as voluptuous as they pleased, (...). Epiphan. Haeres 34. ex Iren. l. 1. c. 8.
and 9. p. 72. Hom. Iliad. 5.
because by virtue of their Redemption they were (...), at once inapprehensible
and invisible to the Judge. Just as Homer feigned Pallas to have covered her
self with Pluto's Helmet, that so she might not be seen by Mars. (A Privilege
as senseless, as That which was allowed to the Ring of Gyges.) There is a Third
sort of Thinkers, who say that God can see Sin, but cannot punish it in his
Elect, or impute it to them; and that they are so sure-footed, that though they
slip never so grossly, or stumble never so often, yet for all That they can
never fall, not only not finally, but but not so much as for a Time. And This
expressly was the Haeresie of Jovinian, Hieronymus adversus Jovinianum l. 2.
Tom. 2. p. 69. etc.
(which S. Jerome in a whole Book has very effectually confuted,) that They who
once have been regenerate in the Laver of Baptism, cannot be tempted by the
Devil, so as to cease being regenerate. We have the Sum of all Three (and the
Sequel too) in the one Valentinian Haeresie, which was one of the first, and
the worst of all; as the holy Father and Martyr Irenaeus shows it at large.
What the Malignity of it is, and to how deep a degree of Wickedness it is apt at
least in its nature to betray them that own it, They Themselves have best told
us by This Similitude, (...), etc. Iren. l. 1. p. 26.
That as a Mass of pure Gold in the foulest Dirt does not lose so much as its
beauty, much less its nature, but still retains the whole goodness and worth of
Gold; so let the Saints, that is Themselves, lie and wallow whilst they will in
the Mire of Sins, and in those Sins especially whereof the Scripture says
plainly, that they who do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, yet
they cannot thereby lose their spirituality and perfection. Gal. 5. 21.
They cannot cease from being Branches of That true Vine, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
into which they were once ingrafted.

6. Now that other men's Dangers may be employed to keep us safe, and that other
men's real Miseries may be improved to our being Happy, we must convince our
selves thoroughly of the Truth of this Doctrine, which in my Text is most clearly
and unavoidably implied; To wit, that He who now stands in a Christian State,
of Repentance, and Conversion, and a blotting out of Sins, (which is
Justification,) may possibly fall into a dangerous yea and a damnable
Condition, unless he takes such strict heed, as our blessed Apostle does here
enjoin. And here I cannot but be sorry, that so clear a Text as This should
stand in need of any Sermon to give it Evidence. That our Apostle's Exhortation
should be so little argumentative in some men's minds, that we must light up our
Candles to show his Sun. I much admire that those Libertines, who think they
stand in no need of this holy Caveat, are not sufficiently convinced by their
own Experience, that since their having been regenerate in the Sacrament of
Baptism, which is (no less than Circumcision) a Romans 4. 11.
Seal of the righteousness of Faith, they have fallen into deadly and wasting
Sins. Lord! how many Sons and Daughters of our one Common Mother, the Church of
England, have renounced the very Baptism, by which alone they were
Christianiz'd, have abandoned the House of Prayer, and in it the Lord's Table,
and on it the outward Sign of invisible Grace? have fallen away before our
faces into the scandalous commissions of Schism and Haeresie? have turned
apostates from the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints? have
indulgently marched on in the ways of Corah, in the Sins of Sacrilege, and
Rebellion, and still are snoring in the Impieties of being heady, Jude 8.
high-minded, Despisers of Dominion, and Evil speakers of Dignities, Romans 13.
1, 2.
ever Opposers of Authority ordained by God, which is to be a worse Thing than
a Common Drunkard?

7. How many Examples are there in Scripture of final Apostasy from Grace, or
from a State of Regeneration, enough to dit the widest Mouth of the daring'st
Gnostick? How many of God's peculiar people under the Law, did fall away from
their acknowledgment of the only true God, into the worst of all Sins, which
is Idolatry, and into the worst of all Idolatries, which is the worshipping of
Devils, and into the worst of that worst too, not by offering their Sheep and
Oxen, Psalm. 106. 37.
but their own Sons, and their own Daughters unto Devils? Isa. 1. 21, 22, 23.
which compare with Hos. 4. 1, 2, 6.
How did the faithful City become an Harlot? how did her Silver become arrant
Dross? She was once full of Judgment; Righteousness lodged in her, but now
Murderers. Be astonished, O ye Heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, (as
God himself spoke by the Prophet Jeremy,) Jerem. 2. 12, 13.
for my People have committed two evils, forsaken me the fountain of living
waters, and bewn them out Cisterns, broken Cisterns which hold no water. 17.
Have thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord
thy God? 21.
I had planted thee a noble Vine, wholly a right seed; How then art thou turned
into the degenerate Plant of a strange Vine unto me? Nor is it only under the
Legal, but under the Gospel Dispensation, that many begin to build well on a
good foundation, Luke 14. 30.
but do not finish. Many Gal. 3. 3.
end in the flesh, who began in the Spirit; and Many are Matthew. 20. 16.
called, but few are chosen. Many are sanctified, but few are saved. Many are
justified for a time, but very few in comparison do persevere unto the End.
That saying of our Savior Matthew. 24. 12, 13. [The love of many shall wax cold,
but he that indureth unto the end shall be saved,] S. Paul reflecting on,
Matthew. 24. 12, 13.
has explained Thus: That some in the later times shall depart from the Faith,
giving heed to seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Devils: 1 Timothy 4. 1.
speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their Conscience seared with an hot iron.
There the word in the Original is very observable: They shall depart (says the
English,) (...)) (says the Greek,) They shall apostatize from the Faith of
Christ. A very evident opposition unto final perseverance, in Both those
Places; and it is as evident that the Apostasy there prophesied of, is from a
State of Sanctification. For the Love waxing cold, and the Faith departed from,
(That expressed by our Savior, and This by our Apostle,) are the same in both
Texts, in which they ought to have persever'd. So again in the first Chapter of
the same Epistle to Timothy, S. Paul exhorts him to hold fast faith, 1 Timothy 1.
19, 20.
and a good Conscience, which some (says He) having put away, concerning Faith
have made shipwreck. That This was justifying Faith which was thus put away,
and suffered shipwreck, may appear by two reasons clearly arising out of the
Text: First, because it was That, to the holding fast of which S. Paul does
there exhort Timothy; next, because it was That, which was attended with a good
Conscience. Joh. 15. 6.
If a man (says our Savior) abide not in Me, he is cast forth as a Branch,
and is withered, and cast into the Fire: clearly spoken of a Reprobate who had
formerly been in Christ, but abides not in him, and was therefore cast forth
as a withered branch. A Text to which our Apostle in probability does allude,
where he tells us of certain Branches broken off, Romans 11. 17, and 20.
from The Olive Tree, though once partakers of the Root and Fatness of it; and
broken off they were for their unbelief. From whence he exhorts his Believing
Romans to beware, lest they who now stand by Faith, do also fall into
infidelity; and They be also broken off, who are grafted in. There are that
hear the word of God, Matthew. 13. 20, 21.
and receive it with Joy, and endure for a while in that good Course, and yet
in time of Persecution they are offended and fall away, says our blessed Lord.
1 Timothy 6. 10.
Some have erred from the Faith through the Love of money, says S. Paul to his
Son Timothy; and in the Eighteenth of S. Matthew, the Servant forgiven, v. 32.
was yet condemned, v. 35. The same is signified by the Parable of an unclean
Spirit cast out by Repentance, Matthew. 12. 44.
or regeneration, and re-entring by a Relapse into the House of a man's Heart
well swept and garnished, and that with 7 Devils, worse (if possible) than
himself, so as the Person he repossesseth is worse than ever. Which very
Parable of our Savior S. Peter seems to point at in the plainest terms; whilst
he tells us of some, 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21, 22.
so entangled and overcome by those pollutions of the world which before they
had escaped, as that their later end was very much worse then their beginning.
Again it is said by the same Apostle, in the Chapter going before, 2 Pet. 1. 9.
that He who lacks those things by which he is to make his Election sure, has
forgotten that he was purged from his old Sins, that is to say, that he was
regenerate.

8. Whosoever is not satisfied with what I have hitherto alleged out of holy
writ, let him tell me what he thinks of That unpardonable Sin, Matthew. 12. 31,
32.
The Sin against the Holy Ghost. Let him say whether that Sin can ever be
possibly committed, unless by one who was once enlightened, and had tasted of
the heavenly Gift, Heb. 6. 4, 5.
had been made a partaker of the Holy Ghost, and of the good word of God, and
the powers of the World to come. Let him weigh the fourth Verse, and compare it
with the Sixth of the Sixth Chapter to the Hebrews, and Both together with the
Comment of learned Calvin thereupon, if he will not trust That of our most
learned Dr. Hammond. Let him consider if it is not possible for such a man to
fall away who is so enlightened; and if it is not impossible for such a man
falling away from such a Station and State of Grace, to be renewed again unto
repentance. But above all let him consider the (...) in the sixth verse of That
Chapter, which signifies expressly a second regeneration, and every second
implies a first. The Apostle does not say barely, it is impossible to renew
them (if such as they fall away,) but that it is impossible to renew them again;
clearly intimating unto us these two Illations: First, that a man may so fall
from a State of Grace, as not to be able to rise again; Next, that the Grace he
falls from was such as gave him a Salvability; or such as by which he was in a
State of Regeneration.

9. Being about to carry my proof from Vniversals to Individuals, I shall not
instance in Saul, with S. Cyprian and S. Austin; much less in Ahab, with S.
Jerome and S. Chrysostom; much less yet in Cain and Esau; nor yet in Alexander,
and Demas, Philetus, and Hymenaeus, Phygellus and Hermogenes, 2 Timothy 2. 17.
who were Deserters of Christ in his Apostles, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Wasters of Conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 15.
and Shipwrackers of Faith; I shall not instance in Dorotheus who fell away to
serve Idols at Thessalonica; nor yet in Nicolaus, who, though one of the seven
Deacons, was yet the Author of that old Haeresie which carries the Name of The
Nicolaitans; much less shall I instance in the most excellent of the
Haeresiarchs, Nestorius, Photinus, Apollinaris, and Pelagius; (for these last
may be the subjects of great Dispute; and whatsoever may be true in the
Judgment of Faith, yet the Judgment of Charity forbids me to affirm that These
did finally fall away:) But of Judas I suppose there is no Dispute. For He was
chosen by Christ as one of the Twelve select Apostles, Joh. 6. 70. and is said
to have been given by God the Father to God The Son, whose word he kept for
some time, Joh. 17. 6. and was justified by Faith, v. 8. prayed for by Christ,
not as one of the World, but as His peculiar, v. 9. He confessed and taught
Christ, and did Miracles in his Name, Matthew. 10. 5, 7, 8. He was one of
Christ's Sheep, v. 16. had been grafted into Christ, Joh. 15. 2.
notwithstanding all which, he did not only fall from, but betray his Master,
hanged himself as a man Lost, and is called by our Lord expressly, (...), The
Son of Perdition.

10. I would not here be so mistaken, as if I meant that God's Elect can fall
away finally from Grace. I am so very far from That, that I affirm it to be
impossible, and to imply a Contradiction. For They and They only are God's
Elect, who do finally persevere in a Christian Course; who being delivered out
of the hands of their Enemies, do not only serve God in holiness and
righteousness, (for so do many that are called, and are not chosen,) but they
serve him in Both together All the days of their Lives; as Zachary goes on in
his Benedictus. We must therefore so distinguish in our Discourse of this
subject between The Regenerate and The Elect, as still to carry in our minds as
well their Difference as their Agreement. In This they agree, that all The
Elect are still Regenerate; In This they differ, that all The Regenerate are
not Elect. The former may and do often, the later cannot fall finally from
Grace. Concerning the former, and Them alone, all the Scriptures I have urged
and argued from must be understood. For the later are only They, who do Matthew.
24. 13.
endure unto the End. Only They that overcome, and so are said to have a right
to the Tree of life. Rev. 21. 7. and 22. 14.
The Elect are only They, 2 Pet. 1. 10.
that can finally never fall; for if they could, they could not have been
elected to life eternal.

And yet even of These I am to say in the second place, that they fall totally,
and for a Time, many of them, and of the Best too. Not only Solomon, and
Aaron, and David himself in the Old Testament, but all the Apostles in the New,
and S. Peter above them all, are uncontrouble Examples of This sad Truth; if
Idolatry, and Adultery, and wilful Murder, if Lying, and Cursing, and wilful
Perjury, and a repeated abjuration of Jesus Christ, are Sins inconsistent with
saving Grace, and the inhabitation of God the Holy Ghost. It Is true indeed that
The Elect who fall away for a time into Deadly Sins, and so by consequence,
whilst impenitent, into a State of Damnation, cannot possibly die 'till they
have repented; because they have This Seal upon them, The Lord knows them
that are His. But This which is offered as an Answer to what I say, is an
irrefragable Argument to evince the Truth of it. For if David ( for example)
could not die till he repented, it is for this reason only, that he could not
be saved without Repentance; and that before he repented, he was in a State of
Condemnation. Saving Grace and Impenitence cannot simul and semel be in one and
the same Man. It Is the Condition of the great and precious promises in the
Gospel, and in effect the whole Covenant 'twixt God and Man, that all shall be
saved with repentance, 2 Chronicles. 15. 1, 2.
and None without it. Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah, and Benjamin, ( said The
Spirit of God by Azariah,) The Lord is with you, whilst ye be with Him; and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake
you. So again by The Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 33. 18.
When the righteous turns from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, he
shall even die thereby: ver. 15.
and if the wicked walk in the Statutes of life, he shall surely live. Promises
and Threats are both alike conditional, not only under the Law, but as
expressly under the Gospel. It is the saying of Christ himself, Whosoever shall
confess me before men, Luke 12. 8, 9.
Him shall the Son of man also confess before the Angels of God. But he that
denies me before men, shall be denied before the Angels of God. It Is S. Paul
's to the Christians who were at Rome in his days, that God will render to
every man according to his works. Romans 2. 6, 7, etc.
To them who seek for Glory by continuance in well-doing, aeternal life: But
unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the Truth, Indignation and
Wrath. And again, If ye live after the flesh, Chapter 8. v. 13.
ye shall die: but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body
ye shall live. And yet more plainly to our purpose, Col. 1. 21, 23.
in his Epistle to the Colossians, You who were Enemies in your minds by wicked
works has he reconciled, if ye continue in the faith grounded and settled, and
be not moved away from the hope of the Gospel which ye have heard. And in like
manner to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15. 1, 2.
Ye are saved by the Gospel, if ye hold fast or keep in memory what I preached
unto you, unless ye have believed in vain. The Epistle to the Hebrews is very
full to this purpose, Heb. 3. 6, 14.
We are made partakers of Christ, if we hold the beginning of our Confidence
steadfast unto the end. Whose House we are, if we hold fast the Confidence and
the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the End. Heb. 10. 38, and 39.
Now the Just shall live by Faith. But if any man draw back, my soul shall have
no pleasure in him. Plainly intimating in This, what is taken for granted in
the very next verse, that from the same kind of Faith by which it is said the
Just shall live, there were some in the best of Times who drew back unto
Perdition. Heb. 10. 39.

11. What now is the Advantage we are to make of all This? and what the Lesson,
which all these Scriptures are apt to teach us? Truly the lesson is plainly
This: That if the End of our Prayers, if the End of our Hopes, the End of all
our Endeavors is but Conditional, and All the Promises of the Gospel are made
unto us with an [If we do so and so,] we must not now boast of our being
Christians, as the Hebrews once did of their being Israelities. We must not
glory in our being the younger Brethren or Members of Jesus Christ, as They in
their being the Seed of Abraham. We must not pride it in the Church, as They
did commonly in the Temple. Nor insult over the Jews, as They did foolishly
over the Gentiles. For if God spared not Them who were the natural Branches,
Romans 11. 18,
We must also take heed, 19,
lest he also spare not us. If They were broken off for their unbelief, 20,
and we by Faith are grafted in, the proper use we are to make of the
observation, 21,
is that we boast not against the Branches; that we be not high-minded, but
rather fear; 22,
for we bear not the Root, but the Root us. We must consider both the Goodness,
and Severity of God, and the Grounds of Both: on them that fell, Severity; but
toward us, Goodness; with an If we continue in his Goodness. Otherwise we
shall be broken off too; and They shall be grafted in again, 23.
if they do not still abide in their unbelief. We cannot reasonably desire a
clearer State of this matter, than in That whole Passage of the Eleventh
Chapter to the Romans. And therefore seeing it is employed by our blessed Lord,
Matthew. 5. 13.
that even The Salt of the Earth may lose its Savor, and become good for
nothing, but to be utterly cast out, and trodden under foot; Joh. 15. 5, 6.
that a Branch of the true Vine may lose its Verdure, and become good for
nothing, but to be cast into the Fire; I thought it good (as S. Peter 2 Pet. 1.
12, 13, 15. and chapter 3. v. 1, 2.
speaks) to put you in mind of these things, although ye know them already, and
are established in the Truth. And still I think it good (with the same S.
Peter) to press the giving all diligence for the making of our calling and
election sure. 2 Pet. 1. 10.
I think it good (with S. Peter) to say, Chapter 3. v. 17.
Beware, lest ye also being led away with the Error of the Wicked, fall from
your own stedfastness. If God was so provoked by the Children of Israel, (to
whom the Conditional Promise was made) that he swore in his Wrath, Heb. 3. 11.
they should not enter into his Rest, because they failed of the Condition on
which the promise was made; Then I may sure without Praesumption draw the very
same Use from That tremendous matter of Fact, which the Inspired Writer makes
in the very next Verse, ver. 12,
Take heed, Brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in
departing from the living God. But exhort one another daily whilst it is
called, 13.
To Day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceiptfulness of Sin. Heb. 4.
1.
And again, Let us fear (says the same Apostle) lest a Promise being left us
of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it, or (...),
to come behind it. I may sure without arrogance exhort the Best of my Hearers,
much more my self, and all other Christians of my low Class, that They and We
receive not the Grace of God in vain. 2 Cor. 6. 1.
That They and We do look diligently, Heb. 12. 15.
lest any man fail of the Grace of God; or lest any fall from it, as it is in
the Margin, and is sufficiently imported by (...).

12. The Sum and Upshot of all is This: There is in many a Seed of Grace, Mar.
4. 3, 4, etc. to verse 21.
which does never bring forth the fruit of Glory. For as The Spirit of Truth
makes none Infallible upon Earth, so The Spirit of Holiness makes none
impeccable, none incapable of falling into any Deadly Sin, or a Sin unto Death.
The reason is, because the workings of The Spirit are only congruous, and
sufficient upon voluntary Agents, never compulsive, and irresistible. From
whence it follows that The Degrees of Grace and Truth in several persons, are
not at all from God's Omnipotence as it is such, or from his overruling
Providence as overruling, (for Then there could not be possibly such a variety
of Degrees; All persons Then must have been equally good, and only good in
perfection;) But partly from the different Dispositions, and Behaviors, and
Negotiations of the Subjects with the Talents of Grace committed to them,
(which some are for Luke 19. 16, 20.
employing, and some for wrapping in a Luke 19. 16, 20.
Nepkin, as our Lord in his Parable was pleased to make it plain to us,) and
partly from the Measures of The Spirit's Communication: which to some, is much
more; to others, less; to none, irresistible; to all, sufficient. How very many
there are that fall from that Faith and Patience, which in Job were two Rocks,
which nothing was strong enough to shake, much less to shatter, (and yet the
Grace of God in Him was never cogent,) but being well Col. 2. 7.
rooted, and very well cultivated besides, by daily exercises of Piety, and all
good Works, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3.
grew up exceedingly in his Soul, and did not wither; I say, how many there are
that fall from their several Graces, that idly waste, and mispend, or wilful
squander away their Talents, I have hazarded your patience in making it plainer
than there was need; by which excess if I have erred, I am the rather to be
forgiven, because it has proceeded from the sincerity of my Desire, to beget in
such as stand, a taking great heed that they do not fall. And that our
Adversary The Devil may never find Us, as the Messengers of the Danites found
Them of Laish, Judge. 18. 7, 27.
dwelling careless, and secure, after the manner of the Zidonians, and void of
Business; Let it be our prime Business, from this day forewards and for ever,
not only to watch and pray lest we enter into Temptation, but to reflect on
the chief Ends, and the chief Objects of the Caution commended to us. The
chiefest Ends of it are the Glory of God, and our own Salvation. Its chiefest
Objects are the Evils of Sin and Punishment; the Work itself, and the Wages of
it. But in calling these The Chief, I do imply there are many more. Even as
many as there are Dangers wherewith we are every day beset; and whereof in this
Text we are advised to take heed.

13. We have but one way to stand, But to fall, a Thousand. Fall we may by our
Enemies, which ( without and within us) are not easily to be numbered. Those
within us, in our Bosom, are still the worst, because the nearest, and least
suspected; and then most hurtful, when most Beloved. The worst without us are
our Advancements to Wealth and Honor, because they are apter than any other,
first to lift up our heads, then to trip up our heels, and to throw us down.
Many stand, when at the lowest, stout and steadfast in the Faith, (as S. Peter
speaks,) who being drunk with Prosperity, do quickly stagger. And then how
easily do they fall, Even at every little thrust of Applause, or Plenty? Yea we
may fall, without a Thrust, by the bare Treachery of the Ground upon which we
stand. Some Parts of it being too slippery, and some too high, and very
dangerous are the blocks which are laid in others. Now it is plain the more
slippery the places are we stand in, by so much the apter we are to fall. And
it is as evident, that the higher our Stations are, by so much the greater our
fall will be. But what the stumbling blocks are which are laid in our way by
some false Teachers, (besides those few already mentioned) and at which if we
stumble, 'twill be impossible not to fall, deserves a larger Examination than
can be made at this Time, and perhaps a more Polemical than can belong to this
Place. In the mean time it is certain, that in proportion to the dangers there
are of falling, the general Caveat of my Text does extend it self. Take we heed
lest we fall for want of any of those things, which are conducible to our
Station and state of Grace. Either for want of that Knowledge of things
Essential to Religion, which is required; or for want of that Zeal which is
according unto Knowledge; or for want of that Consideration we ought to have,
of what we know well enough does concern us nearly; or for want of that
Distrust in our selves and others, to which the wise Epicharmus does well
excite us. Take we heed we do not fall for want of carrying still about us a
fear of falling. A fear both of our Natural, and of our adventitious Frailty. A
fear of Him who alone holds us up, and when he will can throw us down. A fear
of God, as he is just, but above all, as he is merciful. Because there is
mercy with thee, O Lord, Psalm. 130. 4.
Therefore (says David) shall thou be feared. For the abusing of his mercy
does more than any other baseness, incense his Justice. A Fear of falling from
his grace, and by consequence out of his favor, and by consequence into his
wrath and his sore displeasure.

14. Amidst our several ways of falling, we have but one to stand firm, however
diversely expressed in holy Writ. I mean the congruous Assistance of God's free
Grace, and our own working together with it. All the use S. Peter makes of his
Apostasy from Christ for a little time, is to put in a Caveat for Himself and
Us too, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18.
not to fall from our own stedfastness; and the effectual way to That, is to
grow in Grace, as he there exhorts us; Not to content our selves with this,
that we are not any thing worse than we use to be, but to be constantly
advancing from strength to strength, and to be careful that our last days may
be our best too. All the use S. Paul makes of the Doctrine he had taught of a
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
is to be steadfast, and unmovable; and the effectual way to that, is always to
abound in the work of the Lord. Ephesians. 6. 11.
So again we may infer from his Epistle to the Ephesians, The only way for us
Impotent and Silly men, to be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, is
to put upon our selves the whole Armor of God. To be strong in the Lord and in
the power of his might. Implying a full Trust in God, and as full a
Distrustfulness of our selves. A putting our selves out of our own, into his
Protection. Which yet we cannot till convinced of this great truth, that in our
selves, as of our selves there dwells no good thing. No not so much as
Inclination to any thing that is Good. No not so much as Aversation from any
thing that is Evil. That our Destruction [if it happens] is of our selves; But
all our sufficiency of him alone, who styles himself by way of Eminence, the
All-sufficient. And hereunto we are to add this most pertinent supplication,
(which must be fervent and without ceasing,) that he will be pleased to work in
us both to will and to do of his good pleasure, Phil. 3. 13.
that so (having him for our (...). 2 Cor. 6. 1.
Coadjutor in the language of our Apostle) we may work out our Salvation with
fear and trembling. And that at the final consummation of all our days, he may
crown his own Gifts and Graces in us. Which God of his Mercy dispose us for,
for the Glory of his Name, and for the worthiness of his Son.

To whom with the Father, in the unity of the Spirit, be Glory and Thanksgiving
for ever and ever. Amen.

OF PEACE AND HOLINESS UNITED, As aequally required to Our SALVATION.
HEB. 12. 14. Follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man
shall see the Lord.
1. AS there are but two Ends at which our Studies are to be levelled, (let our
Parts and our Learning be what they will,) to wit, a Rectitude in our
Knowledge, and an Exactness in our Religion; (the first of which is still
subservient and has a Tendency to the second;) so there are but Two things in
which This Second does chiefly stand; to wit, a Rectitude of Faith, and the
Truth of Practice. The Former does consist in the Belief of two Things too, 2
Cor. 5. 19.
to wit, That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, Heb. 11. 6.
And, as such, (...) the Rewarder of Them that diligently seek him. The Later
lies chiefly in two Things more; Our helping the fatherless in their
Affliction, Jam. 1. 27.
and the keeping of ourselves unspotted from the World. Nor can we doubt
whether in These consists the substance of our Religion, because besides that
out of These our several Duties may be deduced by the light of Reason, we have
Authority also of Scripture (to wit, S. Paul and S. James) to assure us of it.
Then why should we compass Sea and Land to meet with Catechists, and Preachers,
and Commentators, and School-Divines, a world of Fathers, and of Councils, and
Ecclesiastical Historians, and an hundred other Instruments for the completing
of a Christian, (however necessary they are for the accomplishment of a Divine)
whilst Christianity in it self is a thing so easy, and may easily be held in
so little Room? Had it been suffered to abide within its primitive Simplicity,
in but few and plain Precepts for Life and Practice, as well as in few and
plain Aphorisms for Faith and Doctrine; the Yoke of Christ had still been easy,
and his Burden had still been light, and little Children had still been
qualified for a Discipleship under Christ, which yet is now made too difficult
for some of the subtil'st and the learned of all our Jesuiticall and Sorbon
Doctors. Nothing has certainly been so mischievous to the true Body of
Religion, as the making so many Mysteries where God was pleased to have so few;
vexing the Articles of our Faith with curious Quaestions, and Disputes, and a
large Catalogue of Additions, (as for example in the Creed of Pope Vid. Laert.
Cherub. Bullar. Tom. 2. p. 129.
Pius Quartus,) most obstructive to the Unity and Peace of Christians. So that
by accident at least, and through the Lust of her several Lovers, (I mean the
Avarice of some, and the Pride of others,) the charming Beauty of Religion has
contributed too much to the Ruin of her. She having been courted as unhappily,
as Plutarch's fair Arisloclea; who was so plucked at by the Rivalry of
Calisthenes and Strato, and by the Partisans of them Both; (...). Plut. (...).
p. 772. Id quod accidit Actaeoni Melissi filio, qui (...). Id. ibid.
that (to their shame and sorrow too,) She lost her Life in the Contention.

2. Now considering how much it is easier to have an Excellence in the
Knowledge, than in the Exercise or Practice of Christianity, And that without
our Endeavors of living up to such Knowledge, All our learning will but light
us into the Territories of Darkness; Little or Nothing will be got by our most
plausible Seize, besides the Meagre Satisfaction of going learnedly to
Hell, and the Privilege to be beaten with many stripes, whilst the more
ignorant Transgressor must be contented with a few; I cannot think of a fitter
Text for the giving advantage to my Design of setting up the most Useful and
Real learning, in the place of That learning wherewith the Devil is often
adorned, (to use the words of S. Jerome touching the Excellence of Pelagius,)
than this important Exhortative of our learned Author to the Hebrews;
recommending to them the Study of Peace and Holiness, as That on which there
depends (as it is followed, or despised,) an unspeakable Proportion of Bliss,
or Misery. These are the Sciences, and the Arts, which will make us wise unto
Salvation. We are to balance all our Knowledge with these two Weights, whereby
to preserve it from puffing up. These are to take up our Meditations; on These
our Souls are to be fixed. These are the Beauties we are to court, with the
greatest Love. These the Riches we are to covet, with greatest Avarice. These
the Dignities to be sought for, not only with the greatest, but best Ambition.
And therefore every thing else being laid aside, (at least with a comparative,
though not an absolute Neglect,) we are to give our selves wholly to the Study
of These Two; Following Peace with all men, and Holiness, without which no man
shall see the Lord.

3. Though the Text at first Hearing may seem as easy as it is short, yet
there is hardly any thing in it, which stands not in need of an Explication;
And The English Translation is so much harder than the Original, as that we
cannot reach the One, without recourse unto the other. Follow Peace, says the
English. Pursue it earnestly, says the Greek. It is not every kind of
Following will serve the Turn; for it is not (...), sequimini, but (...),
persequimini, and we know, The word (...) has a remarkable Importance, implying
Industry, and Eagerness, in seeking That that we desire. (...), hunt after
Peace. (...), run apace after Holiness. As if the Apostle should have said,
that Peace and Holiness are things to be contended for and Courted, with great
Ambition. We must not follow them so, as to come behind them; but rather so as
to overtake them. So as the Racer follows the Prize; or so as the Hound follows
the Hare; or so as the man of Contention does greedily follow a suit in Law; or
so as S. Paul does elsewhere urge us to follow after Charity. For each of these
is Imported by the emphatical word (...), implying zeal in our Christian
Duties, and Perseverance unto the End.

4. After the Nature of the Act, consider the latitude of the Object. Which
though expressed by a Contraction into these two Branches, Peace, and Holiness;
yet like a Couple of great Arms, they do embrace the whole Decalogue, by the
large extent of their signification. For by Peace is meant Charity, in which
all Justice is folded up; And thence is said by S. Paul to be the fulfilling of
the Law, (taken There is an extended, as Here it is in a stinted sense,)
because according to the Rule amongst moral Philosophers, [(...),] Justice is a
(...), (as the Eastern Fathers do call the Book of Ecclesiasticus;) a
comprehensive kind of Pandect of all manner of Duties. For as S. John, in his
first Epistle, has reduced all Vices to these three Heads, The Lust of the
Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life; so S. Paul, speaking to
Titus, compriseth all Virtues in this Trichotomy, Living soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present World. Now to live righteously what is it, but to do
justice* unto our Neighbors? What, to live soberly, but to be just unto our
selves? (not to abuse our own Persons by any Intemperance or Debauch?) And
what, to live Godly, but to deal justly with God himself? (not to rob him of
the service, nor to defraud him of the honor that is due unto him?) The first
is included in the word Peace, (taken here as it is in a stinted sense,) the
second and the third in the word Purification. I say, Purification, because
it is literally the English* of the Word (...), which in our English Translation
is rendered Holiness.

5. And this deserves to be the Subject of a third Consideration. For it is not
(...), Peace and Purity, which notes the Habit of being Clean; But it is (...),
Peace and Purification,, which notes the continued Act of cleansing. Betwixt
which two, there is not only a very great, but an useful Difference. For
hence we learn that whilst we live, we must evermore be on the mending hand.
Must never look upon our selves as good enough to serve turn. But as a Pot of
boiling water is ever casting up a Foam, until it is purged of all its Filth;
so we must daily be casting out somewhat or other which is amiss; ever busy in
the work of our Reformation; ever mending, and purging, and purifying our
selves. Seeing it is said by S. John, 1 John 3. 3.
that he who has this hope in him, purifieth himself even as God is pure. We
must not content our selves (for shame) with a stunted Piety, with the Reproach
of being Dwarfs in the School of Christ; But grow in Grace (as the Apostle
speaks:) Nor must we ever leave growing, until we come to a perfect man. And
thus to Peace we are to add Purification. For they are not joined with a
Disjunctive, (it is not follow Peace or Holiness) as if the one were sufficient
without the other; But These Vnitedly are the things, which must be prosecuted,
and followed, with Zeal, and Fervor.

6. And then in the fourth place, there is great Reason for it. Because if
either of these is wanting, (...), No man living shall see the Lord. Let his
Parts, or Acquisitions, be what they can be; Let his Principles, or his Party,
let his Person, or Profession, be what they will; Let him be born of Godly
Parents, let him be carefully brought up within the Bosom of the Church, let
him be Papist, or Puritan, or in the middle of each Extreme, A sober
Protestant; let his pretensions be what they will to Regeneration, or Election;
yet unless he follows Peace, and Peace with All Men, and Purification as well
as Peace, and unless he follows Both with Faith and Patience unto the End, He
is a Man of impurer Eyes, then can ever be admitted to see the Lord.

8. Thus We see what is meant by peace and holiness, and as well for what
reason, as after what sort we must follow both. There are three other Things
which will deserve an Explication, but That will best of all be made by way of
Answer to three Objections. For a Conquering Truth is much more glorious, than
a Truth unexamin'd, or unattempted with opposition.

9. First it may easily be doubted, whether it is Possible, or Safe, to have
Peace with All men. For some are such Enemies unto Peace, that when we speak to
them thereof, they make them ready to Battle; and Peace with such does seem
impossible. And Impossibilium nulla est obligatio. It cannot be necessary to
do, what is Impossible to be done. Others are always at war with God by their
Impieties, Romans 1. 30.
they are (...), Inventors of evil Things; nay (...), Haters of God; and Peace
with such does seem unsafe. For may we be at Peace with them, who will not be
at Peace with God? These are They that in Scripture are called The World. And
know ye not (says S. James) that the Friendship of the world is Enmity with
God? Jam. 4. 4.
These are they that in Scripture are called the Wicked. And there is no Peace
says my God to the wicked. (Isa. 57. 21.) Which though spoken in another, may
yet be applied in this sense also. When men are scandalously wicked, 2 John 11.
an Apostle forbids us to eat or drink with them; or to receive them into our
houses; or to bid them God-speed. And as this was the Precept of that Apostle,
so according unto this he framed his Practice. For with the Heretic Cerinthus
he would not be in the same Bath. The Heathen Poet Horace was thus affected in
his Vetabo sub iisdem sit trabibus, Fragilemque meeum solvat phaselum. So said
Moses to the Royalists touching the Rebels which then arose against Him and
Aaron; Depart from the Tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs.
Besides that as much as in us lies, we ought to be affected like God himself;
and so by a necessary consequence we are to hate those that hate Him, because
they are such as are hated by Him. (For so the word (...) does very naturally
import, although it is not observed in our English Bibles.) And therefore by
this the Prophet David seeks to prove his Affection to God Almighty; Do not I
hate them* O Lord, that hate Thee? yea I hate them right sore. Or (as the New
Translation has it) yea I hate them with a perfect hatred. Why then says our
Apostle, Follow Peace even with All men, not excepting the Worst of all?

10. We see the Objection is very specious* But strike one Text against
another, (as a flint against steel,) and there will leap from both together
both Fire and Light too. The Answer to it is to be taken from Romans 12. 18. and
thence forwards unto the end. If it is possible, as much as in you lies, live
peaceably with all men. He does not peremptorily say, live peaceably with all
men at all adventure, let the Case be what it will. But (...), if it is
possible, and (...), as much as in you lies. Whereby it is evidently implied,
that in diverse hard cases it is Impossible, it does not lie in our power to be
at Peace with all the world. All that God requires of us, is to employ our poor
utmost in order to it. Whilst we hate the Malefactor, we must have charity for
the Man; so as to pity his being sick of habitual Sin, and supplicate God for
his Amendment. Follow Peace we must with Them, who fly as fast as we can follow
it. And to the end we may attain it, we must endeavor at least to win them by
all good means. Such as is the not avenging our selves, but giving place unto
wrath; feeding our Enemies when they are hungry, and when they are thirsty
giving them Drink. For by so doing, we shall heap (says the Apostle) Coals of
Fire upon their Heads. Not that this can be spoken of any mischievous kind of
charity; For it is meant of nothing else but the Fire of Love. And Love is
fitly compared to Fire, because it has both a purging and melting Faculty in
its Nature. The Metaphor is taken from the custom of the Founder, who when he
cannot melt his Metal by putting Coals of Fire under it, does heap some Fire
upon it too. So we must heap the Fire of Love upon our Enemies Heads, not to
consume them in their Impenitence, but to melt them into Repentance and change
of Life. At once to purify the Dross, and to mollify the hardness, with which
their hearts are affected toward us. But if at last our Malacticks are used in
vain, we must then indeed proceed to the severer Methods of Charity, which is
Charity never the less for being attended with severity. A Rod being ordained
for the Back of Fools, who will not be wrought upon at all by the Spirit of
Meekness. (1 Cor. 4. ult.) When men are the worse for being pardoned, and even
corrupt themselves with Goodness, we must not be so over-cruel, as to punish
them with Impunity. For God in great Mercy has given us Magistrates, to be his
Ministers of wrath, and his Executers of vengeance. Nor are they liable unto
any more noxious failing, than that of bearing the Sword in vain. Hereon is
founded both the Lawfulness, and the Necessity also of War upon some Occasions,
as being That without which Peace it self cannot be kept. The Law of Nature,
and of Nations, That of Moses, and of Christ, and the best men's Examples permit
it to us. As it were easy to evince, were This a Time or Place for it. And
what I say of the Civil, is just as true of the Spiritual Sword. The highest
Act of Christian charity that can be shown to the obdurate, is to deliver them
up to Satan for the Destruction of the Flesh; because it is to this wholesome
end, That their Spirits may be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. (1 Cor. 5.
5.) Thus we see what is meant by Peace with All men; how far forth it is
extended, and how it admits of a Limitation.

11. Another Objection may be raised from the Pronoun [Which] because it is in
the Greek, not (...), but (...), and so may seem to relate rather to Holiness,
than to Peace. As if our Duty toward God were a great Requisite to Salvation;
but not our Duty toward our Neighbor. Whereas in Truth the very discharge of
our Duty toward our Neighbor, is one of the great and main Duties we owe to
God. Peace and Holiness are such Twin-Sisters, as are not like the Tindaridae,
or Twins of Leda, who (after the manner of two Buckets, whereof the one is
going up, and the other down,) did take their Turns in Heaven, and Hell; But
like the Twins of Hippocrates, or the two Friends in Valerius, who neither
could live, nor die asunder. He that follows not Peace, does fly from Holiness;
or follows it only to drive it from him. Why then says our Apostle, not
(...), without which Things, nor (...), without which Peace, but (...), without
which Holiness, no man living shall see the Lord?

12. The Answer is, that the word (...), is of an aequivocal signification; as
being equally of the Masculine, and Neuter Gender. But some there are in the
world of eminent Learning and Reputation, who taking it up by the wrong handle,
have unhappily fastened upon a wrong signification, and so have set up Holiness
to the prejudice of Peace. Merely for want of consideration, That the Relative
[Which] in this place is the Neuter Gender, and has not any single word for
its Antecedent, but the whole Clause going before. It is not in a divided
sense, (...), without which Holiness, but in sensu composito, (...), without
which Following of Peace and Holiness united. Whereby we are given to
understand, That there cannot be such a Thing as a Godly Rebel, or Holy
Boutifeu, because the Subject excludes the Adjunct. To say that such or such a
Man is a most conscionable Schismatic, or a religious exciter unto Sedition,
(whilst he fights away his Conscience to win its Liberty, and sacrifices Peaces
to pretended Holiness,) is to affirm both Parts of a Contradiction. He that is
of an unpeaceable, must needs be of an unholy Spirit. For as Peace without
Holiness is but Adherence unto a Faction; so Holiness without Peace is but
Hypocrisy. They that are so superstitious as to strain at Gnats, (such as the
Authorized Rites of Cross and Surpliss,) whilst they are also so profane as to
swallow Camels, (such as are the crying Sins of Schism, and Sacrilege,) cannot
well be called Followers, but only Persecuters of Peace, (and that indeed is
one Sense of the word (...).) Nor can we say they are Possessors, but only
Personators of Holiness. I am not willing to be so rigid, and do heartily wish
it were false to say, That they are really nothing else but the Apes of Satan;
who is Then at his worst the Prince of Darkness, when he transforms himself the
most into an Angel of Light. So said our Savior, and so S. Paul. And from both
we may infer, That of all the Hypocrites in the world, the Devil himself is the
most Demure; and by being such indeed, is the more a Devil. Thus we see what is
meant by the Relative [Which] in this Place, and what use we are to make of its
Antecedent.

13. But what may last of all be meant by seeing the Lord in this Text, Object.
3.
that our Apostle should set it down as the greatest Recompense of Reward, to
such as are Followers of Peace and Holiness? When Moses desired to see the
Lord, and therefore earnestly prayed that God would show him his Glory; Exodus
33. 18.
The very Mercy of God's Answer did consist in the Reason of his Denial. Thou
can not see my Face; ver. 20.
for there is no man shall see me and live. And therefore Gideon himself,
although a mighty man of Valor, (as God himself is pleased to call him) a man
as stout as the steel with which his Proverbial Sword was tempered, was yet
exceedingly afraid, Judge. 6. 22.
as soon as he perceived he had seen an Angel of the Lord. And so it was with
good reason that Manoah said unto his Wife, Judge. 13. 22.
We shall surely Die, because we have seen God. And if these things are so,
that we cannot see God, without the danger of sudden Death; It may seem a sad
thing for a man to be a Follower of Peace and Holiness, because by that means
he shall see the Lord. But

14. The Answer to this is extremely obvious. Answer.
It being no more than to distinguish betwixt the Eyes of our vile, and of our
glorified Bodies. If we behold him with the first, we shall find him indeed a
consuming Fire. But when we shall see him with the second, we shall find him
nothing less than a quickening Light. Here our Eyes are so carnal, that it very
much hurts us to see the Sun, unless we see him in his Reflection, or at least
through the veil of some Diaphanous Body. And if the Brightness of the Sun is
enough to strike the Beholder Blind; How can we safely gaze on Him, to whom the
Sun is but a Shadow? Yet after the Time of Restitution, when what is sown in
weakness shall be raised again in power; Then our Life will consist in the
sight of God. We then shall see him as he is, no longer darkly as in a Glass,
but face to face; and that with infinite Pleasure, as well as Ease. And this
alone is that Vision, which is alluded to in the Text. Without an earnest
Prosecution of Peace and Holiness in conjunction, no one shall be qualified to
live by seeing, what here he cannot see and live. None shall enter within the
Veil, or be made a partaker of the Beatifick Vision. None shall wait on his
Throne in whose presence is Life, and where there are Pleasures for evermore.

15. Thus in the Suit of the Explication, we have (before we are aware) a full
Division of the Text. And not so only, but also practical Reflections on all
its parts.

First, We have seen a single Act of great Moment. And Secondly, How it is fixed
on a double Object. The double Object is Peace and Holiness, which, according
to the Scope of the word (...), (showing the Energie, and the Force of the
single Act,) are to be Prosecuted and followed with Zeal and Fervor.

Next to the Act, and the Object, which are sufficiently expressed, we have
their absolute Necessity very significantly implied. For these are set as the
Condition, on which alone we arrive at Bliss. Matthew. 5. 8.
It is for none to see God, but the pure in heart. And therefore this is a
cogent Reason, for the fastening of the Act on the Double Object. For the
Intensiveness of the one, and the Extensiveness of the other.

16. But now because it is impossible, that men should eagerly pursue their
Christian Duties, whilst they believe them to be needless, or gainless Things;
Things which rob them of their happiness in this present World, and without
which they may be happy in That to come: We must possess our selves more fully
than we have hitherto done, not only with the Nature of Peace and Holiness,
but more especially (and in the first place) with their absolute Necessity to
life aeternal; whereof unless we thoroughly convince our selves, we cannot hope
(with any reason) to engage our Resolutions to follow Both.

17. First, For the word Peace, it is that that comprehends our whole Duty
toward our Neighbor, and as well to our Enemies, as to our Friends. For how
can we follow Peace with All men in so earnest a manner as the word (...) does
import, unless we labor, by forgiveness, to overcome evil with good, (Romans 12.
ult.) much more must we render unto every man his Due, Tribute to whom Tribute,
Custom to whom Custom, Honor to whom Honor, Fear to whom Fear, (Romans 13. 7.)
and so by analogy of Proportion, Service to whom Service, Love to whom Love,
no injury to whom no injury is due. (For every Injury is breach of Peace.) We
must owe no man any thing, but to love one another, Romans 13. 8. And therefore
injure him we must not, no not so much as in desire. This is to follow Peace
indeed, when we do not only not give a Cause, but not so much as an occasion
of just offense. When we keep not only our Hands, but even our Heads and our
Hearts from picking and stealing. When we do not commit Adultery, no not so
much as with our Eyes. When we do no Murder, no not so much as in our wishes.
When we dishonor not our Parents (whether private or public, Ecclesiastical,
or Civil,) not not so much as in our Wills. This is, as much as in us lies, to
make an eager Prosecution of Peace with all men. Which comprehends our whole
Obedience to the Second Table of the Law.

. 18. Secondly, As Peace does grasp the whole Duty of Man to Man, so we may say
also of Holiness, that it is the whole immediate Duty of Man to God. Which more
especially consists in these three Things: Vid. Catech. Card. Richi.
In preserving our Loyalty, in exhibiting our Reverence, and lastly, in
rendering our Active Service. The first, has respect unto our Thoughts, the
second, unto our Words, the third, unto our Actions. First, for Loyalty, That
(we know) is a virtue, by which a Servant does acknowledge no Master but his
own, holds no Intelligence with his Enemies, admits no Rival in his Affections,
but ever honors him, and owns him, and adheres to him alone against all
Pretenders. And This is that which is commanded in the two first Precepts of
the Decalogue. Thou shall have no God but me. Thou shall not make any graven
Images, to bow down to them, or worship them. This is holiness in Thought.
Which however it is Necessary, is not enough; And therefore to this we must add
our Reverence. That we know to be a virtue which is equally compounded of Love
and Fear, and by which an Inferior does speak with Awe, concerning any one
above him whom he does honor or admire. And this is that which is commanded in
the third Precept of the Decalogue. Thou shall not lift up the name of thy God
in vain. Thou shall not only not use it falsely, but not so much as upon
trivial and slight Occasions. This is holiness in Word. Which, however it is
Necessary, is not enough neither. And therefore to this there must be added our
active Service. That (we know) is an execution of what our Master gives us in
charge. And (as an acknowledgment of Supremacy, as well as of Maintenance, and
Protection,) a setting aside our own business, that we may wholly attend upon
our Master's. And this is that which is commanded in the fourth Precept of the
Decalogue, Remember that you keep holy the Sabbath Day. Six days are allowed
thee to do thine own business; but the seventh is set apart, in the seventh
thou shall do no manner of Work. No manner of work which is thine own, but all
manner of work which is thy Master's. Not only acts of Sacrifice, (such as our
Duties in the Church,) but works of Justice, and Mercy too. For these indeed
are the things, in which especially consists the Sanctification of a Sabbath,
and are called by our Savior the weightier matters of the Law. This is
holiness in action. And so we see the three things, wherein our holiness is to
consist; which comprehends our whole obedience to the first Table of the Law.

19. I have the rather been thus plain in showing the Latitude and the Nature
of these Grand Duties, that the exactness of our Knowledge may be our Directory
to Practice. It being necessary to know what it is necessary to practice,
Holiness toward God, and Peace with all men. For whilst we are told by our
Apostle, that without these two, there will be no seeing of God, we are as good
as assured by God himself, that These precisely are the Terms on which
Salvation is to be had. Insomuch that if either of these is wanting, there is no
escaping the Pains of Hell, nor any attaining the Joys of Heaven. And therefore
after their Nature, I am to speak of their Necessity, their absolute Necessity
to Life eternal.

20. And first, Observe how other Scriptures do hold conformity with This.
Without these two, we cannot possibly make our Calling and Election sure. Not
the first, For we have boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of
Jesus, that we may draw near with a pure Heart, having our Hearts sprinkled
from an evil Conscience. (Heb. 10. 19. 22.) Nor yet the second, For God has
chosen us in his Son, that we should be Holy, and without Blame. (Ephesians. 1. 4.)
Without these two, our Justification will be in vain. For God did therefore
Reconcile us when we were Enemies in our Minds by wicked works, that he might
present us Holy, and Unblameable, and Vnreproveable in his sight. (Colos. 1.
22.) Without these two, we lose the End, and so do frustrate the Work of our
Redemption. For our Lord Jesus Christ gave himself for the Church, that he
might present it unto himself a Glorious Church, that it should be Holy, and
without Blemish. (Ephesians. 5. 25. 27.) Without these two, we lose the Benefit of
the Rod, and do partake of That as Bastards, which is intended to us as Sons.
For as we are told by the Apostle, that if we are without chastisement, then
are we Bastards, and not Sons; so he presently adds, that God corrects us for
our profit, to make us Partakers of his Holiness. (Heb. 12. 10.) In a word,
Without an earnest prosecution of Peace and Holiness United, (for I have showed
that the one cannot subsist without the other,) we lose the Benefit of Grace,
and so evacuate the Means of our Glorification. For we all with open face,
behold as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, that we may be changed into the
same Image, from Glory to Glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord. (2 Cor. 3.
18.)

21. Nor have we only store of Scripture, but Reason for it. For if Salvation
were to be had by appearing Righteous unto men, The greatest Hypocrites would
become the most glorious Saints. If by the stoutness of a Belief, or by a Hope
without doubting, None would be happier than the presumptuous, and such as are
carnally secure. If by the Latitude of a Knowledge, or by the Rectitude of
Opinions, it would be better sure with none than the Lapsed Angels; who are as
Knowing, and as Orthodox, as any mere man can be thought to be. Heaven would
Then be a kind of Jayl, full of the guiltiest Malefactors. The Error of the
Origenists would presently pass into a Truth, and the worst of Devils receive
the Benefit of a Redemption. But no man's reason will yield to That. For
whosoever does but believe there is a Heaven and a Hell, must grant that the
one is for the Recompense of the Good, and the other for the Punishment of Evil
Doers. Which shows the absolute Necessity of Peace and Holiness; being as
'twere the two Eyes, without which it is impossible to see the Lord.

22. But here withal we are to take an especial Care, that we do not divide
the consideration of their Nature from the consideration ^f their Necessity;
but still consider what it is wherein our holiness is to consist, as well as
what it is which depends upon it. For through the want of this Caution, the
empty Picture of Holiness is often mistaken for the Life; there are that think
themselves Holy, when indeed they are Hypocritical, and many hope to be saved
for their being Cheats. There were Professors amongst the Jews, who were indeed
very punctual in the worship of God, and thence concluded they were The Godly;
but 'twas a worship which consisted in the outward washing of Cups and
Platters, in external Rites and legal Ceremonies, (which were but shadows of
things to come,) in spreading forth their hands, and making Prayers for a
pretense, in fasting often to appear Righteous unto men, in keeping Sabbaths
and new Moons, in building the Tombs of the Prophets, and adorning the
Sepulchers of the righteous; when all the while they neglected the weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith. They did so pull the Motes out
of other men's Eyes, as not at all to see the Beams in their own. They did so
strain at Gnats, as to swallow Camels; for they devoured even Orphans and
Widows Houses, (Camels Those with a witness) and were partakers with their
Fathers in the blood of the Prophets, and so were far from being Followers of
Peace and Holiness, unless as Worldlings follow their Traffic for filthy
Lucre; dealing as Hucksters in Religion, and Trading in Godliness, as it is an
Instrument only of Gain. For they were called by our Savior, (even then when
at the Top of their painted holiness,) not only Serpents, and Vipers, but
Brands of Hell too, such as could not escape Damnation: (Matthew. 23. 33.) Nor
are there wanting amongst us Christians, who are religiously careful to
sprinkle themselves with holy water, to say a chapletfull of Ave Mary's, to
visit the Sepulchers of the Saints, to cross their Foreheads and their Breasts,
and to salute ye every Morning in nomine Domini. Nay some there are amongst us
Protestants (for it is fit we should be just in our Observations,) who place a
great deal of virtue in an exact coming to Church, in daily reading so many
Chapters, in lifting up to heaven both hands and eyes, in walking softly, and
looking sadly, and hanging down the head now and then like a Bull-rush; and so
we may say they have attained to an handsome Outside of Religion, that they are
wellfashion'd Christians, as addressing themselves to God with a Civil
Carriage, (such as well behaved Enemies do seldom fail of,) But so far from
being Followers of Peace and Holiness, that they want the very Body, much more
the Soul of Christianity, whilst they will rather sow the Seeds of the most
execrable Rebellion, than comply with Superiors in things Indifferent, which
cannot but be lawful, because Indifferent; and not only lawful, but binding
too, as soon as the signature of Authority is stamped upon Them. Do These men
think there is a God, or a Devil, a Corruption of the Body, or Immortality of
the Soul, an Hour of Death, or a Day of Judgment, who will rather break Peace
with all their Governors, than submit to the use of a Public Liturgy, which
is not only lawful, but transcendently good, so long as established by Law
and Canon? I vvish that all sorts of men who are immediately concerned in
what I say, would but take this obvious Truth into their serious
Consideration; That as there were Things under the Law, (such as the Rite of
Circumcision, and Forbearing Swines Flesh,) which (however commanded by God
himself,) were not commanded for being Good, but were Therefore only good,
because commanded; so things Indifferent under the Gospel, though they are not
commanded for being Necessary, do yet become Necessary by being commanded; and
are mediately commanded by God himself, as far as commanded by That Authority,
which God has commanded us to obey. From whence it follows unavoidably, That
what may lawfully be done, before commanded; as soon as commanded, cannot
lawfully be omitted. For Rebellion against the Second Table, is as bad as
Rebellion against the First. And so they cannot be followers of Peace, or
Holiness, who in a mere pretense of Holiness do hinder Peace. An hearty
Follower of Peace, will Romans 14. 19.
follow the Things that make for Peace. He will not be so much as a
Nonconformist; but press with earnestness after Unity, by Uniformity in the
Church. And if his Conscience has any Scruples, (...). Clem. Romans ad Corinth.
Ed. Jun p. 69.
arising merely from the weakness, not from the wilfulness of the man, he will
infinitely rather forsake his City, or his Country, than stay in either to its
Disturbance.

23. Such was the pious Exhortation of Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians,
which he also made good by his own Example. Who (says he) is there among you of
tender Bowels, and Generosity? let him sacrifice (if he is such) his private
Interest to the public. And say, If I am either the Author or the Fautor of
any Difference, I divest my self of All the Wealth and Honor which I enjoy,
and inflict upon my self, a most grateful Exile. Now that S. Clemens made good
his Exhortation by his Example, I am induced to affirm from this particular
Consideration, (...) -- (...). Epiphan. advers. Carpocr. l. 1. Tom. 2. p. 107.
That I can find no better way to reconcile the several Authors who will have
Clemens to be the Second and the Fourth Bishop of Rome, than by saying with
Epiphanius, (till we can find a better reason,) That Clemens laid down his
Bishopric during the Empire of Tiberius, and took it up again in the Time of
Nero. The first of which he did freely, and the second by compulsion; but Both
in order to the Unity and Peace of Christians. Such was also the public Spirit
of the renowned (...), etc. Gregor. Presbyt. in Vita Nazianz. prope finem.
Gregory Nazianzen, who gladly threw the Archbishopric of Canstantinople
behind his Back, for the composing of the strife that arose about it. God
forbid (said he at parting, to all the Prelates there met in the General
Council,) that we whose Office it is to teach and to bring Peace to others,
should scandalously break it amongst our selves. Rather let Me forsake my
Throne, and be cast out of the City, than not contribute all I can to the
public Peace. (...). (...). Chrysostom. in cap. 4. Epist. ad Ephesians. Homil. XI.
subfinem.
Like to this spoke S. Chrysostom in one of his Homilies to the People. That if
He were thought the Cause or the Occasion of their Divisions, he would recede
from his Archbishopric, and be gone whither they pleased; would suffer any
thing rather than Schism, which he protested he thought a Sin as great and
damning even as Heresy; and which rather than administer occasion to, he would
strip himself of the Rich and Splendid Preferment which he possessed. A Charity
like That of the Prophet Jonas, who for the quieting of the Tempest, chose to
be cast into the Sea: And to preserve a whole Ship, was easily content with a
private Ruin. Which Example of S. Chrysostom and other Fathers more Primitive,
every honest man will follow in these our Days, if he is earnestly a follower
of Peace and Holiness. And this is one of the chiefest Touchstones, whereby to
difference a weak from a wilful Brother. They who do not (...), pursue with
eagerness the Things which do make for Peace, do not serve God solidly in the
Duties of the First and the Second Table, in Piety and Probity, in Godliness
and Honesty, in loving God with all their Hearts, which is to serve him in
Holiness, and their Neighbor as themselves, which is to follow Peace with all
men; and so they want the two Hinges, on which the Door of Salvation does
chiefly turn, and whereupon does clearly hang All the Law and the Prophets.

24. I cannot follow Peace enough, in the Discourse I am upon for the following
of it, till I observe how the Prosperity does most especially depend on the
Peace of Christians; and also say by what means, as well as by whose
Instrumentality, we may attain to so much Peace and good Agreement amongst our
selves, as may redeem some of the Credit which we cannot but have lost by our
foul Divisions. There being no greater Stumbling Block, either to Those that
are without, or within the Church, than the Multitude of the Sects which are
seen amongst us. For whilst it is taken by them for granted, (and also confessed
by our selves,) that True Religion can be but one; it is natural for them to
infer, That wheresoever there is Truth, there must be Unity; at least in men of
the same Profession. Whereupon whilst they observe, how the Professors of
Christianity do stand divided amongst themselves, and that in point of Opinion,
as well as Practice, they easily slide into a Jealousy, touching the Tenor and
the Truth of the whole Profession. Now the way to make Peace, and remove the
Scandal, is not to conquer them into orthodoxy by dint of Argument alone;
(though That indeed is one of our fittest Weapons;) as well because the
greater part have not light enough to see a victorious Truth, as because, if
they have, they are not humble enough to own they have lived in Error. No, the
hopefullest way left, (for ought I am able to apprehend,) is not to mention
Those Doctrines, wherein we find by Experience we always differ; and to insist
on those alone, wherein we find by Experience we all agree. A thing which
cannot be brought about by all the Subjects put together, but perhaps with ease
enough by the Kings of Christendom; as well because they are but few, and
therefore the fitter to determine, as because they are Supreme, and of Power to
execute.

25. For it happily falls out, through the Evidence of Truth, and the good
Providence of God, That though we differ in Superstructures, yet we agree in
the Foundation, and Fundamentals of Christianity. Which Fundamentals, as they
are Rerum absolute necessariarum ad salutem, non magnum esse numerum. Re
Jacobus arbitratur in sua Respons. ad tertiam Observat. Perronii Cardinalis.
Few, and therefore easy to be remembered, so are they also very Et fere ex
aequo omnibus probantur qui se Christianes dici postulant. Id. ibid.
Plain, and therefore easily understood; and that by all sorts of People, who
are not flatly Fools, or Madmen. As the wittiest or the most learned cannot
need to know more, so the most simple and illiterate cannot easily know less,
than what it is to fear God, and to keep his Commandments, which yet does grasp
the whole Duty of Man as Man. Again, it is the whole Duty of Man as Christian,
to have a practical Knowledge of Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. And as the
wisest man living needs not know any thing more, so the most learned of the
Apostles would not know any thing else. Another Summary of Religion, (as to the
practical part of it, which is the main,) we have expressed in Three words,
both from a Prophet, and an Apostle. A Summary so short, and yet so copious,
that as a man the most unskilful cannot easily know less, so the most learned
and subtle Doctor is not bound to practice more, than to do Justice, and to
love Mercy, and to walk humbly with his God; or to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present World.

26. Now if it is granted and agreed by every Sort of Real Christians, That the
Creed and the Commandments are comprehensive of the All that is Fundamental, or
of Necessity in Religion, for Faith, and Practice; and if All under Authority
will but allow it to be the privilege of such as are placed in Authority, to
judge of the Decency and the Order which S. Paul in the general, and every
Nation in particular thinks it a duty to observe in the public Worship; (to
wit, the Place, and the Time, and the Manner of its performance, which being
but Accidents, or Adjuncts, or Externals of Religion, should not be differed
about by Them who fully agree in its Essentials;) It will be difficult to
imagine, how the Divisions and Separations which are so many, and so wide as we
see they are, can be able to escape a most happy Closure. A thing which the
Preachers can but press, and the best of the People can but pray for, but the
Rulers of the Earth can easily bring into Effect too, if their Endeavors shall
be as hearty, as their Authority is divine, and their Power cogent. Which how
can they possibly employ unto a better end or use, than is the binding up the
Wounds of a bleeding Savior, who owns himself to be the Head of That mangled
Body, whereof the greatest men on Earth are but lofty Members? Now the better
to prevail with men of all Ranks, both with Them who are in Authority, and with
Them who live under it, I would present but Two things to their respective
Considerations; First, That they who are in Authority ought not to urge the
Accidentals and Externals in Religion, with as much vehemence as they do the
Essentials of it; nor Ecclesia Romana multa hodie observat ceu (...)
necessaria, quae vetus Ecclesia vix norat, certe non ita usurpabat, tanquam
plane essent Necessaria. Is. Casaub. Epist. 710. p. 912.
create too many Necessities in the use of things Indifferent, where God
himself has created none. Next, That the people under Authority ought not to
lessen their Obedience to God in Man, by still pretending their obligation of
obeying God rather than Man. An Axiom True indeed at all Times, but yet at
those times impertinent, and urged quite out of Season, when God does choose to
be obeyed by our obedience to his Vicegerents. Who, if they have any right at
all to make positive Laws, must inevitably make them of Things Indifferent.

27. I press the former consideration, with due submission to Authority, and in
behalf, (not of wilful, but) of truly-weak Brethren, because I conceive the
Laws of Men can reach no farther than the Objects of outward Sense; and
therefore cannot punish Avarice, Pride, or Malice, though they can and do
Invasion, Theft, and Murder; Nor wrong Opinions in Religion, whilst they
quietly lie sleeping, or disturb nothing more than their Owner's Minds; but
only as breaking forth of their Mouths, and at last running out at their
fingers ends. I know the Sword is apt to terrify, but not instruct; to change
a Sectary's Confession, but not his Creed; and therefore the Maladies of the
Spirit are to be Spiritually dealt with, to work their Cure. Not by the Gibbet,
or the Jayl, but by the force of sound Doctrine, and argumentative
Conversation. A man who wanders out of his way for want of light only, and not
Sobriety, (overtaken, not with Drink, but with the Darkness of the Night,)
deserves a Lantern for his Direction, a great deal rather than a Rod. He would
be thought a strange Organist who should not scruple to break his Pipes as often
as he finds them out of Tune. Nor could our Magistrates think kindly of God
himself, should he recall them with a Thunderbolt, as fast as he sees them
going astray.

28. And as for such reasons as These I press the First Consideration, so I
discern as great reasons, (and such as make as much for Peace) to resume the
Second. For though Ceremonies and Rites are only Accidents in Religion, yet
Obedience to Authority cannot but pass for an Essential. Because whatever God
commands us by his Moses and his Aaron, his Zerubbabel and his Jeshua, his
anointed Lieutenants, both King and Priest, he does as really and as truly, and
as authoritatively command us, as what he commands us by a Voice, or an Hand
from Heaven. And seeing the same God that says, Thou shall not worship a
Graven Image, does also say at the same time, as well as in the same Decalogue,
Honor thy Father and thy Mother, (whether private or public, Ecclesiastical,
or Civil,) It is by consequence as Immediate a Sin against God, to show a
contempt of That Authority which God has commanded us to obey, as it is to
worship a graven Image, or to take God's Name in vain.

29. Now might I speak without Censure, even by speaking with submission to all
Superiors, (as well as to others of more Research and better Discretion than
my self,) I would adventure to affirm it as the Conclusion of the whole matter,
That when Peace cannot be had by such a reciprocal Self-denial as I have now
pleaded for, in Them that are vested with Authority, and in Them that live
under it; by Compassion in the former, and by Compliance in the later; by
Condescension in the one, and by Submission in the other; but each will have
his whole Will, and not admit of a Composition; nothing but Power Irresistible
can succor such as make Laws, against the Violence and Incursions of such as
are stouter than to Obey them. Nor will a wise man expect to have protection
under the Laws and the Makers of them, any longer than they Both shall be so
protected.

30. But I return to that Point, The Application.
from which I have made a very pertinent, because a profitable Digression; nor
yet a Digression from my Text, but from the Thread of my Discourse touching the
Nature, and the Necessity of Peace and Holiness. Which being both of such
Importance, as that our Happiness does depend upon the earnestness of our
Pursuit, How can we choose but be persuaded to do a thing which is so Natural,
as that a man would think it should be hard not to do it? For find we any thing
more Natural, than to be Lovers of our selves, and so to covet those things
which we believe to be the most for our own Advantage? A little Rhetoric (one
would think) should be sufficient to persuade us to choose our Interest, and so
to follow even with earnestness the necessary means of our being Happy. Be we
never so illiterate, or be we never so perverse, yet through the little which
has been spoken of Peace and Holiness, (whether as separate, or in
conjunction,) we cannot be ignorant of their Nature, or unconvinc'd of their
Necessity.

31. If then in respect of their Common Nature, They are as 'twere the two
Arms, which do embrace the whole Decalogue or Ten Commandments of the Law; we
must never flatter our selves that we are Christians good enough, until we find
our Obedience to be impartial; that is, as well to the first as to the second
Table, and no less to the second than to the first. Nor may we ever give our
selves Rest, until we See we have attained to this Comparative perfection; I
mean a singleness of Heart, and a love of obedience without reserve. Our
respect (like that of the Psalmist) must be to All God's Commandments, and we
must study to live a peaceable and quiet life in All Godliness and Honesty, (1 Timothy 2. 2.) We must not be kinder or more indulgent to one Commandment than to
another, (whether biased by Custom, or Education;) but rather keep our selves
in Awe by chewing on That of the Apostle, Whosoever offends in one point is
guilty of All. Jam. 2. 10.

Thus we must argue from the Nature of Peace and Holiness. And, after a manner
not unlike, we ought to argue from their Necessity.

For if in respect of their Necessity, they are as 'twere the two Hinges, upon
which the very Door of Salvation turns; or (if you please) the Two Wings (as S.
Bernard in Sermon. 4. de Oratione and Jejunio. p. 113.
Bernard calls them) wherewith the Soul of a Christian soar's up to Heaven;
Lord! how nearly does it concern us, to follow them both as is here required?
and to pass the whole Time of our sojourning here in fear? What manner of men
ought we to be in the future Course of our Conversation? To follow Holiness and
Peace, concerns us as much as Salvation comes to; that is, as much as our Souls
are Worth. Fail of these if we dare, unless we are so stout, that we dare be
damned. But yet how many of our Fiduciaries do miss of heaven, merely by
thinking they cannot miss it? because (forsooth) to the Regenerate it is a Thing
perfectly unavoidable? And what numbers of Solifidians do make it difficult to
be saved, by making it easier than God will have it? by thinking Salvation is
to be had at a cheaper Rate, than that of following Peace and Holiness? Now can
there be any thing more advisable, than that other men's mischiefs should keep
us safe? and we receive the whole benefit without the least danger of their
unhappiness? Mark well the reason which here is urged for the fixing of the Act
on the double Object. (I shall but paraphrase the Text in a broader English,)
Follow Peace and Holiness, if for no other reason, at least for This, because
ye are happy, if ye do; and damned for ever, if ye do not.

Less than This we must not preach, and more than this we need not learn.

But if This of it self cannot find sufficient Place in our Consideration, yet
if we have any the least respect to our Secular Interest and Advantage, as we
desire to be free from the Charge and Costliness of Sin, and to thrive by God's
Blessing upon All we set our hearts and our hands unto; or if we have any the
least respect to our own good Name, and Reputation, as we desire to leave
behind us a fair Report, and to be honorably mentioned by them that dwell
round about us; or if we have any the least respect to our inward Quiet and
Tranquillity, as we desire to have the Peace of a cleansed Conscience, which is
in Solomon's Account a Continual Feast; or if all these together cannot engage
our Resolutions, yet if to these we add. That which before was hinted, If we
have any the least respect to the Righteous Judge of all the World; as we
desire to escape from the Wrath to come, and to enter with an Euge, into the
Joy of our Lord, Let us think of these Things when the Sermon's ended.

And the God of Peace and Holiness sanctify us thoroughly; That the whole of
every one of us, both Body, Soul, and Spirit, may be kept blameless unto the
Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

To Him be Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

OF ABSTAINING FROM ALL APPEARANCE OF EVIL.
1 THESSALONIANS. 5. 22. Abstain from all Appearance of evil.
1. IT was the Fancy of a wise, and an honest Heathen, that all a rational
man's Duty might be expressed in two words, (...), Bear, and Forbear; the first
implying Patience under the evil of Affliction, the second Abstinence from the
evil of Sin. Now in this Precept of our Apostle, we have one of the two Hinges,
on which does hang the whole Duty of man as man. For whatsoever is a man's Duty
may be referred to two Heads, His Abstaining from evil, and his doing that
which is Good. Nay forasmuch as it is impossible to abstain from all evil and
from all Appearance of it, without the doing of what is Good, and persevering
unto the end too; (because the want of Perseverance is Simply evil, and cannot
stand with that Abstinence which is from all the very face or Appearance of
it,) I shall not sure be too profuse in Speaking the pithiness of my Text, if I
shall say it is comprehensive of the whole Duty of a Christian. For if we
abstain from unbelief and misbelief of Christ's Gospel, and from all
disobedience to Christ's commands, and from the scandalous Appearance both of
the one and of the other; we do but barely do as much as my Text requires, and
the God whom we serve can exact no more.

2. In the Discussion of the Words, there are These things to be considered.

First, The Nature of the Act, which is very Good; it is (...), Abstain. Next,
the Quality of the Object, and that is evil; it is (...), Abstain from evil.
Thirdly, the very great extent both of the Act and of the Object; it is (...),
abstain from all evil. And then because the word (...) is of a double
signification, importing equally the Species, and the Appearance of any Object,
here is therefore required a double Abstinence; one from all the kinds of evil,
and another from all the occasions of it. That is required as the End, and This
as the Medium conducing to it. We must abstain from the Occasions and
Opportunities of evil, that so we may be the better able to abstain from the
Species and Presence of it.

But first of all to the end that our very Abstinence may not be Evil, even
then when it makes the most goodly show; we must abstain from the evil of
seeming only to be abstemious; that is to say, from the evil, of being
abstemious in Hypocrisy. For the World is too full of those Modern Pharisees,
who often violate the Text by its Authority; and so insist upon the Letter, in
opposition to the Scope, and the Tenor of it, that they rebel against the
Precept by their obedience; and offer violence to the Law in its own defense.
For (say They within themselves) it is not said by the Apostle, Abstain from
all Evil, but from all Appearance of it; as if he meant not so much to forbid
the Sin, as the Scandalous manner of its commission. As if he had thought with
Them of Sparta, That the abominable Thing is not to steal, but to be caught;
not the Irregularity, but Notoriety of the Fact. And as if This were either the
whole, or the prime Importance of the Text, you shall have many So abstain from
all Appearance of evil, as to satisfy themselves in the Enjoyment of the evil,
because they abstain from the bare Appearance.

3. Thus the Adulteress in the Proverbs may be said to have abstained from the
Appearance of evil, because she wiped her Mouth, and looked demurely, and said
that She had done no wickedness. (Prove. 30. 20.) What was wanting to her in
chastity, She endeavored to supply by the care and caution wherewith She
sinned. As if the Rule were to be taken in this Sense also, De non apparentibus
and non existentibus eadem est ratio. I have done no wickedness, because it
does not appear that I have done it. My way of Sin has been as close, and as
indiscernable, as the way of an Eagle in the Air, or the way of a Ship in the
midst of the Sea. (v. 19.) And if there is either no God at all, or else a God
that has no omniscience, or that does not employ it on trivial objects, I have
abstained from all evil, because from all Appearance of it.

Thus the Pharisees of old may be said to have abstained from the Appearance of
evil, because however they were guilty of eating up Orphans and Widows houses,
yet they did it so devoutly, by their fasting twice a week, and their long
Prayers for a pretense, that notwithstanding they were vile in the sight of
God, our Savior tells us, Matthew. 23. 28.
they appeared Righteous unto men. And how was that, but by abstaining from the
Appearance at least of all unrighteousness? They did Noctem peccatis, and
Fraudibus addere Nubem; that is, they Sinned out of sight as much as might be;
They were circumspect and wary in all their wickedness. If any covetousness or
cruelty of more than ordinary size was to be committed, they presently covered
it with a Corban, and were Deceivers of men in the name of God.

Thus the Samaritans heretofore may be said to have abstained from the
Appearance of evil; because how sinful soever they were Themselves, they did
yet make a Conscience of coming near unto a Sinner. Every Jew was thought sick
of a noli me tangere, and was accordingly kept off with a Ne attingas. Stand by
thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier than Thou, (Isa. 65. 2, 3, 5.)

And thus the rigidest (...). Ignat. in Ep. ad Magnesios.
Professors of Grace and Godliness here at home, have a Conscience so callous,
as to suffer them to rebel against their Governors; but yet so delicate, as
not to permit them to obey. A Conscience so wide, as to swallow Camels; but yet
so straight, as to strein at Gnats. A Conscience so tough, as to bear a Schism;
and yet so tender, as to scruple at a Ceremony. They are not Sabbath Breakers,
or Swearers, (for those are Sins of no Profit,) nor are they ordinarily drunk
with excess of Wine; (for That is both a disgraceful and costly sin;) but they
are Serious and Demure in all their projects, and seek the ruin of a Church in
as great Sobriety, M. Catonis verbum est, ad evertendam Remp. sobrium
accessisse. Sueton.
as Julius Caesar did that of a Commonwealth; Thus affecting to abstain from
all Appearance of evil, when they have nothing in them of Good, but in
Appearance. Insomuch as I may say, without breach of Charity, that since the
Atrocius sub sancti nominis Professione peccatur. Salv. de Providen. c. 7.
Magis damnabilis est malitia, quam Titulus bonitatis accusat; and reatus impii
est pium Nomen. Id. c. 11.
word Godliness was usurped to supplant the Thing, a greater Improvement has
been made in the Trade of Knavery and Deceit, than had been ever known before
in any less pretending Times.

4. This must therefore be the Subject of our first and chief care, that we
abuse not our selves, as well as others, by taking That to be Holiness, which
is Hypocrisy; That we abstain in sincerity from the Evil it self, and not from
the Sole Appearance of it.

Our Second care must be, that in the course of our Abstinence, we be not only
Sincere, but Impartial too. It Is not enough that we abstain from This or That
single evil, to which perhaps we are not carried by any natural Inclination, or
have contracted Averseness to; For it follows in the Text, (...), abstain from
All evil.

Our Third care must be, that in the management of our Abstinence, we be wise
and prudent, as well as impartial and sincere. Which is not only a very
laudable, but (in one respect at least) a very needful Qualification. For we
know it is very needful that we be innocent as Doves; which we can very hardly
be, unless we be wise also as Serpents. I mean so wise as to abstain from those
Indifferent sorts of Good, which are Incentives, and Occasions, and
Introductories to evil. This we learn from the word (...), as here it is taken
by our Translators in its second signification. Abstain not only from all the
Sorts, but (over and above) from all the Appearances of evil. Not only from
the kinds, but Occasions of it. And these I intend shall be the Boundaries of
my following Discourse.

5. To show the Goodness and the Necessity of the first particular of the
Three, to wit, our Abstaining from what is evil, I cannot better take my Rise
then from this pertinent observation; That even Abstinence in it self is a
considerable Virtue, Sueton. l 2. c. 72, 73, 77.
although it be only from Things Indifferent, Vopisc. in vita Taciti Imper. p.
414.
although it be but from Things, whereof we are permitted a free Enjoyment.
Augustus Caesar in Suetonius, Xenophon in (...). lib. 5. p. 441.
the Emperor Tacitus in Vopiscus, Athenaeus l. 2 c. 6. etiam l. 1. c. 8.
the Phliasii in Xenophon, and the Abstemii in Athenaeus, have been deservedly
applauded for this one reason. Valor. Max. l. 4. c. 3.
And as the Rechabites were commended by God Himself, for not departing from
the Will of their Father Jonadab; so was it Jonadab's commendation, Jer. 35. 14.
that he commanded his Sons to abstain from Wine, not at all for being evil,
but rather dangerously good. Now that Abstinence is good, although it is not
from things which are simply Evil, seems to be evident even from This (if from
no other) reason, Hoc Sancti viri habent proprium* quod ut semper ab illicitis
long sint, a se plerumque etiam licita abscindunt. Greg. Mag. Dial. l. 4. c.
11.
that it enables and prepares us for the great Duty of Self-denial. It is a
practice of that Dominion we ought to have over our selves; a prudent Exercise
of the Victory which both our Reasons and our Wills should still obtain over
our Appetites. For by denying unto our selves some things lawful and allowed,
we may attain to a facility of abstaining from the things that are most
forbidden.

6. And this alone would be enough, in case there were not (as there are) any
other reasons, why The Church and State too praescribe the Abstinences of Lent.
For as the annual observation of Lent it self is (in the Judgment of S. Jerome)
of Apostical Institution; so are its Abstinences from Flesh (though a thing
Indifferent) no less enjoined in a Religious than in a Civil Consideration, if
together with the Quality and Condition of our Meals, we have regard unto the
Temper and Measure of them. Nay by the help of a Distinction, our single
Abstinence from the Quality may be in both considerations. For what Authority
does command upon a civil Account only, the People certainly must obey upon
the Account of their Religion, if they do regulate their Religion by the
express Word of God, which straightly charge them to submit to every
Ordinance of Man. (Meaning the Ordinances of Man, which are not opposite or
cross to the Laws of God.) To abstract our Abstinence from our obligedness to
obey, (and from the other great End which first I mentioned,) is to abstract at
the same instant the merit of virtue from our Abstinence. 1 Cor. 8. 8.
For Meat commends us not to God, (as says S. Paul to the Corinthians; and
every Creature of God is good, 1 Timothy 4. 4.
if received with Thanksgiving, (says He to Timothy:) And though the
preference of Fish before the Meat of the Shambles, is so far innocent, and
lawful, as it is left to our Christian Liberty; yea so far necessary, Sunt
deinde Media, quae quidem nec bona esse noscuntur, nec mala, possunt tamen
indifferenter and been pariter and male vel prohiberi, vel juberi, sed male
nullatenus in his a Subditis obediri. Bernard. in Epist. 7. ad Adam Monachum.
p. 1394.
and binding, as it is commanded by that Authority which God has commanded us
to obey; yet, abstracted from the Precept of such Authority, it may be
Wantonness in one, and in another, Superstition. For Meats are all of such
Indifference, if antecedently considered, and with the economy of the Gospel,
that as, if we 1 Cor. 8. 8.
eat Flesh, we are not the better, so if we eat none, we are not the worse. Nay
a man, by eating Fish, may make provision for the Flesh; especially when he
makes it to swim in Wine. He may by Both so fill his Belly, and so fulfill his
Appetite, Ex his sunt, jejunare, vigilare, legere, etc. Idem ibidem.
as that his Abstinence from Flesh may but conduce to his sensuality; and all
his Lenten entertainment prove but a sacrifice to his Lust. The most voluptuous
De Philoxeno Cytherio. Apicio, aliisque, consule Athenaeum, l. 1. c. 6.
Apolausticks, in the Account of Athenaeus, became infamous for nothing more,
than their passionate Doatages upon Fish. Nor could the very learned (...)
Anthippus Comicus apud Athenaeum, l. 9. c. 15. p. 404.
Cook, in the old Comoedian, provide the Amorous young men a more strong
Incentive. From whence it follows that to keep Lent, as it is a Time of
Mortification, is not so carefully to abstain from the Kind and Quality of our
Meals, as from the overgreat Richness and Fullness of them. So that the due
keeping of Lent, in point of eating and drinking, consists wholly or chiefly
in these two Things; to wit, our Abstinence from the kind, which is forbid by
Man's Law; and our Abstinence from the measure, which is forbidden also by
God's. Each of These is a Duty, however different they are in degree of Merit.
For that the later is the greatest, and most important, may appear by the great
Difference betwixt the reasons of the goodness which lies in Both. For our
Abstinence from Flesh, is only good because commanded; whereas our Abstinence
from evil, is only commanded because it is good. There the goodness is
accidental, but here it is natural. There it is nothing but the Consequent, here
the Cause of the Commandment. There it is capable of ceasing by Dispensations
even from Men; whereas here the matter of it is indispensable even by God.

7. This must therefore be our first and our greatest Care, that we abstain
from those things that are simply evil; and this in a double Opposition to two
sorts of men, who divide a great part of the world between them; such as are
Hypocrites on the Right hand, and Antihypocrites on the Left.

Touching the former of the two I shall say the less, the more I have spoken of
them before, in my Introduction. Adding only that They abstain from the
Appearance of evil, as broken Tradesmen from the semblance or perfect Beggary.
(...). Gregor. Nyssen. de Profess. Christ.
The nearer they are to the State of Bankrupts, they have their Artifices and
Tricks whereby to seem so much the Richer. Or as Antipater had his outside all
clad in Black, not because (as he pretended) it was the old Macedonian habit,
but to conceal his whole Inside, as lined with Purple. We must not therefore
follow Them, who cry aloud against the Sins they embrace in silence, and
abstain in such wise from all Appearance of evil, as to abstain from no evil
but in Appearance. We must not so apprehend or mistake the Text, as if 'twere
meant by S. Paul for an Exhortative to Hypocrisy; not so properly to abstain
from the Evil it self, as from the show, and shadow of it. No, the Text is to
be held by a safer Handle; and our Argument is to run thus, a minori ad majus.
If it is our Duty to abstain from all Appearance of Evil, how much more is it
our Duty, to abstain from all evil? The former Abstinence is a Virtue,
whenever this later does either attend, or go before it; whereas for want of
this later, the former Abstinence is a Sin.

8. Yet not so great a Sin as Theirs, who in avoidance of Hypocrisy, do boldly
rush into the greater, and worse extreme. Who being ashamed of seeming piously
and religiously addicted, (as a thing not becoming their Youth, or Quality,)
Isa. 3. 9.
do therefore proclaim their Sin as Sodom, 2 Samuel 16. 22.
and commit it (with Absolon) on the House Top. Not only abstaining from all
that is good, but from all Appearance of it. As if to be thought a godly man,
were the greatest unhappiness in the World, and therefore to be shunned with the
greatest Care. I shall exemplify what I say but in Three particulars. First,
how many may we observe who easily enter into Duels, (and are ashamed not to do
so) with such as speak to the Dishonor of a most despicable Mistress, and yet
will stand unconcerned, when more is done to the Reproach of their Master
Christ? Men so stout, that they dare be damned; and yet so eminent for their
cowardice, that they dare not be patient of putting up the least wrong. Men of
such poor and such sordid Spirits, as to dread the very thoughts and the words
of Men, however senseless of the hatred and wrath of God. Men of such strange
Pusillanimity, that they dare not endure the Contempt of this World, which God
himself is contemned by, and yet is silent. A downright speculative Atheist,
who denies and derides the God that made him, or a practical Atheist who dares
do both in his Conversation, may walk the streets very securely without a
weapon; has never a challenge sent to him for having affronted the Lord of
Glory; who yet for any the least affront which he should dare to have done to
an handsome Idol, had straight been summoned into the Field, there to make
satisfaction in Tears of Blood. Again, how many in our Protestant Reformed
World, do seem to take as great a Pride, and make as open a Profession of being
eminent Apolausticks, as that voluptuous sort of Heathens, Eubulus in Amalthaea
introducit Herculem Delitlarum vituperatorem. v. Is. Causab. in Athen. l. 2. c.
23.
whom Eubulus the Greek Comoedian does expose upon the Stage for their learned
Surfeits? who laugh at Abstinence as a Foolery; and look on all Self denial as
arrant Madness. (A thing proceeding from nothing better than the distempered
Hypochondres.) Who having learned the deep Science of Eating well, and being
able to make a Treatment as becomes Critics in Sensuality, are apt to put a
greater value both on Themselves, and their Achievement, than if they had
taken the Town of Troy.

Euripid. in Andromacha Menelaum introducit sic loquentem.
(...). Lastly, how many Antihypocrites, although Professors of Christianity,
do vye with Ovid, and Messalina, the Emperor Proculus, and the rest of that
heathen World, Cornelius Agrippa de vanit. scient. cap. 63.
(for the recording of whose effronteries Cornelius Agrippa is to be blamed,)
in that they do not only disclose the real Enormities which they have done,
but also boast of more Debauches, than they ever had the appetite, or possibly
the strength to be guilty of? Now he who so far hates hypocrisy, (which is a
damnable abstaining from appearance only all of Evil,) as to glory in his
Impieties, and by consequence to abstain from the very appearance also of good,
(whereby he does not only displease, but despise his Maker,) is as one flying
from a Lion, when behold a Bear meets him; or as one leaning upon the Wall, and
a Serpent bites him. (Amos 5. 19.) He is as one fallen, out of a Fever into a
Fire; and to be reckoned, of the two, the more horrid Devil.

9. In opposition to the first of the two Extremes, we must make our first step
to raise us Thus unto a Second. If Abstinence is so noble and so necessary a
Duty, though from Those very things which are but dangerously Good, what then
is Abstinence from the objects which are damnably Evil? To keep our selves far
enough from Such, we must carefully set before us King David's Method; when
being to qualify himself for an Approach to God's Altar, he did not say he
would wash his Face, but his Hands in Innocence. Besides it ought to be
considered that all the Commandments, saving two, having been negatively
proposed, imply the Bottom of all our Duties to lie in our Abstinence from
evil. As being That, without which, even all our good Deeds will be done in
vain; yea and the best of all our Works will be but handsome Abominations. For
the highest and the most positive of all our Duties, are comprehended by S.
Paul under these three Heads, our living soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present World, Tit. 2. 12. But it is absolutely impossible that we should
ever live soberly, unless by abstaining from all Excess; that we should ever
live righteously, unless by abstaining from all Injustice; that we should ever
live godly, unless by abstaining from all Profaneness. It is a vain thing for
any, to think of loving and serving God, who does not first of all cease to
injure his Neighbor and Himself too. Virtus est, vitium fugere; The very first
of all Virtues is a man's Abstinence from Vice; and sapientia prima est,
Stultitia caruisse. -- The fear of the Lord, That is wisdom, and to depart from
evil is understanding. Job. 28. 28.

10. But however this is necessary, it is not enough, since we are far from
being sure that this our Abstinence is sincere, unless by its being impartial
too. For some of the worst of mankind may still abstain from some evils,
although it be but by the means of some occasional Averseness, and possibly too
for want of a natural Inclination. It Is very far from being enough, that we
have Tolerance in one kind, or Continence in another, which in Aristotle's
Judgment are but a couple of Semivertues, (and yet 'twere well if most
Christians would now attain to so good a Pitch;) no, nor is it quite enough
that we have Temperance in them Both, however This is a complete and a perfect
virtue. For this is only to abstain from those grosser Evils, which do affect
either the Touch or the Taste with Pleasure. That is to say, with such Pleasure,
as is aequally common to Men with Brutes. No, when our Parents were first
commanded to abstain from That Tree, which was enclosed by God's Precept in the
midst of the Garden, they were implicitly commanded to abstain from all evil.
In as much as all the Branches of Sin and Wickedness, which from that time to
this have defiled our Nature, do owe their cursed Derivation to that one Stock.
And by consequence it concerns us to advance a step farther; to plead and pant
after, and contend for such an Abstinence, as is not only from This or That,
(for then the very worst of us might soon be Christians good enough,) but from
All sorts of evil without exception; and so to comply with our Apostle in his
important monosyllable, by taking the object of our Abstinence with its
unlimited universality. For (that we may pass from the first to the second
Particular in the Text) it is (...) --
Abstain from All evil.


11. I say from All, for these obvious, but useful Reasons, which I shall not
only propose, but humbly submit to consideration. First, because He who is
indulgent to any one sort of Evil, cannot say that there is one from which he
does virtuously abstain; nor is he certain what duration his partial Abstinence
will be of. It being so easy for him to fall from one wickedness to another,
that wheresoever the cunning Serpent gets in his Head, he draws his whole Body
in with the greater Ease. As if the contagion that is in Vice were in
proportion to the Links in the Chain of Virtue, our Indulgency to one is apt to
draw the rest after. Vvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva.
One rotten Action does as gladly infect another, as one putrid Grape does
communicate its venom to all the Cluster. And the reason is very clear, why He
who gives himself the Liberty to feed intemperately on one Sin, is ipso facto
become obnoxious unto the Surfeiting upon all; because he has not any Principle
or Power within him, by force of which he can be sure to abstain from any. And
the reason of that reason is just as clear too. For the same want of fear to
offend his Maker, the same despite offered to Grace, and the same Callousness
of Conscience, which either allows or betrays him to any one wilful Sin,
leaves him destitute and exposed to the Power of All. So that if, by not
committing, he seems at any time to abstain from this or that sort of Vice,
it is not his Virtue, but his Luck. And if any thing is to be thanked, (besides
the restraining Mercy of God, who does often set his Hook into the Wicked man's
Nostrils,) he may thank his Stars for it; at least his Company, or his Custom,
or the Laws of the Country wherein he lives, or at least the good hap of his
Constitution, as not sufficing him for some Sins, or not inclining him to
others; and many times so strongly biased to darling obliquities on the left
hand, as to be carried by the same Bias from other obliquities on the right.
There being some sorts of evil so very opposite unto each other, (and
inconsistent at the same instant,) that to abstain from one Extreme, is not
laudable in a Professor who is indulgent unto the other. It Is not thank-worthy
in a Niggard, not to be guilty of Prodigality. Nor is it the Merit, but the
necessity of an extremely great Coward, if he is not found guilty of too much
Rashness. It being a sad kind of Virtue which a Man owes only to Vice; as when
he abstains from any one of two contrary evils, because he cannot commit them
Both.

12. Again, (...), Abstain from All evil, because the wilful Transgression of
any one of God's Commandments, makes us as liable to Judgment, (though not to
so many degrees of Torment) as if we had broken every one. For what else can be
the meaning of that saying in S. James, Jam. 2. 10.
that if a man keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of
all? He (for example) who abstains not from the Intemperance of the Tongue,
(That enormous fleshly lust which is so regnant in these our days,) may be said
to offend in one sole Point of Christianity; yet (like a little Colloquintida
in a whole Pot of Broth) That offending in one Point sheds such an Influence
upon others, as to invalidate and evacuate his whole Religion. Jam. 1. 26. The
reason of which is very evident, in that the same God that says, Thou shall
not steal, or commit Adultery, does also say at the same Time, in the same
Decalogue, and by the very same Authority, Thou shall not take the Name of thy
God in vain, nor bear false Witness against thy Neighbor. And the Breach of
these Precepts, when it is wilful or habitual, is as damnable in its nature as
the Transgression of the former, and all the rest. For as the whole Nature of
Treason against the Majesty of the King, does lie as really in the compassing
or contriving of his Death, as in all the most bloody and ouvert Acts that can
be named; and any one of those Treasons is as capital as a Thousand; so the
whole Nature of Rebellion against the Majesty of God, does lie as much in the
wilful Breach of any one of his Commands, as in all together; and Damnation is
the wages, as well of that one, as of all the rest. And as when a man is hanged
for committing Treason, it is cold comfort to him, that he is hanged but for
one Crime, and not for many; so 'twill but little, if at all, lessen the misery
of the Damned, that they were damned only for Drunkenness, Schism, or
Haeresie, or for another such habitual and mortal sin, not for Murder, or
Adultery, which were not laid unto their charge; or rather for breaking the
Fifth Commandment, than for transgressing the other Nine. And therefore since
Impenitence is indispensably destructive, (though I know there is a greater and
a lesser Damnation,) be it but in one, or in many evils, it must concern us to
abstain with impartiality even from All.

13. Again (...), Abstain from All Evil; as well from the least, as from the
greatest; because our very least Sins do gather a Greatness to themselves, from
the greatness of the Object we Sin against, and from the Greatness of the Means
against which we Sin. (I mean our Prayers, and our Sacraments, and the
frequency of our Sermons, by which whoever is not mended, is accidentally made
worse.) And because the least Sins are apt to lead into the greatest. Besides,
Siracides said wisely (in this sense also,) He that despises small things
shall perish by little and little. Ecclus. 19. 1. The least Sins therefore
cannot possibly be so light, as that they may safely be slighted by us; because
although what is venial can never lose its Distinction from what is mortal, yet
it is worthily to be feared that a man may Sin mortally, by pleasing himself in
his venial Sins; and by loving them more than the will of God. Nor are we
drowned with more comfort, by the Sea's stealing in through little crevices
into our Ship, than by our Ship's being suddenly and at once cast into the Sea.
Abstain we therefore even from all, the most diminutive Peccadillos, (as men of
Latitudes in Practice do love to call them,) not from Evil only in Deed, but
in Word, and Thought too. For if Pythagoras had rather a man should throw out a
(...). Pythag. Matthew. 12. 36.
Stone, than a word or two rashly and at a venture; yea, if of every idle word
Men shall give an account in the day of Judgment, how much more of every evil
one, when falseness and rancour are cleaving to it? And we read that evil
Thoughts which proceed out of the Heart are especially the things that defile
the Man. Matthew. 15. 18, 19, 20. A Truth discernable, as by other, so by this
reason also, That many customary Sinners may be forcibly restrained from their
evil Actions, who yet can never be restrained from their evil Thoughts too. For
as Crows from Carrion are not forced to abstain by Satiety it self, but still
abide upon the Place, as if they could never fill their Eyes, though they have
their Bellies; so customary Sinners, when Age or Sickness has made them
innocent as to their Actions, do love to think over the Sins they have not
vigor enough to act. They can no more cease from Sin which Custom has riveted
in their Souls, than Flies inured to the Shambles are able to abstain from the
smell of Meat. Now whether the Evil of our Thoughts be of Wilfulness, or
Infirmity, we are to exercise our selves in abstaining from it. For we must
actually abstain from all wilful evil; and we must studiously abstain from all
the evil of Infirmity, so as to hate, and to deplore, and to strive against it.
This I say for our Humiliation; But I add for our Comfort too, that so long as
we are striving with the utmost of our Ablility against the stream of human
Frailties, we are not liable to Wrath, in case the violence of the Torrent
prevail against us. Prevail against us (I mean,) so as in spite of all our
striving to have some residence, though not habitually to reign in our mortal
Bodies. For when we strive against That from which we cannot so abstain, as to
be every way sinless, Then we are reckoned to abstain, so far forth as to be
sincere. And though a Sinlesness is not, yet is a singleness or sincerity the
indispensable Requisite of a Christian. And in this sense at least we must
abstain from all evil; as well from the least, as from the greatest.

14. Lastly, (...), Abstain from all evil, although it shall not at all be
simply, but accidentally such. Many hundreds of things there are, however
reducible unto four or five Heads, which are not absolutely Evil, but yet are
evil ex accidenti. And what is evil but accidentally, is simply Good. And so
there are several good things, which though absolutely, and simply, and
antecedently such, yet from The same, being considered in some Relations and
Respects, it is a Christian man's Duty very carefully to abstain. And in
consequence of This, Abstain from every good thing, which thy Conscience does
condemn; and from every good thing, which thy Conscience doubts of; and from
every good thing, by which thy Brother is made to stumble, and to fall headlong
into Sin; and from every good thing which is comparatively evil, by being
heedlesly preferred to what is very much better; and from every good Thing,
which strongly administers an Occasion, and a Temptation unto evil. I say
abstain from the first sort, because though there is nothing unclean in it
self, (of all those Meats which are food for men,) yet to him that esteems
any thing to be unclean, to Him (in that Error) it is unclean. Romans 14. 14.
And abstain from the second sort, because he that doubts is damned if he eat,
in that he eats not of Faith, for whatsoever is not of Faith is Sin. Romans 14.
23. And abstain from the third sort, because though every kind of edable is
simply Pure, (and so may lawfully be eaten,) yet it is evil for that man who
eats with offense. And therefore if thou have Faith, and understandest thy
Christian Liberty, make a private use of it betwixt God and thy self. For happy
is He who condemns not himself in that thing which he allows. Romans 14. 20,
21, 22. Again, Abstain from the fourth sort, because God has declared He will
have Mercy rather than Sacrifice, Mat. 9. 13. And the saving of a Sheep on the
Sabbath Day, rather than the resting from bodily labor. (Mat. 12. 11.) Hos. 6.
6.
and rather a being reconciled to an injured Brother, than bringing a Gift unto
the Altar, (Mat. 5. 23. 24. Last of all let us abstain from the fifth sort of
Objects, which are simply good enough, but accidentally evil, because of the
Precept of our Apostle in the words of my Text; which, though it may seem to be
a rigorous, is yet a merciful Command. For it is easier, whilst we are
innocent, to abstain from the guilt of any one act of Sin, than having yielded
unto one, to forbear another. Abstinence from evil is nothing else but an Act
of Fasting. And certainly He who cannot fast from the Approaches of Impiety,
will much less fast from the Presence of it. If we cannot well abstain from
conversing with the Occasions, how much less from the Act of a pleasant evil?
or if not from the Act, how much less from the Habit? Aegrius ejicitur, quam
non admittitur Hostis. It Is very much easier not to admit, than to drive out an
Enemy. Very much easier to prevent, than to cure a Leprosy. Which our Apostle
well considering, was not only of the Opinion, but made it the Rule of his
Practice also, (in his whole Ninth Chapter of the First Epistle to the
Corinthians,) that to keep far enough off from doing any thing unlawful, he
was to abstain from many things which were lawful too. Nor does he content
himself here to say, Abstain from all Habits and Acts of Evil, but from all
Appearance of it. And so I am fallen upon the means whereby our Abstinence may be
completed, the last Particular in the Division.

(...), etc.
Abstain from all Appearance of Evil.
15. And to the end that we may do so, in every sense and acception the word
will bear, let the Caveat be extended to these two Heads. First of all to those
things, which, though not evil in themselves, yet to others, or to us, do
appear to be so; Next to things, which, though not sinful, (no not so much as
in appearance,) do put upon us a kind of Bias, and Propensity to Sin. To the
former I shall refer, whatsoever Things are lawful, but yet uncomly, or
inexpedient. I shall refer unto the later, whatsoever Things are lawful, but
of dangerous consequence; not formally evil, but grossly evil in the effect.

16. And first abstain from those things, which if not evil in themselves, yet
to others, or to us, do appear to be so; and by consequence though they are
lawful, considered simply in their Natures, yet in certain conjunctures they
cannot lawfully be done. As (for example) it is 1 Cor. 8. 4. 8.
lawful to eat of things, which either are or have been offered in Sacrifice
unto Idols; which yet we Ver. 9.
cannot eat lawfully, if in the Presence of a Brother who has either a
condemning or doubting Conscience. We must beware that this our Liberty become
not a Stumbling Block to them that are weak. And therefore He that had
knowledge (in the Times of the Apostle,) was not in reason to sit at meat in
the Idol's Temple, Ver. 10.
for fear that he who had none should be imboldned to eat of things offered
unto Idols, even against his over weak and erroneous Conscience. So that
although not to abstain for another man's sake, when we need not for our own,
cannot be said to be a Sin through any unlawfulness in the Object indulged to;
yet it is a Breach of that Rule which was set by S. Paul for all to walk by,
That no man put a Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall, in his brother's
way. Romans 14. 13. (Which Rule cannot extend to those things Indifferent, which
being such but antecedently, are consequentially Necessary, in as much as they
are under the Obligation of a Command, and a Command from That Authority which
God has commanded us to obey. And this Parenthesis being premised for the
preventing of Mistakes, I proceed to give an Instance of the Case but now
mentioned. For) Thus the Liberty to fly, for the escaping of a shameful and
painful Death, though very lawful as to its nature, may be unlawful, as to
its use; in regard of many Circumstances wherewith the Case may be apparelled.
For first (however it is lawful,) it may be highly inexpedient, as to the
scandal it may give to our weaker Brethren; (concerning which I have spoken
enough already;) And next, (however it is lawful,) it may be scandalously
indecent, as to the Gravity of a man's Age, and the Dignity of his Calling. In
each of which cases, That which is lawful in it self, is notwithstanding not
allowable in the Circumstances proposed; because inconsistent with two main
Virtues; to wit, with Charity in the first Instance, and with Prudence in the
second. An Example we have of Both in the renowned Eleazer, (2 Macc. 6.) Who
being sentenced to the Torments for refusing to eat of unlawful Meats,
Copiosius haec Narratio habenda est apud Josephum, in Libello cui Titulus,
(...).
would not basely save his life, no not by eating such Meat as was lawful for
him. And for this his Resolution he gave two reasons. First, he argued from the
Indecency, and again from the Danger of it. 'Twould be indecent to Himself, and
as dangerous to others; who straight would follow his Example, as well of
Cowardice, as of Courage, by whichsoever of the two he should chance to lead
them. First, he would not bring flesh of his own Provision, 2 Macc. 6. a v. 18.
ad. v. 31.
and make as if he did eat of what was commanded by the King, (as his old
Friends at Court would fain have had him, v. 21.) because he was told by his
Discretion, that 'twas not suitable to the honor of his reverend Gray-head; (v.
23.) and He would show himself such as his Age required, (v. 27.) Again, He
would not save his Life by such an appearance of Impiety, as the eating of what
was lawful in lieu of what was unlawful, because he was prompted by his
Charity, not to endanger many young Persons their being betrayed by that
Artifice, to think that old Eleazer, when he was Fourscore years and Ten, had
at last gone away to a strange Religion. (v. 24, 25. Whereas 'twas very fit for
Him, who was one of the Principal of the Scribes, (v. 18.) to leave a notable
Example of Sincerity and Courage, and of Daringness to die for the Laws of God.
(v. 28. and 31. Thus there are very many things, which though lawful to us as
Christians, are yet unseemly for us as Men; and do dishonor our Vocation, even
then when they do not defile our Conscience. For how many Trades are there,
very lawful in themselves, which yet by us of the Clergy cannot lawfully be
driven? And therefore Abstinence from These is to be reckoned as a Duty, at
least to our Quality, and our Rank, if not precisely to our Religion. Abstain
we therefore (as much as may be) from all that carries any appearance, or show
of Evil; And as from all that is Expedient, unless it appears to be lawful
too; so from all that is lawful, but not expedient.

17. Again, Sed sagitare magis simulacra and pabula Amoris, Atque alib studeat
animi traducere motus. Lucret. l. 4. de Remedio Amoris.
Abstain from those things, which though not evil in themselves, are yet
Incentives, or Occasions, or Introductories to evil; and however not formally,
yet effectively such. For as it is not only said, Thou shall not steal, but
over and above Thou shall not covet; so the way not to covet, Exodus 20. 17.
is not to see, not to taste, not to touch such an Object, as is naturally apt
to inchant the Senses. Mat. 5. 28.
Our Savior tells us of Adultery in the Heart. And the Apostle S. Peter, 2
Pet. 2. 14.
of Adultery in the Eye. And Moses pressing his Congregation to an effectual
Abstinence from the Evil, Number. 16. 26.
which Corah and others had newly done, said, Depart from the Tents of these
wicked men, and Touch nothing of theirs. Depart from all suspected Persons, and
Places too. For he that touches Pitch shall be defiled therewith. Ecclus. 13.
1.
And Chapter 3. v. 26.
he that loves danger shall perish in it. Whatsoever is born of the Flesh is
Flesh; (Joh. 3. 6.) Nor does the Wax with more Aptness take an Impression from
the Seal, than the Flesh from the Bait of an ill Affection. Insomuch that some
parts of the holy Scripture were (in the Times of Cassianus) not entrusted to
the Ears of the younger Christians, Cassian. lib. 19. Collat.. 16.
Ne noxiae Titillationis stimulus excitaretur. He that hopes to be Safe whilst
he converseth with Incentives to any Sin, is thought by Solomon as Irrational,
as if he should walk on hot Coals, and hope his feet will not be burnt; or take
fire into his Bosom, in a confidence that it will not consume his cloths. Prove.
7. 27, 28. Nay Cum foemina semper esse, and non cognoscere foeminam, nonne plus
est quam mortuum suscitare? Quod minus est non potes, and quod majus est vis
credam tibi? D. Bernard. Super Cantica Sermon. 65. p. 760.
S. Bernard was of opinion, That to be conversant with a Woman, and yet be
innocent in converse, is a difficulter work than to raise the Dead. And then
the Hebrew Wise men could not be righteous overmuch, when they prohibited all
discourse betwixt Man and Woman, (excepting only That of an Husband with a
Wife,) both in regard of the Scandal, and Danger of it; the possible scandal
unto others, and actual Danger unto Themselves.

18. How very nearly it does concern even the gravest, and the most safe, to
abstain from all Occasions and Opportunities of evil, may be collected from the
Examples both of Nec res est dubia quam narro: quia pene tanti in ea testes
sunt, quanti ejusdem loci Habitatores. Quandam Sanctimonialem secum permisit
habitare, certus de sua ejusque continentia, Andreas Fundanae Civitatis
Episcopus. Mox de suo habitaculo non solum eandem Dei Famulam, sed omnem quoque
foeminam illine expulit. Greg. Mag. Dialog. l. 3. c. 7. fol. 29.
Andreas Bishop of Fundo, and of the exemplary Martinian, a famous Hermit.
Whereof the former was fain to banish an holy Matron out of his House, because
he found he could not safely enjoy her sight, nor be protected by her
Innocence, from the great Hazard of his own. The Laur. Surius T. 1. Die 13.
Febr. -- Misit Angelos Deus ad Tutelam cultumque Generis Humani. -- Illos cum
hominibus commorantes Diabolus paulatim ad vitia pel lexit, and mulierum
congressibus inquinavit. Tum in Coelum ob Peccata non recepti ceciderunt in
Terram. Sic eos Diabolus (...) ex Angelis Dei, suos fecit satellites ac
Ministros. Lact. l. 2. c. 15. p. 65.
Later finding he could not otherwise be exempted from the Occasions and Baits
of Sin, threw Himself first into the Fire, for the refining of his Desires; and
after That into the Water, whereby to drown them. Nay as if the holy Angels
were not fit to be entrusted with such Temptations, not only Philo and
Josephus, but diverse Fathers of the Church, (Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Lactantius,) have understood by the Sons of God who could not
innocently gaze upon the Daughters of men, (Genesis 6. 2.) Not the Potentates of
the Earth, but even the Angels of Heaven. Now though I think with Theodoret,
and most of the ancient Commentators, that the Fathers were in an Error who so
expounded; (...). Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3. p. 450. (...). Just. Mar. Apol 1. p.
44.
yet it assures us of their Opinion, how much Temptations are to be shunned, and
how carefully we should fly the Occasions of them. Igni cum Foeno non been
convenit, said Martinian to a Beauty whom he had pulled out of the Sea, but
would not trust himself with when she came to Land. But more remarkable were
the words of the pious Presbyter Ex tempore Ordinationis acceptae Presbyteram
suam ut sororem diligens, sed quasi Hostem cavens, ad se propius accedere
nunquam sinebat -- Et ab ea sibi communionem funditus Familiaritatis
absciderat. etc. Greg. Mag. Dial. l. 4. c. 11. fol. 37.
Vrsinus, when a good Woman came to help him as he was giving up the Ghost,
(one whom he loved too as a Sister, but yet avoided as an Enemy,) Recede a me
Mulier, adhuc vivit Igniculus, Paleam toll. As if he feared that That
Stricture or Spark of life remaining in him, might have grown into a Flame at
the sight of Chaff.

19. Now since it cannot but be inferred from the whole Tenor of my Discourse,
That the way to become able to abstain from all evil, is to abstain from all
approach and appearance of it, from all that does lead and allure us to it,
from all that has a Tendency and Bias toward it; Nothing remains but that we
labor, in every Instance of Temptation and Ghostly danger, (if we are willing
to use the means whereby our Abstinence may be completed,) to frustrate the
Malice of the Devil, to baffle the Arguments of the Flesh, and to tread under
our feet an insulting World, even by carrying our selves wisely in all our
ways, and by keeping constant watch over all our Walkings; and that we never
suffer our selves, either by stratagem, or by force, to be diverted or drawn
aside from this saving Method, until our well-meant Endeavors shall all expire
into perfection; our Contendings with the Flesh, into Triumphs over it; our
rigid Abstinences from Evil, into the ravishing Enjoyments of all that is Good;
our Temporary Lent, into an Everlasting Jubilee; our short Self-denials, into
the Pleasures of Aeternity; our Days of Mourning and Mortification, into
endless Fruitions of Bliss and Glory.

Which thou, O God, of thy Mercy vouchsafe unto us, for the Glory of thy Name,
and for the Worthiness of thy Son; To whom, with thee, O Father, in the Unity
of the Spirit, be all Honor and Glory both now and forever. Amen.

OF ABSTAINING IN GENERAL FROM Fleshly Lusts.
1 PET. 2. 11. Dearly Beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers, and Pilgrims,
abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war against your Soul. Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as
evil Doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God
in the day of Visitation.
1. SAint Peter, as a good Builder, (a Spiritual Workman who needed not to be
ashamed,) having prudently laid the first Foundation of his Discourse in the
former Chapter, to wit, the Holy Spirit of God efficaciously working by his
word; And having erected thereupon the three grand Pillars of Christianity,
Faith, Hope, and Charity; does straight proceed in this Chapter to superstruct
on those Pillars by way of general Exhortation. Which though particularly
directed unto the Christians of the Dispersion in several Provinces of Asia,
yet 'twas equally intended, and is as applicable to Us too, on whom the ends of
the World are come. Now his general Exhortation is briefly This. First of all,
that we lay aside all kind of Malice, and Hypocrisy, and the malignity of the
Tongue. (v. 1.) Secondly, That as Infants do suck the nourishment of their
Bodies from the same Mother's Breast from whom they had newly received their
Being; so also We, being regenerate by the good word of God, and thereby
reputed as newborn Babes, should from the same word of God, suck out a
nourishment for our Souls, and thereby grow unto perfection. (v. 2.) This word
as he calls by the name of milk, so he commends it to our Palats, as sweet, and
wholesome, (v. 3.) After which he goes on with his Exhortation, but steps aside
from his Metaphor, and addresseth himself to a new scheme of Rhetoric. Calling
Christ a Living-Stone, (v. 4.) and the Members of Christ a Spiritual House, (v.
5.) and proving Both out of Esa, (v. 6.) Next he shows the opposition betwixt
the Obedient, and the Rebellious; representing Jesus Christ as a support unto
the former, but to the later a Stone of stumbling, and a Rock of offense. (v.
7, 8.) Then, having said how God had taken us from out the men of this world,
and made us a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar
People, a People called out of darkness, into his mavelous light, (v. 9, 10.)
He here proceeds to exhort us, with somewhat a greater degree of warmth, that
we behave our selves suitably to our Vocation.

Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers, and Pilgrims, abstain, etc.

2. A very pertinent Exhortation to all the Duties of the Lent; to Christian
Purity, and Strictness, and to Abstinence from Enormities of every kind.
Abstain from Fleshly Lusts, that is, (as S. Paul does explain S. Peter,) from
Rioting and Drunkenness, from Chambering and Wantonness, from Strife and Envy,
from Malcontentedness and Sedition, from Revengefulness and Rebellion, from
Schism and Haeresie. For that These are all equally the Lusts of the Flesh, or
the Fleshly Lusts, I shall necessarily show in the proper Places of my
Discourse. The Exhortation (taken in gross) does consist of two Parts. The
material part of it is expressed in these words, [Abstain from Fleshly Lusts,
and have your Conversation honest,] The formal part of it in these, [Dearly
beloved, I beseech you.] Thus we see the Exhortation is ushered in with an
Entreaty, and This with such a Compellation, as shows an Earnestness of
Affection in him that speaks. His Exhortation is so important, so persuasive
his Entreaty, and so meltingly obliging his Compellation, that hardly any thing
can be added to give an energy or weight to S. Peter's Preaching. Though he
desires no more of them, than to have mercy upon themselves, yet he begs for it
as heartily, as if he were begging for his Life. Dearly beloved, I beseech you,
I come unto you as a Petitioner, that ye will not be so transported out of your
Interest and your Wits, as madly to ruin your selves for ever. I make it my
humble Supplication, that ye will rather live happy to all Eternity. If there
is any thing in the World with which you are willing to oblige me, do not
wilfully run upon Swords and Halberts; Isa. 33. 14.
Seek not to dwell with devouring Fire; Be not so foolish as to catch at
everlasting Burnings; But be of an honest Conversation, and abstain from
Fleshly Lusts which war against the Soul.

Thus S. Peter's Exhortation is very Affectionate and Earnest. And taking our
selves to be the Persons to whom the Exhortative does belong, We have it
enforced upon our hearts by Five strong Arguments or Motives. All the worthier
of our Attention, because arising out of the Text.

The First Argument is taken from the Condition of the Persons, to whom the
earnest Exhortation is here directed. We are Citizens of Heaven, and but
Strangers upon Earth, and therefore we must live as becomes Strangers. Nor are
we Strangers only, but Pilgrims. Not only (...), out of our own Country, but
withal (...), that is, Travelers in a strange one. For this I take to be the
difference between these Two, (...), Strangers, and (...), Pilgrims, That
though they are Both out of their Country, yet the former have an Abode, but
the later none. Those have some kind of Rest, but These are always in a Journey.
Those inhabit a foreign Country, whilst These are only passing through it. And
seeing this is our Condition, that we relate to this World, not as Strangers
only, but Passengers, Men whose Houses are but as Inns, and whose Life is but
a Pilgrimage, it concerns us to walk as becomes Pilgrims; that is, to manage
our Conversation with so much wariness and fear, as not to lie open to just
Reproof.

The Second Argument is taken from the Quality of the Things, in opposition to
which our Apostle's Exhortation is here contrived. These are (...), such
Fleshly Lusts, as are very pleasant Flatterers, but no true Friends. For though
they are fawning upon the Flesh, yet they are not at all the less, but the
greater Enemies to the Spirit. And how desirable soever they may appear unto
the Body, yet (...), they are implacably, though invisibly, ever warring
against the Soul.

The Third Argument is taken from the Consideration of our Credit, with the
Enemies of Christ amongst whom we live. Our Conversation is to be honest,
(...), among the Gentiles. And that for this reason, (...), That however they
do maliciously, they may not deservedly speak against us. Whereas in case we
live dishonestly, and indulgently to our Lusts, we shall help them to excuse,
if not to justify their Malignities against our Persons, and our Profession:
And they will have a just ground whereupon to defame us as Evildoers.

The Fourth Argument is taken from the Consideration of our Enemies Welfare; To
wit, their present Conversion, and future Safety. In whose sight if we converse
as becomes Christ's Servants, by our abstaining from Fleshly Lusts, and having
an honest Conversation, (...) says the Text, They then will look upon us with
reverence, and judge of our Principles by our good Works. We shall not only
stop their Mouths, but weaken the violence of their Hands, and help to mollify
their Hearts, and become happily instrumental to the salvation of their Souls.

The Fifth Argument is taken from the Glory of God and its great Advancement.
We must endeavor so to live, as to adorn the Doctrine of Jesus Christ. Our
Conversation must be such, as becomes the Gospel. Our way of Walking must be
exemplary, and our Behavior must be exact, that Christ's Religion being
credited, his Kingdom also may be enlarged, whilst by the Allective of our
Example men will be won from their corruptions, and show forth the Praises of
our God, who has called us out of darkness into his mavelous light. And
this, as it is the last, so it is the best and chiefest Argument for our punctual
abstaining from Fleshly Lusts, and having an honest Conversation, (...), That
Men (by seeing our good works) may not glorify Us, but (...), may glorify God
in the Day of Visitation.

3. These are all S. Peter's Arguments. Nor have I stepped either beyond or
beside the Text for the finding of them. And for the pressing of the Duty He
here injoyns, never were there more or better Arguments in the world, by any
Penman contrived into fewer Words. Before I insist upon any Argument whereby
to enforce the Exhortation, I must first of all explain the Exhortation it
self, First observing the importance of Fleshly Lusts, and then what is meant
by abstaining from them.

In order to the First, two Things are to be known. How we ought to understand
the moral use of the word Flesh, (especially as it is taken in Several parts of
the New Testament,) and what is meant by the Lustings of it.

By the word Flesh in the New Testament is very commonly meant the Appetite.
This is the seat of our Affections, the subject matter of Vice and Virtue. Our
Affections are ever conversant in pursuing, or eschewing, in enjoying, or in
suffering their several Objects. Their Objects in the general are Good, or
Evil. And both are considered in Themselves, or in relation to the
Circumstances wherewith they happen to be clothed. Good considered in it self
is at once both the Object and Cause of Love. But in relation to its
Circumstances, it is productive of other Passions. For, if present, it causes
Joy; and if absent, it breeds Desire. Again, the Good which is Absent is either
attainable, or it is not. If the former, it causes Hope; and if the later, it
breeds Despair. In like manner an evil Object is to be taken in its absolute,
or in its relative Consideration. In the former it is productive of simple
Hatred; but in the later it produces either Sorrow, or Aversation. The First,
if it is present; and if absent, then the Second. Again, the evil that is
absent is either avoidable, or it is not. If the former, it causes Boldness:
but if the later, it causes Fear. Thus we briefly see the Rivulets of all our
Passions, or Affections, together with the Fountain from whence they flow. Now
so many of our Affections as are reducible to Desire, may be called not
improperly our several Lusts. Things so necessary, and natural, and indifferent
in themselves, that being abstractively, and precisely, and antecedently
considered, they are equally in an aptitude of becoming both the matter of
Vice, and Virtue. But when extravagant, as to the Object, or exorbitant, as to
the Measure; Then they are, and are justly called, either the Lusts of the
Flesh, or the Fleshly Lusts.

4. Now it is observable in the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament,
that Lust is many times Synonymous both with Avarice, and Desire. The Greek
(...), and the Latin concupiscere, does equally Signify them all. And thence
it is that all Three have been See Deuteronomy. 14. 26. compared with Deuteronomy. 12. 15;
20, 21.
promiscuously used in our English Bibles. For there we meet as well with
lawful, as with unlawful Lusts; and as well with a good, as an evil Avarice;
(and with Both as they are taken in the innocent sense of our Desires;) Nay,
there we meet with such a Lusting, as is not only lawful, but also eminently
good. We have an Example of the first, Deuteronomy. 12. 15. Thou may kill and eat
Flesh in all thy Gates, whatsoever thy Soul lusts after; that is, whatever it
desires, or has an Appetite unto. We have an Instance of the second, in the
First Epistle to the Corinthians; where though it is said, that no Covetous
shall ever inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 10.
yet there are things which we must Covet, and Covet earnestly, 1 Cor. 14. 39.
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12. 31. We have a Specimen of the Third too, Gal. 5.
17. Whereas the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, so does the Spirit against
the Flesh. And this does show us what is meant by the Law in the Members, and
the Law in the Mind, which are said to be warring, that is, to be Lusting
against each other, Romans 7. 23. the last of which is as good, as the first is
evil.

5. But here we must not impose that obvious Fallacy on our selves, which is, a
been divisis ad male conjuncta. For though the Flesh, and the Lusts, being in
Sensu diviso, have both their innocent Significations, yet in Sensu composito,
they ever signify what is sinful. Nor only the Breaches of any one, but of
several Precepts in the Decalogue. For in the Epistle to the Galatians, not
Adultery only, but Murders, not Fornication only, but Witchcraft, Idolatry,
Seditions, Haeresies, are reckoned up by S. Paul amongst the works of the
Flesh, and that in perfect opposition to the Fruits of the Spirit. Nor is it
only said (in the last Precept of the Decalogue,) Thou shall not covet thy
Neighbor's Wife, But not his House, not his Servant, not his Ox, not his Ass,
no nor any thing else that is thy Neighbors. So that all evil Covetings are
Fleshly Lusts, in respect of the Principle from which they come, though not
always of the Object toward which they tend. Though in regard unto the later,
they are not all Lustings after the Flesh, yet in regard unto the former, they
all are Lustings of the Flesh, or (...), Fleshly Lusts. 'Twas such a Lust of
Curosity, joined with another of Ambition, which made Eve eat of forbidden
fruit. 'Twas such a Fleshly Lust of Envy, which made Cain murder his Brother
Abel. 'Twas such a Fleshly Lust of Avarice, which made an Achan lay hold of the
golden Wedge. Nor was it less a Fleshly Lust which moved Absolon to compass his
Father's Kingdom, than That by which he defiled his Father's Concubines.

6. Now from all these Fleshly Lusts we are exhorted to abstain, as may appear
by their Antithesis to such a Christian Conversation, as is not only to be
chaste, but universally honest among the Gentiles. And yet from those in special
manner are we exhorted to abstain, which are peculiarly comprised in the
seventh Precept of the Decalogue, and are expressed by the name of lascivious
Lusts, 1 Pet. 4. 3. For those were chiefly the Fleshly Lusts of the Gnostics,
from whose unclean course of life the Jewish Christians of the Dispersion were
here dehorted. And so they signify with S. John when he reduces all the Army
of our Spiritual Warriers to Three Brigades, and makes an eminent Distinction
of the Lust of the Flesh, 1 John 2. 16.
both from the Lust of the Eye, Gal. 5. 16.
and the Pride of Life. Ephesians. 2. 3.


7. But what kind of Abstinence is here intended? not such a complete and total
Abstinence, as is from all kinds of Lusting without exception. For This may
seem as vain a Task, as to Abstain from being Men; since it is evident from the
Confessions both of Saxony, and Helvetia, as also from the 9th. of our 39
Articles, That Concupiscence remains in the most regenerate. To which implicit
Objection, I answer Thus. That though the Precept for abstaining does refer
both to the Object and Act of Lusting, yet it is with this Difference, that we
must totally abstain from the things Lusted after, and as much as in us lies
from the Lust it self. For if we cannot prevent a Lust from ever entering into
the heart; yet we can and must keep it from breaking forth into our Actions,
and from the Presence of the Temptation which leads to Both. Many pretend to
Disabilities to which they have not a real Title. It clearly lies in our power,
to make a Covenant with our Eyes; to set a Watch over our Ears; to keep the
Door of our Lips; to thrust Impediments in the way betwixt Us and Danger; and
by the help of God's Grace, (which is not wanting unto any who are not wanting
unto It,) it also lies in our Power to keep a Guard about our Hearts; to put a
Bridle upon our Wills; and give a check to the Cariere of wild Affections. So
that if I may paraphrase S. Peter's Exhortation, it will in the whole amount to
This: Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as arrant Foreigners and Exoticks on this
side Heaven, that ye religiously abstain from forbidden Objects in the general,
and especially from Those which are most Treacherous to the Flesh. Give not any
satisfaction to carnal motions, and be not any whit indulgent to loose Desires.
Make no provision for the Flesh, Romans 13. 14.
to fulfill the Lusts thereof. Gal. 5. 16.
But keep it rather from Incentives, and try to starve it. As it wars against,
you, so do you against it. Besiege it closely on every side; Block up all its
Avenues; Intercept its Provisions by Prayer and Fasting. Reduce the Flesh to
such an Exigence for want of Victuals and Ammunition, as may effectually compel
it to make a Surrender unto the Spirit. Put your selves with Resolution into a
moral Impossibility of being worsted. And in order thereunto, Abstain not only
from the Food of your Fleshly Lusts, but withal from the Borders and Confines
of it; not only from the All that may cause uncleanness, but from all that may
occasion the things that cause it.

8. For here it is worthy our observation, (in the management of our warfare
against those Enemies, which do often the more successfully, because invisibly
war against us,) That we are otherwise to encounter with the Temptations of the
Irascible, than with the other more insnaring ones of the concupiscible
Faculty. The only way to quell the first, is indeed by Fighting, but the way
to beat the second, must be by Flight. The way to vanquish those Allurements of
Flesh and Blood, which are vulgarly expressed by the name of Beauties, is not
boldly to contend with, but rather prudently to abstain from the Presence of
them. We commonly reckon that a Garrison is little less than half taken, when
it admits of any parley with its Besiegers. To enter into a Treaty, is the
Beginning of a Surrender; and then with a greater force of reason. He that
approaches so very near, as to wrestle with the Temptations He ought to fly,
and entertains so much commerce, as to combat with them, is like a very stout
Champion who salls to grapple with a man that is armed with Sickness; I mean
the Leprosy, or the Plague, or other diseases of Infection. Because
notwithstanding he throws the man far enough, it will be hard to clear himself
from all contagion of his Disease. Many are led into Captivity to the Law of
Sin, by not distinguishing as they ought, (and as holy men of old were wont to
do,) betwixt Temptations and Temptations of several sorts; I mean the
Temptations they ought to fight with, and the Temptations they ought to fly. To
make it profitable and plain, I will illustrate what I say, by one or two
Scriptural Examples.

9. When nothing but the Patience of Job was tempted, by the loss of his
Estate, and the destruction of his Children, Tunc surrexit, says the Text, Job
1. 20.
Then Job arose, roused up himself like a sturdy Lion; and as it were girded
himself with strength. He was so far from drawing back from the face of Danger,
that he arose, and stood to it, and bravely baffled both the wit and the
strength of Satan. But when the same Job was tempted by the Allurements of the
Flesh, Then he manifested his valor, (like Fabius Maximus, or the Parthians,)
by taking the Courage to use his Prudence. And he manifested his Prudence, by
the timeliness of his Flight. He made a Covenant with his Eyes, Job. 31. 1.
not to look upon an Object which might endanger him by Delight. Nunquam
fugatur, nisi cum fugitur, nuquam mactatur, nisi cum maceratur, etc. Espensaeus
de Contin. Conjug. l. 6. c. 11. a p. 896. ad p. 903.
It was then his chief Wisdom, when (not his Constancy, or his Patience, but)
his Chastity was concerned, not to make trial of his Mastery, in containing
from a pleasant forbidden Object, but rather wholly to abstain from the
Presence of it. The different way of incountring the different sorts of
Temptation, may be collected from the difference, wherewith the Scripture does
direct us to deal with the Devil, Jam. 4. 7.
and the Flesh. 1. Cor. 6. 18.
Resist the Devil, Cum aliis vitiis potest expectari conflictus; haec autem
fugienda est, quia aliter vinci non potest.
is the Precept of S. James; but fly Fornication, is the Caveat of S. Paul. For
other Vices (says Anselm upon that Caveat to the Corinthians) are easily
conquerable by Conflict, whereas This of Fornicacation is only conquerable by
Flight. Anselinus in 1 Cor. 6. 18.
Now to fly Fornication, -- (...). Aristot. Eth. l. 7. c. 9.
is not only to be continent, (which implies a kind of Combat, though it is not
followed with consent; a being somewhat affected, although not drawn;) but it is
totally to abstain from all commerce with the Temptation. It Is to defeat it in
such a manner, Caetera vitia vincuntur resistendo, sed Fornicatio fugiendo.
i.e. totaliter vitando cogitationes immundas, and quaflibet occasiones.
as King Edward the Sixth, and the most excellent Bishop Wainflet are said by
Budden to have defeated the Armed Rebels under Jack Cade, vel non pugnando; by
not fighting with them at all, but only by praying against their Wickedness.
The total abstinence I speak of, Aquinas in 1 Cor. 6. 18. in eundem sensum
Cajetanus ibid. v. Cassian. Collat. l. 19.. 16.
is not only from the Objects of Fleshly Lust, but from the Vicinities, and
the occasions, yea from all the very memories and mentions of them. For so
Aquinas and Cajetan do expound S. Paul's Caveat, 1 Cor. 6. 18.

10. It follows then that we are likelier to be secure from such dangers by
timely flight, Puellae vel Christo reservatae amore captus est, and sauciatus
Magnus ille Cyprianus. Vnde? and quomodo? tangunt oculorum faces etiam
intangibilia. Nec solum captus est, sed and sollicitavit -- Liberanda de locis
periculosis Navis, ne inter Secpulos frangatur. Eruenda velociter de incendio
Sarcina, priusquam flammis supervenientibus concremetur. Nemo diu tutus,
Periculo Proximus. Espensaeus ubi supra page 900.
than to beat them quite down by a stout Resistance. And though the later must
be employed when we are actually engaged, yet to anticipate such engagements,
it will be our best method to use the former. For how much safer it is to fly,
than to encounter such Allurements, (though encounter them we must, when we
cannot fly them,) we may illustrate by the examples of Joseph, and Sampson, who
were as various in their Behaviors, as they were different in their Success.
Joseph fled from his Mistress by whom he was tempted day by day. He was so far
from discoursing about the matter in design, as that he would not be with her,
but sprang from her presence, and got him out. Genesis 39. 10. 12. Whereas Sampson
(on the contrary) was no sooner come to Gaza, than he saw there an Harlot; nor
did he only See but he went unto her. (Judge. 16. 1.) Again, no sooner was he
come to the Valley of Soreck, where he adventured to converse with another
Woman, (v. 4.) but one of the next Things we read of, is His telling her all
his heart. (v. 17.) And the very next to That, is His sleeping upon her knees.
(v. 19) And the consequent of This, the loss of his Liberty, and his Eyes. (v.
21.) It was not then without reason, That so great and good a Prophet as the
Prophet Elijah, who had so bravely 1 King. 18. 18.
withstood King Ahab, did quickly after Chap. 19. v. 3.
fly away from the Face of Jezebel. And that Abimelech should have fled at the
sight of Sarah, is very evident even from hence, That no sooner had he taken
her, than he was fain to put her away. (Genesis 20. 3. 7.) Nor did he part only
with Her, but with a thousand pieces of Silver, V. Munsterum in Locum and
Cornelium a Lapide.
(v. 16.) And that in velamen Oculorum, for a Covering of the Eyes. And that
not only unto Her, but to all that hereafter should look upon her, as
Gerundensis, and Hamerus explain the Text. Or (in the Gloss of Tertullian,) for
the buying of veils enough, wherewith to cover both her own and her Maiden's
Beauty; and this to the end they might not easily either See, or be Seen by the
other Sex.

11. But I have largely enough explained the moral use of the word Flesh, and
what is meant by the Lustings of it, and what it is to Abstain from all These,
as well according to the Object as Act of Lusting, and as well in a divided as
compound Sense. Besides that in so spacious a Field of matter, and so fruitful
of meditation, as That I am entering now upon, there will be need of some Care
that none be surfeited even with Abstinence. For though an Abstinence (not from
Flesh, but) from Fleshly Lusts, is both the Best, and the most wholesome, and
the most suitable to the Season in its primitive Use, and (where the Guests are
all Christian) the most desirable Entertainment to be imagined, yet a Satiety
of the best things is apt to become the worst Satiety in the world. And
therefore rather than exceed the Time allowed for This Service, I will begin
and end too with That one Argument, or Motive, which here is taken from the
Nature, and perpetual Employment of Fleshly Lusts; which are not only no
Friends, but most Implacable Enemies; nor only Enemies to our temporal, but
aeternal Interest.

12. It is not only here said, (...), that they fight, which may imply nothing
more than a Single Battle; but (...), they war, which imports a continued State
of fighting. So far from being capable of a firm and solid Peace, that they
allow us not a Truce, or time to breath in. Nor do they terminate their malice
upon the Body, (for then we needed no more to fear them than Armed Enemies from
without,) but (which is nearer and dearer to us) (...), they ever war against
the Soul too.

13. Thus the life of a Christian, as it is a Pilgrimage of the Body from Earth
to Earth, (for Dust thou art, and unto Dust shall thou return, said God to
Adam,) and a Pilgrimage of the Soul from Heaven to Heaven; (for the Spirit
shall return to God that gave it, says the Royal Ecclesiastes;) Militia est
vita hominis super Terram. Job 7. 1.
so as truly is it a warfare of Soul and Body in conjunction, whereof That
fights for Heaven, and This for Hell; The former under God's Banner, and the
later under the Devil's. The Flesh, and the Spirit are so unequally matched,
that however nearly wedded, they are incessantly falling out. Each may say unto
the other, nec possum vivere cum te, nec sine te. For however unwilling they
are to part, they are seldom or never at Agreement. There is a Law in the
members so continually warring against the Law of the mind, Romans 7. 23.
that the Flesh still lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
Flesh. And these are Gal. 5. 17.
contrary the one to the other. Now it is the nature still of Contraries, very
earnestly to endeavor a mutual overthrow. And they must Both be well beaten,
brought down, and refracted, ere they can peaceably cohabit under one and the
same Roof. Which kind of Peace may be effected betwixt another sort of
Contraries, (for Heat and Cold may agree together in a Lukewarmness, white and
black in mixed Colors, Day and Night in a Crepusculum, however These two last
are but privatively opposed;) but in this moral Contrariety 'twixt the Spirit
and the Flesh, it never can be; the reason is, because when the Spirit is most
indulgently at Peace with the Flesh, the Flesh is then the most dangerous and
fatal Enemy to the Spirit. Exactly such an Enemy, as Joab was to Abner, when he
took him aside, and slew him 2 Samuel 3. 27.
peaceably. Or as the very same Joab to Captain Amasa, when he saluted him as a
Brother, inquired after his health as a kind Physician, offered to kiss him as
a Dear Friend, that so he might civilly and sweetly smite him under the fifth
Rib. 2 Samuel 20. 9, 10.
Or as the two Sons of Rimmon to Righteous Ishbosheth, when making as if they
would fetch some Wheat, they killed him slily in his own House, Chap. 4. v. 6.
11.
and quietly resting upon his Bed. Or as Judeth to Olofernes, when she pleased
him into Destruction, and maliciously made him in love with her Conversation;
when she ravished him with her Beauty, that she might kill him with the fruit
of his kindness to her; Judeth 12. 14, 16, 18. and Chapter 13. 8.
stole his Heart whilst he was waking, that whilst he slept she might take his
Head too. And exactly such an Enemy is the Flesh unto the Spirit, when the
Spirit gives no disturbance, but dwells in quietness with the Flesh. For then
the Lusts of the Flesh do give the Spirit such wounds as it cannot feel. Wounds
endued with such a numming, Narcotick Quality, as hurts the Spirit without
offense, and by killing it very pleasantly, sends it insensibly to Hell. Nor
are any whit the less, but the more certainly destroyed for being laid into a
sleep by an overgreat Dose of Opium. Hence those (...), (...).
invisible Wars, and indiscernable Insurrections, from which the ancient Greek
Liturgies were wont to pray for a Cessation. For when the Soul is so degenerate
as even to dote upon the Body, Then does the Body with most advantage
insensibly war against the Soul. The treacherous Lusts of the Flesh, (like the
treacherous Assassinates of Olofernes and Ishbosheth,) assault the Spirit in
its own House, and (which is the worst of all Supercherie) as they find it fast
asleep in the Bed of Carnal Security. Nor is it only not awaked by the Blows
they give it, but it rather sleeps the faster for being struck, (just as if it
were struck by the Rod of Hermes.) That when at last it shall awake, either in
This, or another World, it may not be to escape, but to see its Ruin.

14. So that the War I now speak of, is more than Civil or Domestic. For there
we war against others, but here, against our own selves. Mic. 7. 6.
A Man's Enemies (says the Prophet) are those of his own House. And indeed the
greatest Enemies, excepting those of his own Heart. This especially being the
Field, wherein the Lusts of the Flesh do still incamp against the Spirit, and
give it Battle; and strive to bring it into Captivity to the Law of Sin. And
because the whole Man does consist of these two, Flesh and Spirit, Body and
Soul, matter and form, as essential Parts of his Composition, it cannot but
follow that we our selves are incessantly warring against our selves. To wit,
our selves, as we are Animals, against our selves, as we are Men. Our selves,
as we are Men, against our selves, as we are Christians. Our selves, as we are
Carnal, against our selves, as we are Spiritual. Again it follows, that we our
selves are the greatest Enemies to our selves, because we arm our vile Members
against our Mind. (For what our English Translation does call the Instruments,
(...).
is in S. Paul's own language, the Armor of unrighteousness.) Romans 6. 13.
And by the help of this Armor, we Arm our base Appetites against our Wills;
and our brutish Affections against our Reasons. We use our selves as
unmercifully, as Samson's Enemies did Him. We strive to pluck out our inward
Eyes, and to deliver our selves bound to Sin, and Satan. We side with the old
man against the new; Abet the outward man in us against the inward; are such
Enemies to our selves, as to despoil our selves of Grace, whereby (as much as
in us lies, and without Repentance,) we make our selves incapable of Bliss and
Glory.

15. But when I speak of a War between the Flesh and the Spirit, I do not mean
only the visible and gross Body of Flesh, which of it self is but passive, and
cannot fight. No it is the animated Flesh, the Flesh that is capable of Lusting;
It is a fleshliness of Spirit, and a carnality of Reason, which is armed with a
Wisdom fetched up from Hell, and stands in hostile opposition to that which
comes down from Heaven, Jam 3. 14, 15, 16. And accordingly when God had
upbraided Israel, with their being a foolish and sottish People, and void of
all understanding, he gave the reason of it in this, That they were wise to do
evil. (Jer. 4. 22.) Observe the pithy Brevity of That Expression, Because they
were Wise, they were therefore Foolish. Their Wisdom did not only consist
with Folly, but in That sort of Wisdom their Folly and Sottishness did
consist. This is that Wisdom of the Flesh, which exalts it self against the
Knowledge of God. 2 Cor. 10. 5. It is an Earthy, Sensual, Devilish wisdom, as
God Himself by his Apostle is pleased to call it. And it is with very great
reason he calls it Devilish; because the Lust of the Flesh, which is its
Wisdom, is a direct Devil within us; as having a faculty to entice us, and to
draw us quite away from fighting under Christ's Banner. Therefore it is that
Lust and Satan have the very same Character in holy Scripture. Jam. 1. 14.
A man is tempted (says S. James) when drawn away of his own Lust and enticed.
More than which cannot be said of the Devil himself; who cannot drive us by
force into any Sin, but only draw us by Flattery, or morally drive us by
panick Fears. Now the very same Warrier, which sometimes is called by the name
of Flesh, is elsewhere termed the carnal Mind; which is as much as to say, the
fleshly Spirit. Gal. 5. 17. Romans 8. 7.
The carnal Mind (says S. Paul) is enmity against God, for it is not subject
to his Law, nor indeed can it be. It is so naturally a Rebel, that it can never
be any other, so long as it remains a carnal Mind. A very natural thing it is
for the Son of the Bondwoman, even in Abraham's own house, to hate and
persecute the Son of the free. And even in Abraham's own Person, it was as
natural for the Flesh to war against the Spirit. Esau kicked against Jacob,
whilst both were yet in their Mother's Womb. And even Jacob himself, although
as peaceable as he was plain, had yet a Law in his Members, as it were lifting
up the heel against the Law in his Mind. The best of Men are but Men, and
therefore at their best will still be subject to Corruption. Some Canaanites
will be left in the holiest Land. S. Paul himself had fears and fightings, as
well within as without. And notwithstanding his Abundance, as well of Grace, as
of Revelations, he had a thorn in the Flesh, which did exceedingly terrify and
wound his Spirit. Nor was David more afflicted by envious Saul, than his inward
man was vexed by the hostilities of the outward. When our Spirits are most
willing to do the will of our Lord, we are forced to complain that our Flesh is
weak; and in that very weakness does one of its chiefest strengths lie. Even
then when we can say, Lord we believe, we have great reason to add, help thou
our unbelief. Let the Flesh (like the Thief, I mean the unconverted Thief on
our Savior's Cross,) be bound up and Crucified, yet (like the very same Thief)
it will continue to resist, or revile the Spirit. As when the Tailor in the
Apologue had stopped the mouth of his scolding Wife, She was able still to rail
with her finger's ends. An Apologue not so light, as the moral of it is grave
and serious. For the Spirit and the Flesh are (in Aristotle's Comparison) as
the (...) and the (...), i. e. as the Husband and the Wife; and so the moral of
the Apologue may be affirmed to be This. Whilst Fleshly Lusts have a Being, are
unmortified and alive, let congruous Grace do what it can, (so long as it is
not irresistible,) there will be Hostilities against the Spirit. For were it
possible for the Flesh to cease from warring against the Spirit, a Man might
possibly be innocent on this Side Heaven. Which because he cannot be, the
Carnal mind by sound Consequence must needs be at enmity with God. Hence it is
that Rank Atheists are very commonly Rank Wits too, full of Artifices and
Tricks, very skillful to destroy Themselves and others. And it is an Enmity so
much the worse, even because it is Spiritual, as well as Carnal, or (to use S.
Paul's language) a Carnal mind. For the Spirit of a man, which by nature goes
upwards, when like the Eccles. 3. 21.
Spirit of a beast, it tends downwards, quite against its own nature, and as
it were clings unto the Earth by being Carnal, it is not only a strong, but a
subtle Enemy. It wageth war against the Soul, that is, itself, as well by
stratagem, as by force. It is a Treacherous, cologuing, Heb. 3 13.
deceiptfull Thing. And though it seems to be but one of those three Brigades
whereof the Devil's whole Army is said by S. John to be composed, (the Lust of
the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life,) yet has it all the
lower World to serve for its Armory or Magazin; Profit, and Pleasure, and
Pomps, and Vanities, Beauty, and Honor, and Strength, and Greatness, and (to
express it in a word) All the Darts of the Flesh which it does shoot (after the
measure that the Devil gives Aim,) against the Spirit, are commonly drawn out
of that one Quiver, that is to say, the Carnal mind.

16. Since then our Enemies are such, as have been described; Anima, Dei
insignita Imagine, decorata Similitudine, desponsata Fide dotata Spiritu,
redempta Sanguine, de putata cum Angelis, capar Beatitudinis, haeres Bonitatis,
Rationis particeps, quid tibi cum Carne unde ista pateris? Bernard. de Anima.
c. 3. p. 1051.
so strongly, so subtly, so incessantly warring against the Soul, (A Soul
adorned with God's Image, and indu'd with his Spirit, and redeemed with his
Blood, and sustein'd with his Grace, and in a capacity of his Glory,) our very
Dangers may serve for Orators, to encourage and incite us in our Encounters.
And our Dangers are to be measured by the preciousness of the Subject, or Prize
we fight for. And this is here expressed to be the Soul. That Is the Helena
(...), or (...), the Ball or Apple of contention, thrown as 'twere between us,
and our Fleshly Lusts; We asserting it to God, and They to Satan; We contending
for its Safety, and They contriving its Destruction. Now so infinite is the
difference between the values to be put upon Souls and Bodies, that He who Romans
5. 3. Philip. 2. 17. Romans 7. 24.
rejoiced in those Afflictions which did but war against the Body, did groan
and tremble under the Lusts, which still did war against his Soul. And in
comparison of the hurt, which may happen unto the Soul, we are forbidden to
fear them that can kill the Body. For what is the Body, in its original, but
Dust and Ashes? what, at the best of its Consistence, but a fair Nursery of
Diseases? And what, when parted from the Soul, but the food of Worms? whereas
the Soul is That Spouse, which God has betrothed to himself, Liquido colligere
debemus, quiasi Deus Sapientia, Anima autem Justi Seeds sapientiae, dum Coelum
dicitur Seeds Dei, Anima Justi ergo est Coelum. Greg. Mag. in Evang. Homil. 38.
l. 2. p. 133, 134. Vide etiam Bernard. super Cantica, Sermon. 27. p. 646.
Hos. 2. 19, 20. Not a Citizen only of Heaven, but Heaven it self; as S.
Gregory and S. Bernard are pleased to call her. And therefore if the Warriers
or Fleshly Lusts I now speak of, do fight against our immortal Souls, it
concerns us as much as our Souls are worth, to war against, by abstaining from
Fleshly Lusts; By which if ever we are conquered, we are undone. As being dead
whilst we live, (to use S. Paul's Oxumoron) and (which is a great deal sadder)
as being to live when we are dead too, although it be only to die for ever, or
rather to be for ever dying. These are some of those foolish and hurtful
Lusts, which drown the Soul in misery and perdition. They transform the whole
man into a State of Brutality. They cast us out of his presence, 1 Timothy 6. 9.
in whose presence is life, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore.
For when it is said by the Apostle, That if we live after the Flesh, Romans 8. 13.
we shall die; his meaning cannot but be This, That we shall certainly be
damned. For They that live after the Spirit must die the first Death, and
Therefore This other must needs me meant of the Second. Thus our Dangers do
encourage us in our Encounters.

17. Another Encouragement which we enjoy whilst we are prosecuting our War
against Fleshly Lusts, lies in the Goodness, and the Nobleness, and (as the
consequence of Both) in the Pleasure of it. For what can be better in it self,
than to side with the Spirit against the Flesh? with the Rational part in us
against the Brutal? what more honorable, or noble, than to win a Victory over
our selves? It was not near so great a Glory to the Young man of Macedon to
have brought into Subjection all the Provinces of Asia, as it had been to have
subdued at once his Avarice and his Ambition. For it is not the greatness of the
Conquest, but the goodness of the fight, which yields an happiness to the
Victor, and solid glory to his success. When Paul was ready to be offered, and
at the Approach of his Departure, his chiefest Comfort and Honor stood both in
This, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7.
That he had fought the good fight, that he had finished his Course, and had
kept the Faith: that he had prosperously engaged against Fleshly Lusts, which,
however they had warred, had not prevailed against his Soul. Many are worsted
in their Warfare, for want of distinguishing (as they ought) between the Acts
and the Effects of their Self-denials. It Is true the Act of Self-denial will
affect the best of us with pain or trouble; but how much more will it delight
us by our Enjoyment of its Effects? (as the drawing of a Tooth is painful and
troublesome for a moment, although in order to perfect ease.) We know the Soul
is the life, and so the happiness of the Body, as God himself is both the
happiness and the life of the Soul. And as there is no greater pleasure, than
that which affects the very Soul of a Pious man, (for it is a Proverbial
Antimetabole, and in every man's mouth, that the Pleasure of the Soul is the
Soul of Pleasure,) so the Pleasure of the Soul can hardly be greater, or more
refined, than in despising and rejecting the grosser Pleasures of the Body. Nor
need we fear that such a Pleasure is not attainable at all, because it does not
grow up, like a worthless Mushrom, in a night; but rather (like the goodly
Rose) requires a certain Tract of Time to give it Ripeness. For a Left Handed
Conscience, like a Left Handed Man, by abstaining long enough from the use of
the Left, and by continuing long enough the use and practice of the Right, will
perform the same Actions with ease and pleasure, which at present may be
difficult, and painful to him. Habitual Sicknesses of Soul being like to those
inveterate diseases of the Body, which cannot possibly be cured by one or two
Tastes of a Noble Med'cin, but must submit to whole Methods and Courses of it.
Many Sciences and Arts are extremely tedious to such as are but new beginners
and learners in them; which yet will yield them the greatest Comfort, Content,
and Pleasure, as soon as Use, and Understanding has bred a very good
Acquaintance and Friendship with them. Will any Man who is not mad, break off
the finger of his Watch as an useless Thing, because he cannot perceive it
moving? or leave off the practice of a generous abstinence from his Debauches,
because his very first Endeavors of Self-denial and Pious life are not so
pleasant or so easy, as he expected? let him have patience, and That Finger
will most apparently, though insensibly, make a progress from this, to another
hour. So let him stay his due time, and his practice of Reformation will pass
from difficult to easy, from easy to useful and familiar, from familiar to
delightful and joyous also. Let a vicious man get but the knack of Virtue,
(which without Custom he cannot have,) and he will wonder how he could once
have been pleased with Vice. But he who stays 'till it is pleasant to leave his
gross pleasures, will never leave them; because the pleasure of leaving such,
cannot begin 'till they are left. From whence it follows, that He who will not
be persuaded to persevere in abstaining from Fleshly Lusts, until his
Abstinence is easy, and pleasant to him, is like the natural Fool of Greece,
whom Hierocles in his (...) does merrily call his Athenian Scholar, who
determined within Himself never to go into the Water, until (before hand) he
might be sure that he could Swim. Or like the overwary Messenger (of whom we
read in the Spanish Story) who having been threatened under a Poenalty by him
that sent him, not to return without an Answer, would not part with his Letter
to the Person to whom 'twas sent, until he might first have an Answer to it.
For a man not to abstain from Fleshly Lust till he finds it pleasant, is just
as senseless, and as absurd, as for a man to be impatient of ever learning the
use of Books, 'till he can read and understand them with ease and pleasure; or
to grumble at the labor of taking a Pencil into his hand, until he finds he
can use it like some Apelles. If there is any man that hears me, who is
conscious to himself of so great a Folly, I have no more to beg of him than
barely This; That he will not come with Praejudice to the Amendment of his
Life, (as the Israelites did to the Land of Promise, in fear of Anakims and
Lions to be incounter'd in the way,) and that he will not distrust a virtuous
course 'till he has tried it. That he will weigh Vice and Virtue in equal
Scales, before he cleaves unto the First, or rejects the Second. That he will
have so much Justice both for God and Himself, as to make an essay, whether a
Customary Abstinence from Fleshly Lusts, will not yield him more pleasure than
all his Customary Enjoyments have ever done. That he will once have the courage
to make a Trial of new obedience, (I mean an incorrupt and impartial Trial.)
And that being once engaged in the practice of it, he will not poorly start
back at its first uncouthness; (for difficilia quae pulchra, the goodliest
things in their Enjoyment are ever difficult in their acquist;) but that
imitating the Bravery of Caleb and Josua, he will deferr to make a Judgment or
final Aestimate of the Thing, 'till he has had a Sound proof and experience of
it. For if the Savor and the Taste he shall have of Virtue, be but as much, and
as long, as his Taste of Vice, he will sooner swallow the Stings and the Gall of
Asps, than vouchsafe the licking up of his nauseous Vomit.

18. But besides this Encouragement (which of it self is very great) from the
Fight it self, (a fight for God against Satan, and for the Interest of the Soul
against Fleshly Lusts,) there is a Third arising to us from the consideration
of our support. For it is the powerful Spirit of God, Romans 8. 26.
which helps our Infirmities. Yea, when our Infirmities are so potent, as to
disable us even from praying, and from crying out for help, the Spirit
interceedeth for us with Groans which cannot be uttered. And at the
intercession of such a Spirit, our Spiritual Enemies will fly, as the walls of
Jericho did fall at the sound of a Trumpet. 'Twas by the help of This Spirit,
that though the Enemies of David were still in hand to swallow him up, yet he
was able still to say, Psalm. 56. 2, 4.
He would not fear what Flesh could do unto him. Whilst the weapons of our
warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual, They are mighty, through God, to the
pulling down of strong Holds; casting down Imaginations, and every high thing
that exalts it self against God, and bringing into captivity every Thought to
the obedience of Christ. Our weapons indeed are mighty, but it is through God,
who does not only guide our Feet, but also lifts up our Hands, and directs our
Blows, and often strikes for us Himself too. And yet the Victory which he wins,
his Goodness places to our Account. His is the Glory of the Conquest, but Ours
the Comfort. And This accordingly was the Encouragement our Savior gave to his
Apostles, Joh. 16. ult.
Be of good Comfort, I have overcome the World. The Sting of Death, which is
Sin, He has plucked out for us. The strength of Sin, which is the Law, He has
weakened in our behalf. He has routed our common Enemy, and looks that We
should follow the chase. Which the Apostle well considering, did seem (with one
and the same Breath,) to turn his outcry into an Eulogy, his complaint into a
Jubily, his Temptations of Despair into Joy and Triumph. Romans 7. 24.
For no sooner had he said, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from
the Body of this Death? But in the next words he added, I thank God through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Nay farther yet; He does not only say in another place,
Thanks be to God who has given us the Victory through our Lord Jesus Christ;
But also invents a new Word, to show the greatness of our Victory above that of
others; Through Him that loved us, (...) (says the Text) we do not only
overcome, Romans 8. 37.
but are more than Conquerors. Indeed without Him our strength is weakness, our
Wisdom Folly; and accordingly the Apostle does very appositely exhort us, to
be strong in the Lord, and in the Power of His might. Ephesians. 6. 10. And when it is
said by S. John, Ye are of God, little Children, and have overcome them, he
gives this Reason, Because greater is He that is in You, 1 John 2. 14.
than he that is in the World. For whatsoever is born of God overcomes the
World; and this is the Victory that overcomes the World, even our Faith. 1 John 5. 4. This must therefore be our Prayer, That Christ may dwell in our
Hearts by Faith. And this will then be our Encouragement, Ephesians. 3. 17.
That being strengthened with might in the Inward man, we shall be able to stand
in the evil Day. Ver. 16.


19. But we have yet another Encouragement, to wrestle with and to fight
against Fleshly Lusts, from the exceeding great Richness of our Reward. For
when we can say with the Apostle, we have fought the god fight, we may also say
with him in the same Assurance, because upon the same Ground, 2 Timothy 4. 8.
Henceforth is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness. Betwixt which two there
is so vast a Disproportion that the Fight is for a moment, and the Sufferings
growing from it do quickly wither; whereas the Crown is immarcescible, such as
cannot but enjoy an eternal Spring. And therefore S. Paul was not out in his
Reckoning, when he reckoned that the Sufferings (and amongst Them the
Self-denials) of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the
glory that shall be revealed in us. Romans 8. 18. A Bold expression I confess,
but it is S. Paul's, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
Which kind of Sufferings and Self-denials do not only praecede, but even work
for us a weight of Glory. 2 Cor. 4. 17. And the reason of This expression may
be argued even from hence, That to fight against the Flesh, so far forth as to
mortify, Col. 3. 5.
and put it to Death, Romans 8. 13.
(which are the literal importance of the Apostles two words, (...), and
(...),) is to make our selves Partakers of the sufferings of Christ. Which
sufferings of Christ, do not only occasion, but clearly work for us a weight
of Glory. And for this very end do we partake of Christ's sufferings, (by
Self-denials on his Account,) That when his Glory shall be revealed, we may
also rejoice with exceeding Joy. 1 Pet. 4. 13. Yea the bare consideration of
such an unspeakable Reward, did put S. Paul upon Rejoicing, not only after,
but in his Sufferings and Self-denials. Col. 1. 24. A Reward great enough to
make a Coward turn Fighter. For who would not fight even for fear, that he
shall lose such a Reward? The only thing we have to fear, is our not fighting
enough to win the Prize we fight for. Now every Fighter (says our Apostle, and
so say all Agonistick Writers,) is to keep a strict Diet. S. Paul's words are,
He must be 1 Cor. 9. 25.
temperate in all Things. Alluding plainly to the Olympicks, in which the
Combatans were dieted for forty Days. Every Man had his Lent, whereby to fit
him for his Encounter; and his Abstinence was his Armor, whereby to guard him
from a Defeat. And if They were so Abstemious, to gain a corruptible Crown, how
much more should we abstain, for the gaining of a Crown which is not liable to
corruption? not only an exceeding, but an aeternal weight of Glory? Such was
the Logic with which S. Paul argued, and such was the Rule of his Acting too.
For (says He) I so run, Ver. 26, 27.
not as uncertainly; So fight I, not as one that beats the Air. But I keep
under my Body, and bring it into subjection. His own words are, (...), and
(...). I fight as a Pancratiast, (that is,) as a Cuffer, and Wrestler too. I
beat my Body black and blue? I make an arrant Slave of it; lay upon it both the
Yoke and the Cross of Christ; subdue my Flesh unto my Spirit; deny my self the
use of my Christian Liberty; suffer the loss of many things which I might
lawfully enjoy; that by any means I may attain to the Resurrection of the Dead,
that by any means possible I may apprehend That, for which I am also
apprehended of Christ Jesus. All which I take to be imported by those two
words, 1 Cor. 9. 27. Where by the way we may observe of our Apostle S. Paul, He
did not war against Another's, but against his own Body. For he knew his own
Body was the worst Enemy to his Soul; and that to save himself from it, was to
keep it under. He knew the Flesh to be so sturdy, and so implacable a Rebel,
that if he should suffer it to thrive, and to get an Head, he would have reason
to be jealous of its Aspirings; and to stand in some fear, lest whilst he
preached unto others, He himself might become a Castaway.

20. Now we must go, and do likewise. For we expect the same Crown, and are
beset with the same Enemies, by which if he was endangered, much more are we.
And therefore if it was His way, much more must it be Ours, to abstain in good
earnest from Fleshly Lusts, by abstaining from the things by which they are
nourished and upheld. Intemperance is the Mother of all the rest, or if not
properly the Mother, yet at least she is the Nurse, as being evermore feeding,
and making provision for the Flesh, and by consequence giving strength to its
several Lusts. And therefore striving for the Mastery, let us be temperate in
all things. Let us add Fasting unto our Prayers, and constant Watchfulness unto
our Fasting, and persevere in all Three, till we have crucified the Flesh with
the Affections and Lusts. For since our Lusts are so restless as never ceasing
to rebel, we must be every whit as restless in reducing such Rebels to their
Allegiance. Nay it concerns us to be restless, though they should possibly be
at rest. For as a Leopard, or a Lion, though sometimes gentle, and debonaire,
are yet with reason kept close, in Chains, or Dungeons, because they still
retain the nature of salvage Beasts; so Fleshly Lusts, though very much tamer
at one Season, than at another, do yet retain the whole nature of Fleshly
Lusts, and if they are not locked up in Chains, or thrust down into a Dungeon,
we know not how soon they may rage against us. However then our Fleshly Lusts
may Seem to be at peace with us, let us never be at peace with our Fleshly
Lusts. And though the vileness of our Enemies, or the miseries of a Defeat, the
Honor and Gallantry of our Engagement, or the Divinity of our Support, (by the
Grace of God, and the Means of Grace,) should not be able of themselves to
prevail upon us, yet the additional consideration of the Immensity of our
Reward, should (one would think) beget within us the noblest courage and
resolution. We find them both in one Text, and spoken both with one Breath, and
the later is an Inference which cannot but follow from the former, That
whosoever will but fight the good fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6. 12.
will not fail to lay hold on Eternal life.

And this the God of all Mercy prepare us for, both for the Glory of his Grace,
and for the Worthiness of his Son, unto whom with the Father in the unity of
the Spirit, be all Obedience and Thanksgiving for ever and ever. Amen.

OF ABSTAINING In particular from DISOBEDIENCE TO AUTHORITY In things
INDIFFERENT, As from the worst and the most scandalous of all FLESHLY LUSTS, in
S. Peter's Judgment.
1 PET. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's
sake.
1. SAint Peter having exhorted us to abstain from Fleshly Lusts which war
against the Soul, and enforced his Exhortation with Five strong Reasons, (in
the two next Verses before my Text,) straight gives an Instance in the most
scandalous and the most damning piece of Carnality, of all those sorts in
general from which he exhorted us to abstain. For what Connection or Coherence
can there be betwixt my present and former Text, (lying as close by one
another, as by S. Peter they could be laid,) unless it be that Disobedience to
human Governors and Laws, is of all Fleshly Lusts the most disgraceful to
Christianity, the most repugnant to the Gospel of Jesus Christ, most
incompatible with the Profession and the Salvation of a Christian? That this is
the meaning of S. Peter, seems to be clear from the word (...), very
significant in the Original, however omitted in the Translation. To stop the
Mouths of those Enemies who speak against you as evil Doers, (says S. Peter to
the Christians of the (...), to whom he writes,) by your abstaining from
Fleshly Lusts, and by your unblameable Conversation among the Gentiles, (...),
be ye subjected, and (...), be ye Therefore subjected; and (...), to every
human Creature, that is to say, to every Man who is a Magistrate, created by
God (not by the People) to be a Governor. But still a Creature, and a Man, and
(Both together) an human Creature; wholly mortal, as to his Person; though
wholly divine, as to his Office. Therefore to Him submit your selves, (...),
not for the Magistrates or the People's, or your own sakes only, but first and
chiefly for the Lord's. First, because of the Lord's Precept, Matthew. 22. 21.
Next, because of the Lord's Example, Matthew. 17. 27. Thirdly, because of the
Lord's Ordaining him, Romans 13. 1, 2. Fourthly, because He bears the Lord's
Image, and is the Lord's Deputy, Lieutenant, or Vicegerent upon Earth, the
Lord's Minister, and Avenger, Romans 13. 4. Lastly, because ye must love the
Lord, (v. 5.) and love the Lord ye cannot, unless ye love the Lord's Surrogate,
and your love to Superiors is to be seen in your Obedience.

Again, submit your selves without partiality, ((...), is the Apostle's word,)
to every Ordinance of Man, or to All the Lord's Surrogates without exception.
Not only to the Supreme, as sent by God's Providence, and God's Commission;
but to subordinate Rulers also, as sent by Commission from the Supreme. Not to
the Emperor only Himself, (whether Claudius, or Nero, at the writing of this
Epistle,) but to Proconsuls, and Procurators, both of Asia, and Bithynia, as
sent by Caesar. Yet not to Them, against Him; not to Furius Camillus
Scribonianus, against Claudius: not to the Parliament, against the King; nor to
the King, against Himself; not at all to his Authority, against his Person; nor
in his Right, to his Wrong; (as some Christians have played the Sophisters to
the reproach of Christianity;) But to each in his order. To the King, as
Supreme; (so it follows in the Text,) and to Governors, as sent by Him. Where
the word as is very emphatical. As, and no otherwise, than as by Him sent. As,
and no otherwise, than for His sake, and on His account. And so, a quatenus ad
omne optime valet argumentum. Submit your selves to All, as sent by Him; and
submit your selves to None, but so far forth as He sends them. S. Peter's
Logic is very plain, and makes the Case very clear upon every side.

2. Of all the Arguments or Reasons which are producible for the enforcing S.
Peter's Praecept, here are two of concernment to Men in general, and a Third
for Believers, or Christian People in particular. Of the two former, the first
is taken from the Author and Assertor of All Authorities, unto which Men as Men
are here commanded to submit. They must do it propter Dominum, because The Lord
has Authorized human Authorities upon Earth, and The Lord will defend or
avenge them All. The second is taken from the End of the divine Constitution of
Human Authorities in the World. To wit, an equal Distribution both of
Punishments, and Rewards. Those to Evildoers, and These to Them that do well.
(v. 14.) By which Distribution of which two things is procured the Peace and
Quiet, and by consequence the Happiness of human life. The Third and special
Argument, touching us merely as we are Christians, is taken from the Credit of
Jesus Christ and His Gospel, which We who are Christians are highly obliged to
assert. And assert it we cannot by any one Argument so well, as by submitting
our selves impartially to every Ordinance of Man. By making it appear to the
Jews and Heathens, that the Gospel or Law of Christ obliges its Subjects to
live a peaceable and quiet life in all godliness and honesty. That Christianity
is a Religion, either reviving or introducing love and loyalty and order and
Tranquillity into the World. That Obedience to the Authority of human Laws and
Legislators, is one of the Prime Characteristicks whereby a Christian is to be
known. That the best Christians are still the loyal'st. That the more we love
and fear the Lord Jesus Christ, the more we submit for the Lord's sake to every
Ordinance of Man. And that They who do otherwise, are but Titular Christians;
not at all Christians, but in Profession; none of Christ's Followers, but in
Repute. And therefore Christianity must not be estimated by Them, who are
Rebels to the Gospel of Jesus Christ. Nor must We who are The Lord's, by
submitting our selves for the Lord's sake, be measured by Them who are none of
Us, but Disorderly Walkers out of the High way to Heaven, from whom S. Paul
bids us withdraw our selves; and whom S. John bids us not receive into our
Houses, nor bid them God speed; and that for the Credit of the Gospel, which
(but for this Prophylactick) They would bring into Disgrace.

3. This Third and last and special Argument of S. Peter, drawn from the Credit
of Christianity, for the enforcing of our Submission to every Ordinance of Man,
thereby meaning our Obedience to human Laws and Legislators, is of so great a
value with him, and so peculiar to us as Christians, that He urges This Twice
in a little room; immediately before, and immediately after my present Text.
First, our Loyalty and Obedience, and all other honest Conversation must be
made known unto The Gentiles, that they who speak against us as Evildoers may
by our good works which they shall behold, glorify God in the day of
Visitation. (v. 12.) Next, it is the will of God, that with such our well-doing
we may put to silence the ignorance of foolish Men. (v. 15.) This is an
Argument which S. Paul does urge often, whereby to make men afraid and ashamed
of Vice. Through you (says He unto the Christians who dwelt at Rome) the Name
of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles. Romans 2. 24.
For the unbelieving Gentiles do judge by your Practice of your Profession; by
the Blemishes of your lives who are called Christians, they grow averse to
Christianity; and have no good opinion of Christ himself whom you worship,
because they guess that your Religion has so very ill an influence upon your
Lives. So again argues S. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 6. 1.
Let as many Servants as are under the Yoke (either under Heathen Masters, or
amongst Heathen Men) count their Masters worthy of all honor, that the name of
God and his Doctrine be not blasphemed. For when Servants are refractory, or
Subjects rebellious, although they are such to Heathen Masters or Magistrates,
they draw disgrace upon the Gospel, and tempt the Infidels to believe that men
are the worse for being Christians; that the Doctrine of Christ is corruptive
of Principles, as well as Manners; and Christian Liberty but a Cloak for
rebellious Practice. Now to antidote this Venom, and to wipe off this
Disparagement, as well from the Doctrine, as from the Name of Jesus Christ, S.
Paul commands Timothy to be earnest and often in preaching Obedience and
Submission to all Superiors; esteeming These the weightier things of the
Christian Law. And therefore These things Teach and Exhort, Ver. 2.
(says He to Timothy with an Emphasis,) as being Things most essential, not
only to the saving of Christian's Souls, but essential to the saving of
Christianity it self, and to the saving of our Savior from being blasphemed
among the Gentiles. And for as much as no Obedience can be more naturally or
politically, or religiously due from one Mortal unto another, than from Wives
to their own Husbands, S. Paul does therefore press Titus to preach up This
also for This great End, Tit. 2. 5.
that the Word of God be not blasphemed. That Christian Religion may not suffer
by their Enemies taking notice of their unchristian disobedience to those above
them. That Jews or Gentiles may not suspect any ill Issues or Infusions of
Christian Principles, as if they were exclusive of moral Virtue; and that
Inferiors either were, or that they might be the worse for their being
Christians. Lastly, since Masters are a kind of Domestic Magistrates, to whom
Obedience also is due by the same divine Right, (and no sturdy Servant will
ever make a good Subject,) Servants therefore must be urged to be Obedient to
their own Masters, Ver. 8, 9, 10.
and to please them well in all things, not answering again, for This Great
Reason, that they may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things; and
that he who is of the contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say
of them.

4. From All which ways of Argumentation put together, I conceive my self
qualified to make these profitable Conclusions. That Obedience and Submission
to every Ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether Supreme, or Subordinate
by his Commission, does make the most (of all Duties) for the Ornament and
Honor of Christianity. That Disobedience and Resistance do make the most for
its Disgrace. That the Doctrine of Obedience to public Parents, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical, is more authenticated and taught by Jesus Christ and his
Apostles throughout the Gospel, than by all other Systems, Codes, or Pandects,
by all other Bodies, Collections, or Constitutions of Religion, or Philosophy,
throughout the World. From all which things it seems to follow, that they who
call themselves Christians, and yet are Authors or Fomenters of Schisms and
Factions, (such industrious Embroilers of Church and State, by sowing the Seeds
of coffeehouse and of dissatisfaction in People's Minds, as if they longed
to be fishing in Troubled Waters and to be licking up again those public
Spoils and Revenues, which they were forced to disgorge in the Great Year of
Restitution,) They (I say) who thus act, and yet do call themselves Christians,
are the greatest Antichristians, the greatest Adversaries of Christ, and the
greatest underminers of Christianity, which He can possibly set on Work who was
a Murderer from the Beginning. Can any Man wonder at the spreading of
Irreligion and Atheism, more since the Year 41, than ever before in our
Memories, and perhaps in our Readings too? (unless I may except the Days of
Hildebrand, when Hell is said to have broken loose?) One account of it is plain
and obvious: The horridst Rebellion under Heaven (from after the Year 41)
having been managed by Christians, made the name odious ever since. Insomuch
that some Blasphemers have dared to say, (not That old and common word only,
sit Anima mea cum Philosophis, but as the effect of a greater hatred,) They
would not endure going to heaven, if they thought they should meet with such
Christians There. Which, though the language of the most stupid and
thick-headed Sinners, who can no better distinguish 'twixt Words and Things, or
'twixt the Picture and the Life, or 'twixt the Vizard and the true Face, or
'twixt the Actor and the Man, or 'twixt the Use and the Abuse of the best
things that can be named, or last of all, betwixt a Nominal and Real Christian;
should yet be sufficient to deter such as are Christians at least in Wish, from
giving occasion for the future to such Aversions. If the Enemies of Christ
would but read over our Gospel, and well consider it, they would be juster and
more ingenuous, than to look upon Rebels and Mutineers, in Christian Kingdoms
and Commonwealths, as truly Christians. But rather would guess that out of
Malice they wear the Profession of Christianity, to make it odious; on purpose
to bring it into disgrace; and (as much as in them lies) to make us all ashamed
of it. Though God be thanked we are so far from being ashamed of the Gospel of
Christ, or ashamed of our Affliction in the Gospel's being abused, Jam. 2. 7.
and in The Adversaries Blaspheming that worthy Name, by which it is our
Happiness and our Privilege to be called, that we Act. 5. 41.
rejoice to be thought worthy to suffer shame for Christ's sake. Yea it is our
(...), Such Disgrace is our Boasting; and we Romans 5. 3.
glory in Tribulations. Yea one step farther S. Paul advances; we do so glory
in our disparagement which we suffer for our Submission to every Ordinance of
man upon Christ's account, or in Obedience to his Doctrine, or for the Lord's
sake, (as S. Peter speaks,) that we glory in Nothing else. God forbid that we
should Glory (says S. Paul to the Galatians) save in the Cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Gal. 6. 14.
by whom the World is crucified unto us, and we unto the World.

5. But what I speak last is but Occasional, and may be reckoned as a
Parenthesis, showing All are not staggered or wavering in the Faith, though
many are. And indeed they are so many whom the Schisms and Rebellions of men
professing Christianity have made to waver, if there are not many more whom
they have made to fall off; There are so many who do suspect the Christian Name
in them that wear it as a cloak of Maliciousness, (which S. Peter provides
against in the 16th. Verse of this Chapter,) and so many who do detest it for
being so worn; that if ever there can be any, This is certainly the Time,
wherein the People are to be pressed to obey their Governors. God I mean in
the first place, and human Authority in the second. And This as really in the
second, as that other in the first, because our Obedience to the first does
clearly depend (for its Completion) upon our Obedience to the second. Men
should be made to understand, by perspicuous and frequent and cogent
reasonings, how the whole of our Religion may be easily wound up into these two
Bottoms; our adaequate Obedience to God and Man. To the Royal Law of Christ,
and to the Laws of the Nation wherein we live; whether those Laws are
Ecclesiastical, or Civil. These two are the Measures we may warrantably take of
our selves, and others. These two are the Touchstones by which we all are to be
tried. Not the one without the other. There is no fearing God, without
honoring the King, nor vice versa. Our Obedience to God is a thing impossible,
without a suitable Obedience to his Vicegerents; whether the King as Supreme,
or other Governors Subordinate. These commissioned by Him, as He by God. Not
only Scripture, and Reason, but long Experience, and Observation, have made me
look on These two as things which are never to be parted, either in Practice,
or in Discourse. Without These two, all the rest are worth nothing. And neither
of These alone can be sincere without the other. Prove. 24. 21.
My Son (says Solomon) fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with Them
that are given to change. Either fear them Both, or Neither; though each in his
Order; The Lord for his own sake, and therefore First; The King for the Lord's
sake, and therefore Second. But meddle not with Them, whose evil communication
may corrupt thy good manners; and therefore meddle not with Them that are given
to change, who do neither fear God, nor honor the King; and accordingly are
weighed in the opposite Scale of the Wise man's Balance. The People must not
only be told now and then upon the By, but must purposely be taught, nor must
they cease from being taught until convinced of this union, [The fear of God
and of the King, Obedience to Divine and to human Laws,] as essential to our
Present and Future Safety.

6. When I inquire into the Reasons, why amongst a World of Christians there is
so little of Christianity; and why the Protestants themselves divide as much
from one another, as they all do from the Church of Rome, which is as much as
from the Jews or the Turks themselves, (for they will no more communicate with
the one than with the other, although in most Fundamentals they All agree,)
This, amongst several other reasons, appears to me to be the chief, that there
is one thing Essential to the Christian Religion, and by consequence to the
Salvation of all men's Souls, which, however a Fundamental, is not yet so well
known, or not so heartily believed, or not so seriously considered, and laid to
heart, nor so duly preached up, as it ought to be. For if it were, there could
not be so many Schisms and Separations here in England, as now there are. There
could not be by any means such Inclinations to Rebellion, such Oppositions of
Authority, and such Contempt of human Laws, (whether Civil or Ecclesiastical,)
as now we see there are daily; and are rather in a likelihood to grow worse and
worse, than in any present Hope of a sound Amendment. Now the Truth which is
Essential to our Christian Religion, and to the saving of our Souls, (which I
conceive to be so seldom either known, or believed, or sufficiently Considered,
or Taught as such,) is plainly This: [That the Duties of the First Table,
cannot possibly subsist without the Duties of the Second. That Obedience to
God, does ever include and carry with it a strict Obedience unto our
Governors. That human Laws (where e're the matter of them is lawful) are the
Laws of God too. And that for this cogent irresistible reason, (which I have
several times urged, and think I can never urge it enough,) because commanded
by that Authority which God has commanded us to obey.]

7. Shall I exemplify and illustrate what I say by plain Scripture on either
side? God forbids us by Moses to worship Idols. And He bids us, by S. Peter,
submit our selves to every Ordinance of man. Again, He bids us, by S. Paul,
Obey them that have the Rule over us. Heb. 13. 17.
Now is not God's Law as binding in what he bids, as in what he forbids his
peculiar People? I know the former binds Semper, and the later ad Semper. But
when they Both bind, they cannot but bind with an Aequality. Or is not his
peremptory Command as obliging under the Gospel, as it was under the Law? Is
not the Message of God as good, when dispatched to us Christians by S. Peter,
and S. Paul, and by Christ himself, as when sent unto the Jews by a single
Moses? Is not God the same Jehova to Them and Us? and his Word as authentic in
these last Times, as in the First? Why then do not Christians make it a matter
of as much Conscience, to obey the Laws of Men whom God has commanded them to
obey, as not to worship a graven Image which God has commanded them not to
worship? That Each is equally God's Command, was never denied by any Christian,
nor ever can be. And is not His Command that we do a Good thing, as valid as
his Command that we abstain from what is evil? Yea, it is as much a Christian's
Duty, to obey his lawful Governors, and by consequence their Laws
Ecclesiastical and Civil, as it is, not to worship a graven Image. The first is
as conducible to our Salvation as the second. And Damnation is as much
threatened to the Breach of the one, as the other Precept.

8. Now in my slender judgment, (and such as it is, it is the best I have,)
there can be no likelier way, whereby to win over our weak and dissenting
Brethren from the ways of Separation they have espoused, than that of laboring
to convince them by all good means, from the Pulpit, and from the Pew, and in
the privacy of the Closet, by public Preaching, and Catechizing, and private
Conferences especially (which we shall find to be ever the most effectual,)
that (saving the Dignity and Priority of the first and great Commandment, as
the Ground and Foundation of all the rest,) our Obedience to our Governors,
and human Laws in force amongst us, is as really an essential or Fundamental of
Christianity, and of as absolute Necessity to our Salvation, as the Belief of
one God, or any other that can be named. It being as rigidly commanded by God
in Scripture, under the very same Promises of Reward if we obey, and under the
very same Threats of endless Punishment if we rebel. It Is not enough that This
Doctrine be like the Homily of the Church against Rebellion, which is commanded
by Law and Canon to be read once a year in every Parish; nor is it enough that
it be preached up of course upon the Thirtieth of January, and the Fifth of
November; But it is of absolute necessity to be riveted and ingrain'd, first of
all into the Heads, and after That, into the Hearts of People committed to our
charge, that they must needs be Subject, (that is, Obedient) to human
Magistrates and Laws, not only for fear of the Magistrates Wrath, or for hope
of worldly Profit, no nor only for fear of Hell, or for hope of Heaven, but
(as S. Paul goes on to tell us) for Conscience sake. I say, for Conscience
toward God, and for Conscience toward our selves, because it is part of the
Law of Nature, and simply Good in it self: not consequentially, (as every
positive Law is) but antecedently obliging, and without any the least relation
to God's particular written Law, (so often repeated in the Scriptures,) though
This does make our Disobedience to be the more unexcusable, and the Person
disobeying fit for the greater Condemnation. Matthew. 23. 14.
I know the Custom of Disobedience, and the great Numbers of the Refractary,
and their Impunity thereupon, and the seemingly-good morals of some Dissenters,
and their giving out themselves for the Godly Party, (These five Fallacies put
together) have bred an opinion in many weak and unwary Christians, that they
need not be subject to the Higher Powers upon Earth, though S. Paul says they
Need, Romans 13. 5. That the Powers spoken of are not the Ordinance of God,
though S. Paul says they are. (v. 1, 2.) That they may not submit to every
Ordinance of Man, though S. Peter says they must. (1 Pet. 2. 13.) And so they
imagine that it consists with a Godly life, to slight the Authority of their
Governors, and scorn their Laws, unless when their Governors and their Laws
are to protect Them and Theirs, both in their Livelihoods and their Lives, from
fraud and violence. (in which one case, they will readily submit to every
Ordinance of man, though not for the Lord's sake, as S. Peter would have it,
yet for their own.) In a word, they think it lawful, to live in Schism, if not
in Sacrilege; (still in Sacrilege where they are able;) and so to tear in
pieces, not the Seamless Coat only, but the Body of Christ crucified in a
mystical sense.

9. To frame an Amulet in proportion to the Contagion of this Disease,
wherewith a world of easy Souls of catching Complexions have been infected, I
humbly conceive it may be made of these Six Ingredients.

First, that no Form of Godliness can be other than Pharisaical, which is not
attended with common Honesty.

Next, that none can be truly honest, who do not render to All their Dues.
Tribute to whom Tribute is due, Custom to whom Custom, Fear to whom Fear,
Honor to whom Honor. ( Romans 13. 7.)

Thirdly, that nothing can be more due from any one to any other, than from the
Subject to the Sovereign, and all in Authority under Him. To wit, the Tribute
of Obedience, as well as Money; the active Custom of Conformity, as well as
passive Subjection to Laws in force; and as well to Those Laws which tend to
the public Peace and Safety, as those others which maintain us in the private
enjoyment of our Estates; The Fear of offending, as well as of suffering for
our Offenses; lastly, the Honor of inward Reverence, as well as of outward
Complaisance. Not as Men-pleasers, but as the Servants of Christ.

Fourthly, that a Dishonest man is ipso facto and eo ipso an ungodly man; and
Disobedience to the Fifth Precept, as bad as Rebellion against the seventh or
the eighth, or rather worse; And so a Common Nonconformist to Laws established,
is (to speak within compass) as Scandalous in his life as a Common Drunkard.

Fifthly, that such a Subject as will no longer allow the Laws, than the Laws
allow Him in his being lawless, or no longer than they are useful and pleasant
to him, (as when they avenge him upon his Enemies, protect him in his Liberty,
and assert him in his Estate,) deserves not those Benefits of Propriety and
safety the Laws afford him.

Sixthly, that as many as do avow themselves Protestants, and yet divide from
the Church of England, do contribute a great deal more toward the bringing in
of Popery, than All the Emissaries of Rome could have done without them.

10. If we earnestly desire (at least as much as in us lies) to put an end to
all Schisms and Separations; to procure or promote the public Peace of this
Nation, and (in That) the public Safety, by procuring and promoting Uniformity
in Religion, and a general Conformity to the Laws we live under; we must be
restless in convincing all the People we can converse with of these Six things.
Not only by making them unable to deny, but by making them able to assert the
Truth of them, and thereby to be Converters of other men. We must never be at
rest, nor let Them be so, until they are perfect in these Particulars. Or if
not in all, yet especially in the chief. As, that though the Laws of God cannot
possibly depend on the Laws of Men, (but vice versa,) yet our Obedience to
God's own Laws does depend on our Obedience to Those of Men. They only differ
by the Distinction of mediate and immediate. And so they are Termini
Convertibiles; for the immediate Laws of Men are the mediate Laws of God. And
that by force of This Text (never enough to be repeated, and chewed upon,)
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. And why for
the Lord's sake, if not because the Lord has so appointed? What God does
mediately command by his several Deputies, his Moses, and his Aaron, his
Zerubbabel, and his Joshua, and all his succeeding Legislators in Church and
State, He does as really, and as truly, and as bindingly command, as what He
immediately commands by a Voice from Heaven. In so much that the Distinction of
mediate and immediate does no ways alter the Obligation, or make God's Law
either more or less His. Now though the Doctrine of Obedience unto the mediate
Commands of God, is very learnedly, and piously, and frequently preached in
many Places, yet it has not universally its wished effect, because not preached
as a Fundamental, as essential to our Religion, and as of absolute Necessity to
the Salvation of the Soul. The Doctrine cannot be pressed enough, until it is
pressed in This Notion. For Liberty is so sweet, and Obligation so distasteful
to most men's Palates, that they will never make Conscience of being punctually
Obedient to human Ordinances and Laws, whilst they are flattered that their
Souls may be saved without it.

11. Touching the several Ways and Means whereby This Work is to be done, I am
plainly of This opinion. That though it may be well done from out the Pulpit,
in such profitable Discourses as we commonly call Sermons; yet very much better
it may be done out of the Pew, in the more primitive way of Preaching, and the
more profitable, I think, which is Catechizing. But best of all by private
Conference, wherein we deal with our Dissenters one by one; and give them the
reasonable Advantage (which in the public they cannot have) of alleging all
they can for their Separation, and of objecting all they can against our Church
from which they separate, and by consequence against the 33 Acts of Parliament
by which our Liturgy and Church do remain established. For This Advantage given
to Them by a Private Conference, gives Us also the Advantage of giving clear
and full Answers to their Objections. Which if we do to their Satisfaction, we
shall gain them back to God, and to His Spouse (our Dear Mother) The Church of
England. This we certainly shall do, if their Error is but of Weakness, and so
consistent with an honest well meaning Spirit; whereas if of Wilfulness, Pride,
and Stomach, Then indeed they are possessed with such a Deaf and Dumb Spirit,
as of which (without a Miracle) we are not able to dispossess them. And so we
may lawfully give them over as incurable Patients on whom All Remedies are cast
away. (As we may lawfully cease to cast that which is holy unto Dogs.) For in
good Earnest, of the two, I do esteem it a lesser Miracle, to make the Blind
man to see, or the Deaf to hear, than either the Wilful to believe, or the
Obstinate to submit to the clearest Reason. The only Charity left for Such, is
to deliver them up to Satan; I will not say for the Destruction, but
Humiliation of the Flesh; that so (if by any means possible) their Spirits may
be saved in the Day of the Lord Jesus. 1 Cor. 5. 5.


12. If what I have said is not sufficient to reach the end I aim at, I will
try what success I may happen to obtain by a shorter Method; The Method of
Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, a very Noble Roman of known Integrity. Who being
accused before the People in a very long Oration by Varius Sucronensis an
envious Knave, defended himself in a very short one; or (to say truly) in None
at all. For disdaining to contend with his base Enemy in words, He only asked
the Roman People this Question. Which of the Two (ye men of Rome) think ye the
worthier of your Belief? Varius Sucronensis, who does confidently affirm
Aemilius Scaurus to be Guilty? or Aemilius Scaurus rather, who does protest
that he is Innocent? Upon which words alone the Person accused was acquitted;
and the Envious Accuser severely censured.

In a manner not unlike I shall only say Here. The great Apostle S. Peter, as
the Holy Ghost's Penman, bids us all submit our selves to every Ordinance of
Man for the Lord's sake. Whether to the King, as Supreme; or unto Governors,
as sent by Him. But certain men of these Times, crept in unawares, who despise
Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, who think themselves of more knowledge
and greater Authority than S. Peter, do as absolutely forbid, as S. Peter bids
us. They will not have us submit to any Ordinance of Man, either Subordinate,
or Supreme. But they will have us ( for the Lord's sake) to recalcitrate
rather, and kick, at every Ordinance of Man, as incroaching too much on our
Christian Liberty. Now if I ask which of the Two, (S. Peter, or His Enemies,)
we ought to follow, or obey; very confident I am, ye will say S. Peter.

These (I think) are words enough to have been used at This Time, upon the
grounds I have to hope that No more are needful.

A CAVEAT Touching the Danger of REFUSING THOSE CAVEATS Our LORD has given us
in His GOSPEL.
HEB. 12. 25. See that ye Refuse not Him that speaks. For if They escaped not
who refused Him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not We escape, if we turn
away from Him that speaks from Heaven.
1. AS it has frequently been said of the Laws of England, They are so many,
and so good, that there needs but one more, for the putting of the rest into
Execution; so I may say with like reason of Sermons too; They are so every
where enough, in case they are enough heeded, that there needs but one more,
for the procuring to the rest a kind and hospitable Reception. For without such
a Reception, 'twere better for us that our Sermons were not fewer only, but
worse too. My reason is, because the more, and the more powerful our Teaching
is, by so much the more our Non-Proficiency must needs be rendered Inexcusable.
Regular Preaching was ever reckoned amongst the means of Salvation. And by the
means of Salvation whosoever is not bettered, must needs be worse. Not to go
forwards, is to go backwards, in the School of Christ; And when the Gospel is
not admitted but to our outward Ears only, it cannot be but as a Millstone
about our Necks too. Luke 2. 34.
For as 'twas said by old Simeon of Christ Himself, That he is certainly for
the Fall, Mat. 23. 14.
where he is not for the Rising of many in Israel; Mat. 12. 40.
so the Preaching of Christ, if we profit not by it, will accidentally be
employed unto our greater Damnation.

2. Now considering this duly, with one thing more, That as Creeds have
multiplied, True Believers have decreased; That as Christian Professors do grow
more numerous, Christianity it self does seem to lessen; And that the Multitude
of Religions has been in some Danger to thrust Religion out of the World, (the
Spirit of God being of Unity, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4.
and not of Division, whereas the Devils name is Legion, Mar. 5. 9.
for they are many,) I say considering all This, both in the Causes and the
Effects, and that the Time is long since come, wherein Professors of
Christianity will not endure sound Doctrine, 2 Timothy 4. 3.
but having proud and Itching Ears do heap up Teachers to themselves, such as
make for their Palate, and hit their Fancy, (which very Teachers cannot please
them one minute longer, than whilst they speak pleasant Things, and only
prophecy Deceit,) and that of all our Epidemical or National Sins, none is
likelier to provoke or pull down National Calamities, than a general slighting
and contempt of the Messages of God in the Mouths of Men; I think it will not
be impertinent to press that Caveat upon our selves, which God's inspired
Amanuensis did inculcate somewhat often on his Disciples, (a Caveat which
deserves and bespeaks an Audience, and which does not only invite, but also
threaten us into Attention,) See that ye refuse not Him that speaks. For if
they escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from Him that speaks from Heaven.

3. The Text considered in the gross, is a rowzing Warning, or Alarm. And being
taken in the retail, it has Three general parts. First, the matter of the
Warning, which though but negatively expressed by a bare [not refusing him that
speaks,] yet sure it cannot but be implied, that we must give a great
Attention to the excellent Things that are spoken by him. Secondly, the
Persons, who (above all other Persons) are most concerned; and These are
implied in the Pronoun Ye. Ye that are Christians of the Hebrews, as having
heard and embraced the Faith of Christ, (...), See that Ye do not refuse. See
that Ye be not debauched by whatsoever solicitations of Jews or Gnostics.
Thirdly, the Argument, or Ground, by which the Warning is enforced and urged
on; and This again is twofold. First the Experience of greater Mercies than had
been shown unto the Jews; Next, the Sequel of greater Judgments, in case those
Mercies shall be abused. The greater Mercies are very evident from the
comparison in the Text. They were spoken to by Moses, but We by Christ. Heb. 3.
5.
Moses was faithful in all his house as a Servant, but Christ as a Son. Moses
spoke to Them on Earth, but Christ does speak to Us from Heaven. And that the
Judgments must be greater in case the Mercies shall be abused, is just as
evident from the Reason on which the Text is here built. For Ingratitude is a
Sin the most provoking to be imagined. And This receiving its aggravation from
the number and weight of foregoing Favors, infers our Judge so much the
fiercer in being revenged upon our Sins, the more indearing obligations we Sin
against. For if they escaped not who refused Him that spoke on Earth, much more
shall not we, if we turn away from Him that speaks from Heaven.

Having thus viewed the Text in its several parts, let us observe the
Propositions which are deducible from the whole.

First, as Men (in the general) above all other Creatures, so Christians (in
particular) above all other Men, are not only not to refuse, but to embrace,
and adore Him that speaks to them from Heaven. We must not only be
contemplative, but practical Hearers of the Word.

Secondly, Christians are not excusable for their Apostacies or Neglects, by
the greatest Temptations to be imagined. But the greater Temptations they meet
withal, the greater use they are to make of their Ghostly strength, and the
more to illustrate their Christian Courage. For

Thirdly, the more we do enjoy the glorious Privileges of Christians, the more
obnoxious we are to consuming Fire, (in the last Verse of this Chapter,) on a
supposal that we be found to be dry, and fruitless, and so combustible matter
for it.

Lastly, not to give Attention to the Word of God speaking, not to love and
entertain it with Faith and Fear, does pass with Him for a flat Refusal. For
(...) is to reject with an Aversation; it is the word S. Paul uses, when he
exhorts his Son Timothy to refuse Profane and old Wives Fables. 1 Timothy 4. 7.
And the opposite Thing to it is (...), to give an earnest heed unto the words
which we have heard. ( Heb. 2. 1.) Betwixt which two because we see not any
medium, (...), See the rather that ye refuse not him that speaks.

The third of these Propositions is an Inforcement of the first, and must be
therefore treated of in conjunction with it. But yet since it is not the sole
Inforcement, (nor indeed should be the chief, were we men of more ingenuous and
generous Natures,) it will be fit to introduce it with some few others, and
such as are aptest to prevail with men of the noblest Dispositions.

Now there are four things especially, (all arising out of the Text,) by which
this Warning may be enforced. To wit, the Quality of the Speaker, the Nature of
what is spoken, the Condition of the Persons to whom he speaks, and the
Inevitable Destruction to such as are guilty of a Refusal.

4. First consider who it is that speaks unto us in the Gospel. It Is He that
sits between the Cherubims, and covers himself with Light, as with a
Garment. He that inhabiteth Eternity, and dwells in that Light which no
mortal Eye can approach unto. He of whom it is therefore said by the royal
Psalmist, that Clouds and Darkness are round about him, though righteousness
and judgment are the Habitation of his Seat. He that stretches out the
Heavens, and lays the Foundations of the earth, and forms the Spirit of man
within him. He that guards us with his Angels, and that guides us by his
Spirit. He that protects us by his Providence, and directs us by his Grace, and
that orders all he does to crown us finally with his Glory. In a word, it is God
the Father, that speaks unto us in the Gospel by God the Son. And therefore for
this, if for no other reason, so that ye refuse not Him that speaks, because
he speaks in the language of unspeakable Love, and unspeakable Humility. For
when as yet we lay weltring and polluted in our Blood, how did he save us as so
many Brands plucked out of the Burning? how very gladly did he descend from out
the Bosom of the Father, to bid us Live? 'Twas He that descended to be born, to
make himself capable of dying. 'Twas He that died for our sins, to become
capable of rising for our Justification. 'Twas He that rose, and ascended, and
sat him down on the right hand of the Throne of Majesty on high, Heb. 1. 3.
That there he might make Intercession for us; That by the Gifts of his
Apostles whom he inspired for that end, he might cause his holy Gospel to be
still Echoing in our Ears; and that by sending his Holy Spirit at once to
sanctify and instruct us, he might place it as a Signet upon our Hearts too.
From whence it follows unavoidably, That if we miss of those things which have
thus been prepared and purchased for us, and shall finally come short of the
glory of God, we cannot say unto God, that He has withheld his good things
from us; but God may rather say to us, as heretofore to his People Israel, Jer.
5. 25.
Your Iniquities have turned away these things, and your Sins have withholden
good things from you. It Is only the hardness of our Hearts, and the Spirit
within, which hardens every thing else that is without us. It Is That that many
times makes the Heavens Brass over our heads, Deuteronomy. 28. 23.
and the Earth Iron under our feet. It Is very certain that on God's part,
nothing has been wanting to make us happy. He came to this end, that we might
receive him. He spoke to this end, that we might hear him. Was lifted up to
this end, that he might draw us up after him. And draws us up to this end, that
he may seat us with himself at the right hand of God. And if our hearts are now
such heavy, such unweildy pieces of Iron, or have a mixture of so much Lead in
their composition, as not to be lifted above the Earth by so strong a
Loadstone, it does not argue a want on Christ's part, of enough Magnetic
Virtue whereby to draw us, but only a wilfulness on ours, whereby we gain an
Incapacity of being drawn.

Now for the better overcoming this brutish fleshliness of our Spirits, let us
repeat and reinforce the Consideration we are upon. God the Father speaks to
us, by God the Son, what is written by the Suggestion of God the Holy Ghost.
There is nothing of Human in all the Gospel, besides the labor of the
Evangelists, in committing it to Posterity with Ink and Parchment, which yet
was done by the Conduct of God himself. It Is true the Law was of God too, but
That came by Joh. 1. 17.
Moses; whereas the Gospel came from him by Jesus Christ. Christ was sent and
Joh. 14. 10.
commissioned by God the Father, as the Apostles were commissioned and sent by
Christ. For so he told them at that Instant when he gave them their Mission and
their Commission, (Joh. 20. 21.) As my Father sent Me, Joh. 14. 10.
so send I You. Joh. 20. 21.
From whence he is called by S. Paul, not only the high Priest, but the
Apostle of our Profession, Heb. 3. 1. All the Twelve were but Apostles of this
one great Apostle, as well to offer us the Terms of Peace and Pardon, as to
entreat and implore our Acceptance of it. Now when God sends Himself in a
Message to us; when the Heavens are bowed down to embrace the Earth; when even
Happiness it self is brought to visit us at our Houses, (which at present are
but floating in a Valley of Tears;) and brought by Him who is the Author of
Bliss and Glory; whose Dwelling is not only in, but above the Heavens; to whom
the Sun in his Zenith is but a Shadow, and the whole Globe of Earth but an
humble Footstool; sure the least we can do, is to bid him welcome, to give him
an hospitable Reception, and to open the Door of the House within us, at which
he is pleased to stand knocking, and sue for Entrance, with a Behold I stand at
the Door and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the Door, I will come in
to him, and sup with him, and he with me, (Rev. 3. 20.) And therefore if ye can
afford him no better cheer, yet at least entertain him without Contempt, never
treat him at his coming with a dishonorable Averseness, (...), See that ye
refuse not him that speaks.

How many Miles did men go, in the heathen World, to hear but a Socrates, or a
Pythagoras, a Plato, or a Plotinus? How many Miles went a Queen, to hear the
Apophthegms of Solomon? what pains were taken by the Jews, to hear the reading
of the Law? what by Naaman the Syrian, to hear the Counsel of Elisha, a single
Prophet? And shall not God obtain a hearing, when he speaks to us by his Son?
and by such a Son too, as is God himself? Certainly for the hearing of such a
Speaker, 'twere worth our labor to go to Him, although it should cost us a
longer Journey than from Sheba to Jerusalem; much less should we refuse him,
when He (in prevention,) is come to us; when God, to make us his adopted Sons,
does freely expose his only begotten; and appoints him the Speaker, who is the
Word too; I mean the hypostatical eternal Word. Who yet does Rev. 3. 20.
stand at our Door, in a posture of painfulness and humility, whilst we are
lolling in his House, and perhaps sitting at his Table. How that the Dignity of
the Speaker should become an Incitement to our Attention, and what attention we
ought to give to Him that speaks in the Gospel, we may infer from that which
Moses did once exact under the Law. What Attention that was, and how he evinced
the greatness of it from the great Dignity of the Speaker, will best be seen by
comparing three passages of Scripture. Deuteronomy. 4. 32, 33. Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9.
and Deuteronomy. 11. 18, 19, 20. In the first of which three, Moses magnifies the
Privilege allowed by God to the People Israel, To hear the voice of God
speaking from out the midst of the Fire. Did ever People hear the like? in any
Time? or at any Place? First, for Time, Ask the days that are past, since the
day wherein God created Man upon the earth. Secondly, for Place, Ask from the
one side of heaven unto the other, whether there has been any such thing as
This, or has been ever heard like it. In the two next passages, Moses strictly
injoyns the People, to addict themselves wholly to the words of God's Law; to
be conversant with them both Day and Night; to have them always upon their
Hands, and in their Mouths, between their Eyes, and in their Hearts. Whereupon
we are to argue a minori ad majus. If such attention was to be given to what
was spoken only by Moses to all the People, how much more to what is spoken by
Jesus Christ? for Christ was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, in as
much as He that built the House, has more honor than the House, (Heb. 3. 3.)
And by how much a Son is above a Servant. (v. 5, 6.) And therefore if the Words
which God had spoken by his Servant, much more are the Words which He has
spoken by his Son, very fit to be written upon our Gates, and our Door-posts,
to be fixed as Frontlets between our Eyes, to be set as a Seal upon our Hands,
and as a Signet upon our Hearts. We ought to teach them unto our Children, and
to be ruminating on them on all Occasions, in season, out of season, when we
sit in our Houses, and when we walk by the way, when we lie down, and when we
rise up. And thus we have the first of the four Inforcements, by which the
Warning of our Apostle may be set home upon our Souls.

5. Secondly, Let us consider, (after the Quality of the Speaker,) the Nature
of the Things that are spoken by him. They are not any such hard and
insupportable sayings, as once were heard from Mount Ebal, Deuteronomy. 27. 26.
Cursed is he that continues not in all things which are written in the Book
of the Law to do them; Gal. 3. 10.
no nor such as were spoken long before at Beersheba, and to be put in
Execution on Mount Moriah, Genesis 22. 2.
Take now thy Son, thine only Son whom thou love, and offer him for a
Burnt-offering, upon one of the Mountains which I shall tell thee of. No, he
does not require of us any such Terrible Expressions of our Obedience. He
commands us to kill and slay, not our Children, but our Sins. And yet our Sins
are our Children too, the fruit of our Bodies very often, and still the fruit
of our Souls. Nay, many times these ugly Children, (I mean our Sins,) are
dearer to us than Sons or Daughters. (Agamemnon found it easier to kill a
Daughter, than a Lust.) But they are viperous Darlings we so much dote on; such
miscreant Children as will kill their own Parents, if not prevented by being
killed. And these alone are the Children, which God requires us to sacrifice to
his Displeasure. Not our Isaacs, Genesis 16. 12.
but our Ishmaels, (I mean our wild, and furious, illegitimate Offspring) are
to be slain. We must sacrifice our Dishonesty, by doing Justice; we must
sacrifice our Avarice, by showing Mercy; and we must sacrifice our Pride, by
walking humbly with our God. Mic. 6. 8. Well, ye have heard what it is not;
will ye now know what it is, which God in Christ does speak to us? he speaks
the best and the happiest Tidings, that any wounded or broken Spirit can hope
or pray for. So God loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in Him, should not perish, but have life ever lasting. Joh.
3. 16. God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. v. 17. If any man thirst, let him come unto
me and drink. Joh. 7. 37. He that believes in me, there shall flow out of his
Belly, Rivers of living water. v. 38. If a man keep my saying, he shall never
see Death. Joh. 8. 51. Come unto me all ye that travel and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest. Mat. 11. 28. And if ye ask any thing in my name, I will
do it. Joh. 14. 14. Thus we find God the Father speaking to us by his Son. Now
observe how God the Son is speaking to us by his Servants. If any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
propitiation for all our sins. 1 John 2. 1. He that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him, also freely give us all
things? Romans 8. 32. And here I cannot but call to mind what was said unto
Naaman the churlish Syrian. 2 King. 5. 10, 11, 12, 13.
Who coming to Elisha to be cured of his Leprosy, was prescribed by the
Prophet no harder Medicine than to wash seven times in the River Jordan. When
He, being Angry, in stead of Thankful, asked if Abana and Pharpar, Rivers of
Damascus, were not better than all the Waters of Israel. An Ingratitude so
excessive, that his own Servants took him up, I know not whether with a more
melting or a more cutting kind of Rebuke, saying to him, My Father, if the
Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? how
much rather when he says to thee, wash and be clean? After the very same
manner may I say here. If God had sent us a Message by his Archangel Michael,
who is said by the Rabbis to be the Messenger of his Justice, and so to bring
news of the saddest nature; should we not have entertained him as a Messenger
from Heaven, with Fear and Reverence? And then, (with a greater force of
reason,) when a Messenger so glorious, and one withal so obliging is sent unto
us, as God manifest in the Flesh; and sent unto us in such a Message, as is not
only the word of God, but the word of Reconciliation; 2 Cor. 5. 9.
sure the least we can render for so much Mercy, is not only very willingly,
but very thankfully to receive it. And therefore as for the former, so for this
reason also, (...), See that ye refuse not him that speaks.

6. Thirdly, let us consider, (after the Quality of the Speaker, and the Nature
of what is spoken,) the Condition of the Persons to whom he speaks. Even to us
who were Gentiles, that had long sat in Darkness, and the shadow of Death. To
us who were so diseased and sick of sin, as that we could not be cured but by
the Death of our Physician, Mal. 4. 2.
this Sun of Righteousness did arise, with healing in his Wings, and translated
us out of Darkness into his mavelous light. We had nothing but Sin and Misery
to make us capable of his compassion; and nothing more than his own compassion
to make us capable of his Love. For had he not loved us whilst we were
loathsome, and in a state of Depravation, he had not given himself for us to
make us lovely, Tit. 2. 14.
that is, to redeem us from all Iniquity. And since the hardness of our Hearts
was able enough to break His, (I mean, to break it) into compassion, and pity
toward us; shall not the tenderness of his Heart be able enough to melt ours,
(I mean, to melt them) into Tears of sincere Repentance? At least it should
melt us into so much good Nature, as to afford him willing Ears when he speaks
unto us. You know it is uncivil for any Aequal to look aside when another
speaks. But it is sawciness in a Cottager, to slight the speech of his noble
Landlord. It Is more than Insolence in a Subject, not to attend unto the words
of a gracious Sovereign. How great a Crime is it (by consequence,) as well as a
clownery in Religion, either to laugh, or look aside, or any other ways to
express an haughty Carelessness, or Neglect, when God himself in his Gospel is
speaking to us by his Son? The Men of Israel and of Judah were more obnoxious
to Judgment than Those of Nineve, both for slighting His preaching who was
greater than Jonah, and because they were a People much more obliged. For as
the better he is that speaks, the worse it is, not to attend him; or as the
more the Things spoken have been obliging, the contempt of such things is the
more enormous; so the more favors they have received to whom the word of God
is offered, the more unpardonable they are on supposition of their Refusal.
Indeed the Jews, and the Mahomedans, or the Salvages of America, may refuse the
Lord Jesus with some color of Excuse. But we are capable of none, if we
neglect so great Salvation, when brought unto us by a Savior with whom from
our Birth we have been acquainted, and of whom we know This, (by the
instruction of S. Peter,) that He alone has the words of Eternal Life. And
therefore whatever is done by others, who are but Aliens and Strangers to
Christianity; yet in remembrance of the Privilege and the Dignity of your
Vocation, your having been washed in the laver of Baptism, Heb. 6. 4, 5.
your having had a Taste of the heavenly gift, and of the Powers of the world
to come, your being a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a
peculiar People, which in time past were not a People, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 10.
but are now the People of God, which had not once obtained Mercy, but have now
obtained Mercy, (...), See that ye refuse not him that speaks.

7. Last of all, let us consider, (after the Quality of the Speaker, the
excellent Nature of what is spoken, and the Condition of the Persons to whom he
speaks,) the greater Degrees of Condemnation to such as are guilty of a
Refusal. For as the Dignity of our Calling is above that of others, so we find
our selves obliged to greater Duty. And the more we are rewardable for our
Discharge of such Duty, by so much the greater is our Danger, if we neglect it.
For the Gospel will condemn us to greater misery than the Law, upon that
Supposal. An injured Savior will become a most angry Judge. And our contempt
of richer Favors than had been shown in Times past, will but excite our
Benefactor to greater Fury. Mark (I pray) what it is, which I am now to
demonstrate, and press you with, (for what you can never enough remember, I
cannot mind you of too often,) That as the greater Dignities are allowed us,
the stricter Duties we are enjoined; so by how much the stricter our Duties
are, we must needs be obnoxious to greater Dangers. To Mat. 13. 11.
us it is given to know the Will of our Master, and the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Here lies our Dignity. But if we know his Will, we must Joh.
13. 17.
do it too. There lies our Duty. For if we know it, but do it not, Luke 12. 47.
we shall be beaten with many stripes. Therein consists our greatest Danger.
It Is not the knowledge of our Duties, but the living up to our knowledge, which
will stand us instead in the Day of Wrath. Nay, All we gain by our Knowledge,
whilst it is destitute of Practice, is to be laden with greater misery than
they that know nothing at all. Heb. 1. 1, 2.
God who spoke in times past to our Forefathers by the Prophets, has in these
last days spoken to us by his Son. There lies our Dignity. But the times of
their Ignorance God winked at, (says the Apostle) who now commands all men
every where to repent. There lies our Duty, and Danger too. For if his
bespeaking us by his Son exacts to be answered by our Repentance, by so much
the greater must be our Misery if we continue in our Impenitence. And then what
Ground is it of Comfort, that God in these last days has spoken to us by his
Son, (thereby filling us with the knowledge of all the Mysteries of the
Gospel,) in case our Knowledge is become barren, and does not bring forth the
Fruits of Evangelical Integrity? to wit, impartial Obedience to the whole Law
of Christ? To what purpose is our Knowledge of all good things, without the
sedulous execution of what we know, when God who has spoken by his Son, has
spoken This in effect amongst other things, That our present Guilt will be the
more, and our future Stripes the more numerous? It had been better for us, by
consequence, He had not spoken to us at all, much less by his Son, if we shall
now slop our Ears against the Voice of this Charmer, or only open our Ears to
him, but not our Hearts. For what said our Lord of the stubborn. Jews, upon
whom he had bestowed the first fruits of his Preaching, and to whom he had
offered the first Refusal of his Favors? Joh. 15. 22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had Sin; but now (that I
am come, and have spoken, and both in vain,) they have no excuse or color for
Sin.

After the very same manner, had not God spoken to us at all, or had he spoken
to us obscurely, (as he spoke to the Gentiles before the Law, by the great Book
of the Creation, the twofold Volume of heaven and earth,) or had he spoken to
us only by Dreams, and Visions, by Vrim, and Thummim, by Types, and Figures,
by Angels, and Men, by whom he spoke unto the Jews under the Paedagogie of
Moses; we might have alleged in our excuse, (how ineffectually soever) that we
either wholly wanted the means of knowledge, or that the means were much less
than they might have been. But now since after all other Methods, by which he
spoke to us, and others, (and which are written for our Instruction,) he has
left to us in writing what he spoke to us by his Son, thereby enlightening our
Heads with an abundant measure of his Knowledge, and also has given us of his
Spirit, whereby to warm our Hearts too with a competent measure of his Grace;
what Apology or Pretense are we able to make for our Impieties? We cannot
allege at his Tribunal, That we were ignorant of his Glory, and unacquainted
with his Works; for Quicquid humano asperctui subjicitur, Templum ejus vocavit
qui sola mente conspicitur, ut qui haec veneratur ut Templa, cultum tamen
maximum debeat Conditori; sciatque quisquis in usum Templi hujus indacitur,
ritu sibi vivendum Sacerdotis. Macrobius.
the heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handy
work. (Psalm. 19. 1.) We cannot say in that hour, that we were destitute of the
Law; for He has Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.
written it in our Hearts. Nor that we wanted his Gospel; for He has put it
into our Ears. Nor that we were strangers unto his Name; for we daily take it
into our Lips. Nor can we plead that He exacted, more than 'twas possible for
us to do; for (we know) Philip. 3. 13.
we can do all things through Him that strengthens us. And he accepts
according to what we have, (although it be but a willing mind,) where nothing
more can be performed. 2 Cor. 8. 12. He accepts the least Things, where the
least are the greatest that we can give. Sincere we can be, although not
sinless. Let us but be what we can, and be perfectly willing to be what we can
not; that is, let us be perfect as it is possible for us to be, and perfectly
willing to be perfect Matthew. 5. 48.
as our Father in Heaven; and then we have that willing mind, which S. Paul
does assure us will be accepted.

But here I would not be so mistaken, (by such as love to be misled into
pleasant Errors,) as if I had hinted that the Will is still as good as the
Deed; or that if we are desirous to do our Duties, and do them not, it will
certainly serve our turn, as well as if we had done them. The Apostle does not
so speak, and I only speak with the Apostle; whose words to the Corinthians
are plainly These. If there be first a willing mind, God accepts according to
that a man has, and not according to that he has not. Which is as if he
should have said, God will not punish any man living who does as much as he is
able, for the not doing of That, which it is impossible for him to do. From
whence it is obvious to infer, not that any man may presume upon God's
acceptance of his Will, or his woulding rather, without the performance of his
Duty, when he is able to perform as well as will it; (for this were to justify
our wilfullest, which are our very worst sins;) but that when we have in
earnest done the greatest good we can, God accepts of our willingness to do the
good we can not. Being as good as we are able, he will not be angry we are no
better. When he finds us sincere in all our Services, he will not condemn us
for not being sinless. But notwithstanding all This, which is indeed for our
Comfort, It is every whit as true, and for our Humiliation, that we shall be
utterly unexcusable at the last great Audit, ( in the day when God shall judge
the Secrets of men by Jesus Christ,) in case we so far refuse Him that speaks
to us from Heaven, as live no more strictly with all the Advantages of the
Gospel, than the Jews and the Gentiles who lived without them.

First, from the Gentiles, it is argued Thus by S. Paul. Romans 1. 19, 20, 21.
If They were left without excuse, who had no other Scripture than the great
Book of Hieroglyphics, the double System of the Creatures in Heaven and Earth;
and had no other Light, than that of Reason whereby to read it; and had no Law
to go by, but That of Nature; and had no where else to see it, but in the
Tables of their Hearts; and where 'twas written in no Characters, but what were
Invisible to their Eyes; then what excuse can We hope for, whom God has spoken
to by his Son? (and who, besides the Light of Nature, have All the Instruments
of Grace too,) if We shall sin against the light of so clear a Knowledge? It Is
very plain that we Christians may be less excusable than the Gentiles, who
(many of them) never heard of the Name of Christ, and yet for all that were
unexcusable.

Secondly, from the Jews, we find our Author to the Hebrews disputing thus,
Heb. 10. 28, 29. If he that despised Moses Law died without mercy, under two or
three Witnesses; (...), Of how much sorer Punishment shall he be thought
worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God? And He is reckoned to be
the Man that has trodden under foot the Son of God, whoever he is that sins
wilfully, after he has received the knowledge of the Truth. (v. 26.) For if
then we sin wilfully, there remains no more sacrifice or expiation for sins;
but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment, and fiery indignation, which
shall devour the Adversaries. (v. 27.) The confirmation of this we have Heb. 6.
4, 5, 6. where it is affirmed to be impossible for them that once have been
enlightened, and have tasted of the good word of God, if They fall away, to be
renewed unto Repentance. And the reason there is, because (in God's
interpretation) they crucify to themselves the Son of God, and put him to an
open shame. This again is confirmed by 2 Pet. 2. 20, 21. where the End of
relapsed Christians is said to be worse than the Beginning. And thence it is
inferred to be better, never to have known the way of Truth, than after they
have known it to turn, etc. Thus you see how the Jews might be less excusable
than the Gentiles, and yet how We who are Christians may be less excusable than
the Jews. And therefore let us look to it, that we refuse not him that
speaks, but rather that we make him some proportionable Answer; speaking back
to him better, than by our Sins, to wit, by Repentance, and change of Life. For
if They escaped not who refused Him that spoke on earth, much less shall we, if
we turn away from Him that speaks from heaven.

8. I do insist so much the rather upon this fourth and last Topic, from which
the Caveat or Warning is now enforced, because the hope of Reward in a world to
come, is less available with men than the fear of Punishment; and because the
Holy Ghost does seem to prefer this way of arguing, not only in my Text, but
in diverse other places of this Epistle. In the second Chapter more especially,
(at the first, second, third, and fourth Verses,) we find the Argument and the
Inference to be much the same that they are here. First of all observe the
Argument, and especially the Topic from which it is drawn. If the word spoken
by Angels was steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience received a
just recompense of reward, (...), How shall we then escape, if we neglect so
great Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him, God also bearing them witness both
with Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own will? which is as much as to say, That because Christ was
superior both to Moses and to the Angels, by the ministry of whom the Law was
spoken unto the Jews, therefore we who are Christians are bound to yield the
greater reverence to That which God in the Gospel has spoken to us by his Son.
For if the Israelites were plagued for their contempt of the Law, much more
shall we Christians for our Neglect of the Gospel.

9. What now is the Use we are to make of this Doctrine, or what the Inference
to be drawn from this Argument? Is it only in the negative, That we refuse not
him that speaks? or that we have not any Averseness to his Person or his
Words? no, a man may be indifferent, without averseness; he may be cold and
unattentive to what is spoken, without an absolute Contempt, or Refusal of it.
And therefore the inference is so plainly and so positively expressed, as to be
utterly exclusive of all Indifference. It Is (...), Heb. 2. 1.
We ought to give the more earnest heed unto the things that we have heard; and
that for this reason, lest at any time we let them slip. The Apostle's word is,
(...), a Metaphor taken from the falling away of Water, when being not kept
within its Bounds it runs wastfully about, and so is spilt upon the ground, as
Phavorinus and Hesychius do both expound it. A Metaphor the fitter, and the
more worthy to be considered, because the word of God in Scripture is compared
and resembled to those three Liquids, Isa. 55. 1.
Wine, Milk, and Water. 1 Pet. 2. 2.
To the first, by Isaias; Rev. 22. 1, 17.
to the second, by S. Peter; and by S. John unto the third. We must be
therefore very careful, as well to retain, as to receive the Wine and Milk of
the word, and as it were to bottle up the Water of Life, (as David prays God to
do his Tears,) lest at any time we shed it, or let it fall. For there is no
Cordial Water, which we are not careful to preserve; (be it but Cinnamon, or
Surfeit Water.) Nor is there any wholesome Milk, which we think not too good to
be cast away; (be it but a Cow's, or an Asse's Milk.) Nor is there any want of
heed to keep our Wine from being lost, although it be made of a common Grape.
But since the Wine I now speak of is that that flowed from his Mouth, who
called himself the True Vine; And since the Milk is none other, than the
sincere Milk of the word; And since the Water is no less precious, than the
Water of Life, a Water flowing out from Him whom S. Paul calls a Rock, 1 Cor.
10. 4.
from whence there gushes out a Fountain of living Water; Rev. 7. 17. 21. 6.
sure we ought to be studious and careful of it, more than of any thing in the
world which is committed to be kept in our earthen Vessels. 2 Cor. 4. 7.
(...), we ought to give the more abundant and earnest heed to the word of God
which we have heard, (that Wine, that Milk, that Water of Life, which we have
drank out of the Gospel, and have imbibed into our Ears,) whereby our Souls may
be nourished to Life Eternal.

Yet there are multitudes in the world, I mean in our Christian Reformed world,
(upon whom what I have said must needs reflect very severely,) who are so cold,
and so careless in reading or hearing the word of God, that there is hardly any
thing else to which they are not much more attentive. If a Mountebank in the
Street shall speak to the People from a Scaffold, they will presently flock to
him, and give him Audience. If any Revels are to be kept, or a new Comoedy to
be acted, the Souls of men will be running out at their Eyes and Ears, through
the great and earnest heed which they will give unto the things that are said
or done. If a Tertullus or an Herod shall make an eloquent Oration, his
Auditors will be apt to cry aloud with those Parasites, ( Act. 12. 22.) it is
the voice of a God, and not of a Man. Whereas when one of Christ's Sermons is
recited out of the Gospel, the hearers are commonly as indifferent, and as
seemingly unconcerned, as if they said inwardly in their hearts, (the flat
Reverse of what was said of the Speech of Herod,) it is the word of a Man, and
not of a God. Do They give heed to what they hear, who if they are not quite
asleep, are yet so yawningly attentive, as to forget in an Instant, what they
hear in an hour? No, did they heed the word of God, as they often do the
actions and words of Men, (if not in real admiration, at least in flattery,)
they would carry what they learn from this Year unto the next; not in utramque
aurem dormire, or at least in duarum alteram, letting out at the right Ear what
they receive into the left; as if they purposed to confute this Epistle to the
Hebrews, when it says in another place, Heb. 4. 12.
that the word of God is quick, and powerful, and sharper than any two edged
sword, piercing even to the dividing of Soul and Spirit; or had a mind to
enervate that saying of S. Paul, as to their Particulars, That the Gospel of
Christ is the Power of God unto Salvation. Romans 1. 16.


10. What may probably be the reason, why men will sleep at a Sermon, a great
deal sooner than at a Play? is it not because they are less attentive, and by
consequence less delighted to be in the Church than in the Theater, and by
consequence more in love with what is meant only to please, than with what is
meant to profit them to Life Eternal? Or suppose them most delighted in
Church Assemblies. What then may be the reason, why they are much more
attentive to the words of Men out of the Pulpit, than to the word of God out of
the Pew? Is it not that they prefer the gratification of the Ear to the
Rectification of the Heart? And why should that be, if not for want of true
Belief, or else of due Consideration, that the Old and New Testament are God's
own word? and that the Gospel in particular is the word which God the Father
has spoken to us by God the Son? And why should this be so little heeded, (if
it is really believed) unless because it is so cheaply, and so commonly to be
had? were the Sun to be seen but once or twice in the Year, he would be much
more considered than now he is; it being the commonness of his Shining which
makes him pass over our heads so unregarded. And as it is with the Works, so is
it too with the Word of God. For in the Infancy of the Church, before printing
was invented, what care and cost were men at, to write out Copies of the
Gospel? and in what honor was it had, when but newly to be had in the Vulgar
Tongues? whereas now that it is grown both cheap, and common, it is commonly as
Pearl cast out to Swine. Many sit not at ease, whilst the Priest is in the
reading of Psalms and Chapters; and many loyter without the Church, until they
are very well assured the Preacher is going into the Pulpit; not at all laying
to heart, (what yet they cannot but assent to, if ever it enters into their
Heads whilst their Heads are Christian,) that the chiefest part of God's
Service has been performed in the Pew. For the most powerful words of Men can
but edify at the best, whereas the pure word of God is apt to sanctify and
Joh. 15. 3.
cleanse us, Joh. 17. 17. and as S. Peter once said to the Jewish Sanedrim, we
ought to obey God rather than Man. Act. 5. 29.
So in this Case also, we ought to hear God rather than Men. Now the Lesson
which is read out of the Law and the Prophets is the very word of God which he
has spoken by his Servants. And so the Lesson out of the Gospel is the very
word of God which he has spoken by his Son. Whereas the customary Discourse
which we call a Sermon, though it is profitable, and pious, and therefore
worthy of all acceptance; yet it is of human Contrivance and Composition, if it
is not all taken, word for word, out of the Scripture; and if it is, it is no
more, than so much Scripture as fills an hour. And how far it is from That, our
own experience may inform us from several Pulpits; wherein we are often
entertained with accurate Essays, and Harangues, with florid Discourses, and
Declamations, which have a very strong savor of Art, and Diligence, and are
deservedly applauded for Wit, and Learning; but are so far from being drawn
from the Well of Life, so far from being wholly made, or mostly deduced out of
Scripture, as to have hardly any Tincture or Relish of it. Hottinger. de
Necessit. Reform. p. 21, 22.
As if their Authors were afraid, with Cardinal Bembus and other Romanists,
(who are complained of and accused by Dominicus Nanus Mirabellius,) to fully
and flatten their Elocution with the Oracles of God. As if they had the same
opinion touching the Language of the Pulpit, with the Profane Cardinal Hosius
touching the welfare of the Church, when he said it had been better if no
Gospel had been written. As if the Scripture had seemed to Them, what once it
did to S. Cum attendi ad illam Scripturam, visa est mihi indigna quam Tullianae
Dignitati compararem. Tumor enim meus refugiebat modum ejus, etc. Augustine.
Confess. l. 3. c. 5. p. 60.
Austin before he was absolutely converted, very unworthy to be compared with
Cicero's Elegance of Expression. I wish we might not complain of some, who are
called to be Preachers of the Gospel, as Laurentius Valla was said to do of
Cardinal Sadolet, and Politian, and other Orators of their Age, Gentilem illos
Sermonem magis, quam Ecclesiasticum deamasse, That they have rather loved an
Ethnical, than Ecclesiastical way of speaking. And yet if in a zealous Enmity
to such affected Idolizers of human Eloquence, the Preacher frames his whole
Sermon, word for word, out of the Scripture; what is This but the Recital of so
much Scripture as fills an Hour? And then it is certainly as regardable, when
barely read out of the Pew, as when with Emphasis and gesture it is rehearsed
out of the Pulpit.

11. Refuse not therefore him that speaks, upon any Pretense to be imagined.
Not for the meanness of the Person by whom he speaks. Not for the Plainness of
the language in which he speaks. Not for the Hardness or mysteriousness of the
things that are spoken by him. Not for the cheapness or the commonness of what
he speaks. Nor yet for any other Objections, which some who are wittily profane
are wont to urge against the Scriptures. For I suppose it to be true, because I
find it in the writings of an honorable Author, That See Mr. Robert Boil his
third Edition of Considerations touching the style of the Holy Scriptures. p. 4.
some of those who do acknowledge both the Truth, and the Authority, do find I
know not how many faults with the style of Scripture; As that it is too
obscure, and immethodical, and contradicting to it self; incohaerent, and
unadorned, flat, and unaffecting; abounding with things that are either
trivial, or impertinent, and also with useless Repetitions. Monsters more
prodigious than any Africa can afford us, who acknowledging the Authority and
Truth of Scripture, can so blasphemously detract from the Credit of it.

12. But (...), See that ye refuse not him that speaks, for all the
scandalous Aspersions, that either the Wit or the Malice of Men or Devils shall
at any time contrive to be cast upon him in his Word. And First, refuse not him
that speaks, for the meanness of the Person by whom he speaks. The word of
God being as sacred when pronounced by the Mouth of the lowest Priest, as when
by That of the profoundest and greatest Prelate in the Church. Nay his word
being as pure out of a vicious man's Lips, as the Beams of the Sun, when daily
reflected from a Dunghill; or as the most uncorrupted and limpid Water, when it
is running through a sordid and earthy Channel. As the Blessing of God to
Israel was not the worse or the less welcome, for proceeding from the Lips of a
cursed Balaam; so his Rebuke sent to Balaam was not the less to be attended,
for being spoken by the Mouth of an arrant Ass. Be not therefore as impatient
of being spoken to by a Priest of the poorest Talent and Degree, as Nabal was
of being spoken to by a persecuted, 1 Samuel 25. 3. 10, 17.
and destitute, but royal Prophet; nor so impatient of a Reproof from any the
meanest of God's Ambassadors, 2 Samuel 3. 7, 8.
as Abner from Ishbosheth, or as Herod from John the Baptist, 1 King. 22. 27.
or as Ahab from Micaiah, who for speaking an unpleasant, but wholesome Truth,
was presently clapped up in Prison, and fed with the Bread of Affliction too.
Entertain not the vilest of all Christ's Messengers, as the Pharisees and the
Rulers did Christ Himself, Luke 16. 14.
when they did (...), Chapter 23. v. 35, 36.
deride and scoff at him for the despicable Garb of his Appearance. But be as
civil to him at least, as ye would that your Equals should be to You; and even
because ye are unwilling to have your Messages refused, for being sent by the
basest of all your Servants, therefore See that ye refuse not him that
speaks, for the meanness of the Person by whom he speaks.

13. Secondly do not refuse him, for the plainness of the Language in which he
speaks. For what is Plainness, but Perspicuity? and of all those Virtues which
are required in an Orator, Perspicuity and Pertinence are worthily reckoned
amongst the chief. Intendi animum in Scripturas sanctas ut viderem quales
essent. Et ecce video Rem non compertam superbis, neque nudatam Pueris, sed
incessu humilem, successu excelsam, and velatam mysteriis, and non eram ego
talis ut intrare possem, aut inclinare Cervicem ad ejus gressus. Augustine. in
Confess. l. 3. c. 5. p. 60.
So far forth as the Scriptures contein a Covenant, and a Law, the one of
Works, and the other of Faith, (That delivered by Moses, and This by Christ,)
there is nothing more becomes the State and Majesty of its Author, than to
communicate with his People in greatest Plainness. Or is the Gospel very
destitute of what the world calls Wit and Eloquence? call to mind that God the
Father has sent it to us by God the Son; and pay an humble Veneration to what
is spoken, for the honor you bear unto Him that speaks. And since his words
are the words of Eternal Life, (that is, the words of Direction by our
Conformity to which we shall live for ever,) of what a barbarous ingratitude
shall we be judged to be guilty, if we shall quarrel at his Care to have their
meaning understood? Besides, it ought to be remembered, that there are Parables
in the Scripture, as well as Plainnesses of Speech; Places so deep, that an
Elephant may swimm, as well as Places so shallow, that a Lamb may wade through
them. There are some such 2 Pet. 3. 16.
(...), things so difficult and hard to be understood, as that the Ignorant and
unstable (who are arrogant, and proud, as well as empty,) do many times wrest
them to their Damnation. And therefore whatsoever else may be the color for
your Refusal, See that ye refuse not an heavenly Speaker, for the Plainness of
the Dialect in which he speaks; because, of all his Condescensions expressed to
us in his word, this must certainly be one of the most Obliging. And yet

14. Thirdly, do not refuse him, for the mysteriousness of the things that are
spoken by him. For what were this but to find fault with the sublimity of the
matter? and implicitly to complain, that there is strong meat for men of the
ripest Age, as well as Milk for those Babes who are unskilful in the word of
righteousness? Heb. 5. 13, 14.
It were to quarrel with the Scripture for having any thing in it whereby to
exercise our Diligence, and crown our Search, to make us sensible of our
weakness, and to excite our Admiration. Besides, it ought to be considered,
that as there are Mysteries in the Scripture, so there are 1 Cor 4. 1.
Stewards of those mysteries. As things locked up from low and vulgar
Apprehensions, so there are also special men to whom is committed the Key of
Knowledge. Luke 11. 52.
The Priest's Lips are to preserve it, Mal. 2. 7.
and the People are to seek it flowing out in expositions from his Orthodox
mouth. It Is fit the Scripture should be plain, and mysterious too; I mean in
several parts of it, for several purposes and ends. For if nothing in it were
plain, we should but grope after heaven, and miss the way too. And yet if
nothing were mysterious, its over great Familiarity would make it liable to
contempt. Whereas the due consideration of both together will discover to us
the Use and the End of Sermons. For though it is not perhaps the pleasant'st,
yet it may seem to be the best, because the profitablest Preaching in all the
World, only to read, and expound, and apply the Scripture; to show the sense,
where it is difficult, and the use, when it is easy. And therefore See that ye
refuse not him that speaks, for the hardness of the things that are spoken by
him.

15. Fourthly, do not refuse him, for the cheapness or the commonness of what
he speaks. For this were just as extravagant, as if a man should disesteem and
depretiate the worth of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 19, 21.
because the very Foundations of the wall of the City were adorned with all
manner of precious Stones; and so common a thing was Pearl, that the Gates of
the City consisted of it; and so cheap was pure Gold, that the street of the
City was nothing else. To slight the means of Salvation for being commonly to
be had, is just as if a Nice person should die with Thirst, rather than quench
it with common Water. Or as if a proud person should scorn his life, for
depending upon so cheap and so common an Element as the Air. There is nothing
more destructive and dishonorable to men, than their Itching after things that
are rare and novel. This was one of those Crimes wherewith God upbraided his
People Israel, That forsaking him the old and the living Fountain, they had
hewn unto themselves such broken Cisterns, as had nothing but newness to
recommend them. And therefore such Men and Women are very sharply to be
rebuked, (as S. Paul charge Timothy in the very same Case,) who not enduring
sound Doctrine, 2 Pet. 4. 3, 4.
for being old, do turn aside unto Fables, for being new; and still are heaping
up Teachers, not to work upon their Hearts, but to gratify their delicate and
prurient Ears. Choosing rather to quench their Thirst out of every new Ditch,
than to satisfy themselves with the Ancient Springs. And therefore if ye do
not think, that the Ancient of days is the less to be valued for being ancient,
to wit, the Lamb slain from the Foundations of the world; or that the Waters of
Life eternal do lose their Virtue with their credit by being cheap, by being
easily to be had, Isa. 55. 1.
without Money, and without Price; See that ye refuse not him that speaks,
for the commonness of the things that are spoken by him.

16. Last of all do not refuse him in case his words shall sometimes seem to be
incoherent, immethodical, contradicting to themselves, unaffecting, or
impertinent, or clogged with useless Repetitions. For first at most they can but
seem to be such and such, as the Sun does only seem to be deformed in an
Eclipse, and no bigger than a Bushel in his Meridian; Next, they cannot so much
as seem so to labor with Defects, unless it be through our Defects of
Understanding, or of Humility, of competent Industry, or Art, sufficient Time
to converse with, or Patience to consides the things we read.

17. In a word, as we desire that we may never be refused by God Almighty, when
at any time we shall speak, or cry to Him in our Distress, whether by Prayers,
or Tears, from a Gallows, or from a Rack, perhaps out of a Prison, perhaps out
of a Pesthouse, out of the Belly of a Leviathan, or (which at least is as
terrible) out of the Bowels of a sinking and dying Ship, (for we know not what
end may await us all;) I say, as ever we hope to be heard our selves, when in
any kind of Exigence we speak to God, (...). Homer. Il. a.
let us at least give God the hearing, when in any kind of Dialect he speaks to
Us. Be it by his Son, or by his Servants, be it by Precept, or by Example, by
Life, or Doctrine, by Exhortations, or Admonitions, by Promises, or Threats, by
his Prophet, or by his Rod, by Words, or Blows. And be it by whatsoever
Instrument the Blows of God are laid on; by War, Pestilence, Fire, or Famine.
The first of which is now consuming our valiant Countrymen abroad; The second
(you know) has been devouring far and wide here at home; The third has lately
laid waste the goodliest Empory in the world, by having used our Great City, as
once the Cities of the Plain: And unless our Repentance or change of Life,
shall cry as loud in God's Ears as our Sins have done, we know not how soon we
may feel the Fourth. Less than which I cannot say to the most considering
Congregation; and if this little be laid to heart, I think I need not say more.

Committing therefore what I have said to due and serious Consideration, I shut
up all with That Prayer which is the fittest to complete and conclude the
Sermon:

That what we have heard at this time with our outward Ears, may by the
powerful Grace of God, be so grafted inwardly in our Hearts, as to bring forth
in us the fruit of good Living; to the Honor and Praise of his Name, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. To whom, with the Father, in the unity of the Spirit, be
Glory, and Thanksgiving both now and for ever. Amen.

THE APPENDIX.
. 1. OUr steady Adherence or Assent to the Two last Articles of the Creed, (and
indeed to the other Ten,) cannot possibly subsist without our Assent unto the
First. We cannot certainly believe that we shall rise from the Dead, unless it
be by believing that Christ is risen. And as little can we believe that Christ
is risen, unless it be by believing first, that God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto Himself. This implies and presupposes the First Article of our
Creed, which is as well the Foundation as the Support of all the Rest. But
since the breaking loose of Hell in This last Age of a loathsome World, we have
met with such Enemies (not only to ours, but) to All Religion, as from their
wishing and woulding there were no God, (no Resurrection of the Body, no life
after Death, no Day of Judgment,) have proceeded so far, as to say, and teach,
There is no God; nor any one of those Things which have been regularly built
upon This Foundation. And if we suffer This Foundation to be either undermined,
or but shaken in us, All the Fabric of our Faith will fall to nothing in an
Instant. An Error here is like one in the first Concoction, which cannot be
mended in the second. If we do not believe in God, [the first Article of our
Creed,] we cannot choose but be Infidels in All that follow. Nor are we only
to believe him, as Belief is opposed unto a comprehensive knowledge; But we
must knowingly believe him, as Belief is consistent with knowledge merely
Apprehensive. And so as to say with as much Truth, as S. Paul to Timothy,
(every man for himself, in whatsoever Temptations and Times of Trial,)

For I know whom I have believed. 2 Timothy 2. 12.


2. A Text which serves well for a double purpose; to ascertain our Knowledge,
and to establish our Belief, as well as to show the just measure, and use of
Both in our Religion. A Text accordingly to be considered, not only in its
Relative, but in its Absolute importance.

First, the words in their Relation to Those that follow and go before them,
will be most easily understood by being paraphrased Thus. I am a Preacher, and
an Apostle, and therefore now a v. 8.
Prisoner of Jesus Christ. Even for this very cause of my being sent forth by
v. 1.
the Will of God, and made a v. 11.
Teacher of the Gentiles, I suffer these Bonds and Persecutions of the Jews.
But I am not ashamed of my Bonds, or Office; I am not sorry for my Preaching,
though it is the Cause of my Imprisonment. For He on whom I have depended will
never forsake me, I am sure. In His hands I can with cheerfulness repose my
Life, by whom my Death will be a Door to my Resurrection. For I have not
believed I know not whom. Nor do I nakedly believe, whom I love, and adore, and
rely upon; but I perfectly Know whom I have believed; and have a plentitude of
Persuasion, that He for whom I now suffer will never fail me, on Him my Cares
are all cast, who cares for me. With Him I have entrusted the whole Depositum
of my Labors in the preaching of the Gospel, and the Depositum of my
Sufferings for having preached it. And whatsoever I have entrusted, or shall
entrust to His keeping, be it my Body, or my Soul, my Body in Peace, or my Soul
in Patience, I am assured he is Able, and am persuaded he is Willing, to lay it
up for me against That Day. A Day expressed to us in Scripture by such
Periphrases as These. The Day wherein the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming Fire. The day wherein God shall judge
the Secrets of men by Jesus Christ. The Day when all that are in the Grave
shall hear his Voice, and come forth. The Day of Discrimination when He will
make up his Mal. 3. 16, 17.
Jewels, and a Book of Remembrance shall lie before him, for them that feared
the Lord, and that thought upon his Name. All my Concerns are left with Him,
who will keep them in safety against That Day. Thus lies the Text in its
relation to the Context.

3. But being considered in it self, and without such Relation, 'twill be as
easily understood by this other Paraphrase. I know Him perfectly, as to his
Being, whom I believe as to his Essence: or whom, as to his Essence, I know in
part only. I can demonstrate his Existence, although I can but most firmly
believe his Word. For at one and the same time, as also in one and the same
respect, I cannot know, and believe him too; because what I know, I do more
than believe, or am past believing: And what I do but believe, I have not yet
attained the knowledge of. Knowledge and Belief do move in two distinct
Spheres, and That of Knowledge is so much higher, than This of Faith, that it is
the Perfection of a man's Faith, wholly to perish, and expire; to be drowned,
and swallowed up into perfect Knowledge. St. Paul expresses his Believing by
his knowing in part. 1 Cor. 13. 9.
And the Top of his comfort does stand in This, that when that which is perfect
is come, 10.
then that which is in part shall be done away. 12.
Here we can but see darkly, as through a glass; but the time is now coming
when we shall see face to face. Here we only can Believe the Three
Subsistences of the Godhead in but one and the same Substance; whereas in That
Day of Revelation and Restitution, we shall Know this great Mystery even as
also we are Known. Here we can but Believe the Resurrection of our Bodies; but
(in the great Day of Recompense) our Fruition and Experience will make us Know
it. We do not know more exactly that Five and Five do make Ten, or that a part
of any Dimension is unequal to the whole, than we do Know and can demonstrate
(against the Enemies of a Deity) the uncontrollable existence of the Deity we
adore. But This I say only of God's Existence, and of his Essence only in
part. For in our deepest Contemplation of certain Mysteries in our Religion,
such as a Trinity of the Persons in the Unity of the Godhead; the Generation of
the Second, the Procession of the Third, and yet the Coessentiality of
Both-together with the First; I say, in This contemplation our Childish
understandings become so froward, they cannot be quieted but by Faith. Our firm
Belief of God's Word can alone rock them into a sleep. In the mean time it is
matter to us of unspeakable Comfort, that by our absolute Knowledge of His
Verity, and by our steadfast Belief of His Veracity, we can easily acknowledge
the highest Mysteries in the Godhead; which in propriety of Speech we cannot
yet pretend to a Knowledge of. All we can do is to believe, that God was in
Christ reconciling the World unto Himself; but that a God of Heaven there is,
and that a God there must be, and that God is a Spirit, and that God being a
Spirit must needs be infinite, indivisible, from everlasting to everlasting,
and self-subsisting: These are things we do clearly Know. These are things we
can prove by such cogent Reasonings, as every Skeptic will submit to, and
Malice it self cannot resist. And so it is no Contradiction (whatever it seems
at first hearing) to say, We Know whom we have Believed.

4. Now out of this twofold Exposition of the Text, as well considered in its
absolute, as in its relative importance, a threefold Quaere does arise, and
offer it self to be resolved.

The first Quaere is, How and Why we are said to know God, by knowledge
properly so called; to wit, as perfectly, and as plainly, as we can know any
thing else; or as fully, and as clearly, as any thing knowable can be known.

The second is, How and Why our bare Believing the hidden Things of our God,
(as the Scripture calls them) is much more proper, and more required, and more
rewardable in Religion, than our clear and full Knowledge of God's Existence.
Nor only of his Existence, but of his Essence also in part.

The third Quaere is, What are the Powers and the Effects, and the great
Benefits of Believing, (as well as of knowing whom we believe,) clearly implied
in the Text by the Causal For, as That imports S. Paul's Reason, for his not
being ashamed of the things he suffered.

A Resolution of the First, will have an aptitude to shame or convince the
Atheist.

A Resolution of the Second, will have a Tendency to the Conversion, or the
Confusion of the Infidel.

A Resolution of the Third, will dit the Mouths of those Scoffers, who seek to
set up mere Science, (and Science falsely so called,) not only above, but
against Religion. Nor will it be an ill Office, to make the Sciolists ashamed
of their Profanations.

5. Touching the First of these Subjects I speak the rather, (though it is pity
it is not impertinent in any Auditory of Christians,) because I have met with an
Objection, which some have pretended to have had from several eminent men's
Writings; to wit, that the Being of a Deity cannot possibly be proved by
Demonstration, whereby to be the Object of real Knowledge; but only by
Probable Argumentations, which cannot possibly be effective of any thing
greater than our Belief. And Humane Belief may be erroneous, though Knowledge
cannot. Now whilst I consider that such Belief is but a stronger sort of
Opinion, and that a Radical Fear at least (in Books of Logic and Philosophy)
is affirmed to be to Both an essential thing; and that the Object of Opinion
when it is but humane, is said to be under a possibility of Falsehood, however
strong enough to exclude a possibility of Doubtting; I say, considering these
things, it seems first a Disparagement to the God whom we serve, to be
asserted by his Votaries, as a Thing Credible rather than Known. Next, a
Disparagement to Theology, not to be as Scientifical of its object's Existence,
as some inferior Things are; but to content it self to argue from Topics
Probable only by nature, however as strong, and as persuasive, as the (...).
Aristot. Eth. l. 1. c. 3.
matter will bear which it seeks to prove. A Disparagement in the last place it
cannot but be to our Religion, if we cannot be as certain of the Deity we
adore, as of other Things; and if we are not as able to prove His Being, as any
vulgar Geometrician to prove a Theorem in Euclid. Such cold and frigid ways of
Reasoning, as do pretend but to persuade, not at all to compel, or constrain
the Atheist, may seem a Tanto to excuse, and so to gratify his Impiety, by
thus extenuating the Evidence which God has given us of Himself; and by making
That less, than indeed it is. To speak of the Deity's Credibility, may chance
to harden some Atheists, who scorn all Preaching; though it may chance to
soften others, who are but lightly drawn in, and of better Natures. But it is
worthily to be feared, it may occasion some Skepticks, who yet are none. For
some we know have been so staggered by Topical arguments for a Deity, and the
Beginning of the World, as to have made it matter of Question, whether the
Godhead and the Creation are indeed any other than strongly Credible. And
whether that Opinion we have been taught to have of them, is really any other
than highly Probable. And whether (by consequence unavoidable) we are not void
of All Knowledge concerning God, however confident we have been, that a God
there is.

6. To this Objection I answer by These Degrees. First, I say, that the
Objectors do either very much mistake some very learned men's Words, or that
the learned men's Words are not expressive of their meaning. For how
unfortunately soever some of excellent Erudition may have managed some Parts of
their most excellent Design, by an ill choice of some Similitudes, and by the
wording of their Intentions; sure I am that their Judgments are found and
orthodox as to the Deity, and withal as to the Evidence it carries with it.
They do not any where deny that the Godhead is demonstrable; but say it is not
a proper Subject of Mathematical Demonstration. Nor say they any where
precisely, The Godhead cannot be proved by sense; but only that it cannot be
so immediately. And in such sayings as These, there is no Harm. For

7. Not to insist (at this Time) on That Divine Demonstration, which is called
by S. Paul, The Demonstration of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4.
partly made by Signs and Miracles from without, partly by immediate and
supernatural Revelations, to all the Prophets of the Old Testament, and all the
Apostles in the New. We have ways of Demonstration, which, though they are not
Mathematical, are yet as clear, or rather clearer, and more compulsive of our
Assent. And God may be proved even by Sense, mediantibus Creaturis, as S. Paul
strongly argues in his first Chapter to the Romans. Where the Invisible things
of God from the Creation of the World (He says without a Contradiction) are
clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal
Power and Godhead. So that they (who do deny him) are without all Excuse,
whether they know him, or know him not. But that They who were Atheists in
point of Practice, were none at all in point of Speculation, the same Apostle
implies by saying, They held the Truth in unrighteousness. (v. 18.) And That
which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto
them. (v. 19.) And again, They did not like to retain God in their Knowledge.
(v. 28.) So very hard a thing it is (in the Judgment of our Apostle) to be a
speculative Atheist, even for one who desires to be so; and is unwilling to
acknowledge what he cannot but Know.

8. But not to put the least stress upon the Authority of S. Paul, which
Antiscripturists will not allow, (and it is for Their sakes especially that I am
fallen on This Subject,) I shall Secondly prove by Reason, touching the Being of
a Deity, not only that we are furnished with as much Evidence of its Truth, as
such a thing is capable of; but that it is capable of as much Evidence, as the
light we see, and see by, or rather more. For as a mental Demonstration is more
cogently convincing to any Skeptic, than an Ocular; so That which shows the
Godhead to us, is of mental Demonstrations the most convincing. For the most
cogent Demonstration which can be made by a Logician, is that which argues from
the Cause to the Effect, and is called with good reason Demonstratio Potissima.
But God Almighty being the Fountain of All things knowable in the World, and so
the Cause of All Causes which are the Grounds of Demonstration, (the effect of
which is true knowledge, whose Ratio formalis, formal Reason is Assurance,)
It Is plain his Being must carry with it so clear an Evidence of it self, that
if we were not sure of That, we could be sure of nothing else. We are much
surer of it, than of any thing we can see, by how much the inward light we have
is more infallible than our outward. For This may easily deceive us, and indeed
so often does, that much Experience has taught us to distrust our own Eyes in
several Cases, and in some to disbelieve them. Whereas a man's Understanding
(of Objects adaequate to it self) can never either fail him, or be suspected;
because it is an Eye whose Sight is Knowledge. And Knowledge (properly so
called) is so infallible in its nature, that without infallibility it cannot
possibly be Knowledge, but must needs be somewhat else; a shrewd Conjecture, or
strong Belief, an obstinate Confidence, or Presumption; each of which is true
or false, as it is well or ill grounded. Whereas to Knowledge as it is
Knowledge, Infallibility is essential. Shall I make the Case clear, and
undeniable by an Example? We know a man having been blind from his very Birth,
may have as absolute a knowledge that 5 and 5 do make 10, as the best Eyed
Lynceus. And a man the most illiterate is as far from being able to be deceived
in this point, as one of the greatest Erudition, or deepest Reach. Which
strongly vindicates our Apostle from the possible Reproach of a Contradiction,
when he says, Things invisible are clearly seen; Romans 1. 20.
and that Moses saw him who is invisible. Heb. 11. 27.
For God's Existence, though invisible to the Eye of the Body, is yet to That
of the Soul most clearly seen; even as clearly as the Assertion that 5 and 5 do
make 10 is ascertained to a man without Eyes or Learning. Not at all seen by
the light without, but so much the more by the light within him. The Learned
and the Illiterate, the Blind and the Quick-sighted, are very equally
undeceivable in these Particulars. And therefore when it is said by the pert and
dull Scoffer, (as pert and dull as the Japonians of the Jenxuan Haeresie,) Sunt
qui negant Spiritum esse ullum, aut omnino quicquam praeter ea quae sensu
percipimus. Maffeius Hist. Ind. p. 431.
that He is too foolish who thinks he knows any thing he cannot see; and He too
credulous, who is able to believe what he cannot reach; He may be presently
made ashamed of his Understanding, by an argument ad hominem, that He is void
of all Reason, and can have no Soul within him, (much less a rational,) because
he neither can see it, nor can it possibly be seen. So it is an Argument to the
Scoffer beyond all Answer, that nothing by nature can be more excellent than a
Beast, because a Beast cannot reach it, or comprehend how it should be. There
have been some in all Ages, whose shameful Ambition it has been to make their
Ignorance Monumental. Hercules by his Pillars, with a Nihil plus ultra
inscribed upon them, and Mr. Hobs by his Hypothesis, that there is no Spirit at
all, (nor any thing else above the Sphere of his low Capacity,) have but built
obelisks to the Memory of their most eminent Imperfections, their Incomparable
Pride, and their Incurable Stupidity. The man is fitter to be despised, than to
be sadly disputed with, who takes his narrow Understanding to be commensurate
with the Universe, and the adequate Standard of all Existence; who will have
All to be but Fiction, which is to Him Incomprehensible; and nothing really to
exist, which is above or beyond his Soul's Horizon. He is worthier of our pity,
whose perfect ignorance in Astronomy makes him ready almost to swear, the Sun
is no bigger than a Bonfire; because the Distance of the Object, and the
Deceiptfulness of the Organ, do conspire Both at once to give it a Littleness
of Appearance. It Is hard to say which is greater, our uncertainty of some
things which we do every day see; or the Certainty of other things which cannot
possibly be seen.

9. Now amongst the many ways of proving a God by Demonstration, (some of which
cannot be made but to good Logicians, and very hardly if at all, in the English
Tongue,) Two especially are the fittest for the Capacities of the Vulgar,
whilst unassisted by Erudition. The first of which will be the easier, though
the second will be more cogent, and more imperative of our Assent.

The first, and the most obvious, is a Posteriori, as proving the Cause by its
Effects. Which is as true a Demonstration, and as prevailing, as any the
Mathematics pretend to; and many times more proportionable to Capacities
unimprov'd, than Demonstration a Priori, which proves an effect by its Cause or
Causes. As it is many times easier to prove the Tree by its Fruit, than the
Fruit by its Original, the Tree that bears it. Yea there are things, as the
four Elements, whose inward Forms are unknown, and therefore they cannot be
demonstrated to be what they Are, but a posteriori: such as Fire by its
properties of heat, and light, and lightness, and the like; which yet do beget
as great a Certainty of its Existence and Disposition, as could be had if we
could know the whole Essence of it. And thus our common Masters of Music do
know the forces and the effects of all the Musical proportions of Sound and
Number, (perhaps to much better purpose than either Froschius, or Gafforel, or
Boethius himself,) whilst yet the Reason of effects is a Stranger to them. Now
that God is demonstrable a Posteriori, (I mean as to his Being, and his Nature
in Part, which is most easily apprehended, not as to his whole Nature, which is
indeed incomprehensible; and the most that we know of what it is, comes by our
knowing what it is not;) is very well shown, as by other Writers, so especially
by Cicero De Natura Deorum, whom it is fitter to refer to, than to Translate, or
Epitomize. But whosoever shall have the Patience (if I may not say the
Pleasure) so to read, as to understand him, will confess the whole World to be
a Volume so expressive of its Creator, as not to stand in any need of that his
lesser Book, The Bible, to help it out. For if a man who shall but look on a
goodly Palace, will rather argue that 'twas built by some skillful Architect,
than that the Stones by mere Chance (with all the rest of the Materials) did
fall into that order wherein he sees them; much more, when we look on the Sun
and Moon, and all the Harmony of Things in Heaven and Earth, shall we conclude
them rather the Work of some Invisible Contriver, than that they are the Blind
offspring of Hap or Chance. God is much better known by such Footsteps of his
Divinity, than either an Hercules by his Foot, or a Lion by his Paw, or an
Apelles by his Pencil. And as my Knowledge that the House wherein I am, had a
Builder, cannot be lessened by my Ignorance of the Architect or Artist by whom
'twas built; so my Knowledge and Assurance of the whole World's having a Maker,
(and every way suitable to such a Fabric,) cannot possibly be diminished, much
less dissolved, or done away, by its Maker's being Invisible to Carnal Eyes.
For how much ocular Demonstrations give place to mental, I showed before. And
its Truth is yet farther confirmed from hence; that Mr. Hobs his Demonstration
of the Quadrature of the Circle (for which he will sooner dye a Martyr, than
for any thing in Religion,) is by a skilfuller Mathematician plainly
demonstrated to be False. But This Principle in the Metaphysics, [that of the
two Parts of a Contradiction, the one must evermore be True, and the other
False,] which is the first and chief Ground of all our Mental Demonstrations,
(most especially of the Godhead) and every Mental Demonstration which is duly
raised from it, or Necessitates an Atheist either to grant there is a God, or
to affirm Both Parts of a Contradiction, is so clear, and selfevident (without
the help of our outward senses) that it is cogent even to all, of all Romans 2.
14, 15.
Persuasions, and has every where the Suffrage, as well of Taught, as of
Untaught Reason. Insomuch as it cannot be quite so evident, that every Watch
has a Spring, and every Spring a Spring-Maker, as that there is a Aristot. 7
Phys. c. 1. and 8 Phys. c. 4. and 12. Metaphys. c. 29. Plato 10. de Legibus.
Primus Motor of every Mobile in the World, and a Principle of Being to All
that is. The Proof of what I have hitherto but barely said will be short, and
easy. And the Way to it may thus be made.

That some Things there are which began to be, Experience tells us. And that
Nothing can be the Cause of its own Being and Beginning, is just as Plain.
Confer Bernard. de Consid. l. 5. c. 6.
For that which is not in being, cannot do or act any thing; and as little is
it possible that it should be before it is. From whence it follows of
necessity, that whatsoever began to be, had its Being and Beginning from
somewhat else. As the Third from the Second, and the Second from the First. And
because there could be nothing which could begin before the First, it is plain
the First had its Beginning from That which never did begin. And that which
never-began at all, yet is the Author of Beginning to All that ever did begin,
is That which in English we do commonly call God. God the shortest and the
fittest of any Appellative we can use in our English Tongue. Not that This or
any Name can ever express his whole Nature; (for some of the Greeks expressed
him fitly by (...), The Inexpressible, and Moses more fitly by I Am That I Am,
or that stupendous Tetragrammation, the Lord Jehovah,) but as safer and less
improper, than Anima Mundi, Men's Divina, Natura Naturans, and the like, by
which the Peripateticks, and Platonists, and from These the Rosicrucians, have
laid a Stumbling Block in the Way of Themselves and others.

Now because it does imply the first and worst of Contradictions, for That
Being not to be, or Not to have been without Beginning, which gave a Being and
Beginning to That which first began to be; therefore for any one to affirm,
There is no God, or no Eternal Cause of Being to All that ever began to be, is
to affirm Both Parts of a Contradiction. Although, in spite of Himself, and his
own Perverseness, (if he is but an Animal endued with Reason, and not a
prodigious sort of Monster in the mere likeness of a Man,) he must confess the
one is True, and the other False. This is a mental and metaphysical
Demonstration, more compulsively convincing than any Ocular. It being
Impossible to be True, that any thing is in Being, and Not in Being at the same
Instant; as it is Impossible to be False, that every thing (at the same Instant)
is either in Being, or Not in Being.

These are things of such self-evidence, and so compulsive of Assent, that (as
I said a little before) they have every where the suffrage as well of taught as
of untaught Reason. And This I take to be such a Proof or Demonstration of The
Deity, as it is sufficient to convert even an Acataleptick, who holds that
nothing is to be known, but that a man does know nothing. Nor does it nakedly
persuade, but irresistably compel, and constrain the Atheist. I do not speak
only with Confidence, but do Know what I say but an old Experience.

10. Again, we know whom we have believed, by some of the meanest Creatures
acting above the Sphere of their Activity. For all things acting above
themselves, and with more force or virtue than other things of their Level are
of themselves able to do, must needs derive such power and virtue from somewhat
else which is above them. As when Balaam's Ass spoke, and rebuked her Rider,
'twas so commanding a Demonstration of an Agent supernatural, working in, and
upon, and above the Ass, that He who will not grant the later, must (in spite
of himself) deny the former. Which because an Antiscripturist may gladly do, we
are to instance in other Things, whereof (not his Reading, but) his downright
Experience will best convince him. The Case may be usefully represented in the
vast difference which we observe between a Marble, and a Loadstone. We find the
Marble has nothing in it above the Nature of a Stone. It is as dull, as it is
heavy; and as unactive, as it is lifeless. Whereas the Loadstone acts clearly
above the nature of a Stone, or a Thing Inanimate, in drawing Iron as it does,
an heavier Body than Itself, and that without a Touch or Contact, (so little
need has it of Hands and Arms,) and This by way of Discretion too, with a
discriminating Love to That Course Metal above All others. This, and the other
Consideration, that a Needle touched with it has a particular Inclination to
stand full Northward, in which Point only it is at rest, and ever restless in
any other, moved Thales Milesius, (the Wisest man in all Greece) to believe it
Animate. And indeed he might have thought it, not only Animate, but Sensible,
nor only Sensible, but Rational, had not his Knowledge of a Deity (showing his
Wisdom in the most stupid, as well as his Power irresistible in the weakest
and the most passive of all his Creatures,) superseded the necessity of that
Conjecture. To which I add, that nothing speaks a God louder, or more
distinctly, than such a speechless sort of Creatures as Birds and Bees, whose
unlearned kind of Science and skill in Architecture or Tacticks, the learned
Artist in the World can only imitate, never equal, and would certainly admire,
if not adore too, (as not a few of the Heathens were wont to do,) did not the
Wisdom of a Creator unty the Knot, and make All easy to such as own him. Not
to ask one of all the Quaeres we find in Job, Job 38. 39, 40, 41.
(which yet are all argumentative, and plead the Cause I have in hand,) who but
God can teach the Emmet, either to treasure up store of Corn for a Provision in
the Winter, or (which is very much stranger) to gnaw off each little prolifick
particle of the Grain, whereby it may keep without growing, in the most
pregnant and fertile Earth? Shall we say such Thaumaturgicks, as the Loadstone,
and the Be, the Emmet, and the Silkworm, are all (...), or Self-Instructers,
in the exercise of the Arts and Curiosities they exert? If not so, it must be
Thus; that acting All, as they do, above the Sphere of their Activity, and
beyond the low Rank they are placed in, they are clearly, (...), All taught of
God. For where there is Art without Knowledge, eminent Skill without Learning,
unerring Sight without Eyes or Vision, incomparable Providence without all
Forecast, wonderful Wisdom and Contrivance without the inherence and use of
Reason, (as in the Be, the Loadstone, the Emmet, and the Silkworm,) There we
have a Demonstration of a Superior, Invisible, Supernatural Agent, working in,
and upon, and above the Creatures, as 'twere on purpose to convince us, that he
is God. And truly till we are able to give a tolerable reason, (from Art, or
Nature,) why some dull and dead Specificks do work with Discretion, and out of
Choice, upon a determinate Part or Humor in the Body of man, and lets the rest
all alone, (as 'twere by a wilful Preterition,) as why Rhubard purges Choler,
Hellebore Melancholy, Senna Phlegm, Hermodactyls Viscosity; or why Cantharides
are offensive in particular to the Kidneys, Mercury to the Throat, Strammoneum
to the Brain, Opium to the Nerves throughout the whole Body; I say, till we are
able to give Another Cause or Reason of These astonishing Effects, I shall
conclude that These Things have These Discretions only from God; and that the
Physicians were Enthusiasts, to whom These Secrets were first revealed.

11. To sum up all in a word, (and to dismiss the first Method of
demonstrating the Cause of all other Causes by his Effects;) from that virtue
in the Hen which is derived to the Egg, and is the Principle of Essence to the
yet unformed Chicken, whilst it is not a Spirit, and yet Invisible, our
excellent Harvey strongly argues the strict Necessity of a God, for whom alone
it is not difficult to create out of Nothing the Things that Are. And in the
same Book de Generatione, (to the reading of which 'twill be sufficient to
referr our modern Doaters upon Experiment,) he says, Generatio Demonstrat
Spiritum, eumque Deum. He means a logical Demonstration a posteriori; such as
is That of an Artificer from any Artifice he exerts. Which does carry along
with it so clear an Evidence of its Author, that a Watchmaker is said to move
the Watch which he has made, at the greatest distance: in as much as with his
Hands and other Instruments of working, (as truly informed by his Hands, as his
Hands by his Head, and his Head by his Intelligence, and his Intelligence by
the Fountain of its Existence,) he gave his Watch as well the Laws, as the
Necessity of its Motion.

12. The Second general Method of Demonstrating the Object and Ground of
Worship, whereby we Know whom we believe, (as to his Entity or Existence, and
as to part of his Nature too,) is like to That which God made to demonstrate
the Being of the Sun. For as the Sun is best seen by the light it gives us, and
even obtrudes upon our Senses, without the least aid from either the
Mathematics, or Logic, or from the Metaphysics, or Physics; so God himself,
as to his Being, (though not as to all his Mysterious Essence,) is most clearly
apprehended, and unavoidably understood, (without any assistance either from
Art, or Education,) by the Justin. in Resp. ad Quaest. 1. Damascenus 1. fid.
Orth. c. 1. and 3. Cic. Orat. pro Milone.
ordinary Light and Law of Nature. Man's knowledge of a Godhead has been ever
just as natural, as his knowledge that he has Eyes, (without the help of a
Reflection from any Looking-glass whatsoever,) though he cannot either see them,
or make them able to see themselves, unless it be by Reflection, which yet does
not make, but only illustrate and prove his knowledge. Hence it is that All
Nations, in All Times and Places, whether Salvage, or Civilized, however
tempted by the Devil to love and cherish Dissentions, and especially, to affect
a Singularity in Opinions, Though they have evermore differed in most things
else, and even in the choice of the Gods they Worshipped; yet that a Deity there
is, They have not been able but to agree. Nulla Gens tam barbara, quae non
fateatur esse aliquem Deum. Cic. 1. Tuscul. Qu, (...). Aristot. 1. de Coelo. t.
22. V. Jamblicum in pr. de Mist. Egypt. and Julianum apud Cyrill. l. 2.
(...), solus est Sermo universalis. That there is above Nature a Divine Object
of Worship and Adoration, is the one language of all the World: The only
Universal Character, stamped in every man's Heart and Head, who is perfectly a
Man, and not a Monster; as He must needs be a Monster, who has no Reason; and
much more He, who has no Religion. Thus is one single Error the Confutation of
Another. The Sin and Error of Idolatry does refell the Worse Error and Sin of
Atheism. It Is observable of the Athenians, (in the Times of S. Paul,) that
knowing nothing of the True God, but that a True God there is; and Knowing
withal they knew him not, as to the Perfections of his Nature; erected an
Altar with This Inscription, Act. 17. 23.
(...), To the Unknown God. Two things I here mark to my present purpose.
First, that the God whom they knew not, and yet adored, was indeed the True
God, even the same that S. Paul had declared to them. Next that the God whom
they knew not, and could not know, as to his Essence, They had a True knowledge
of, and could not but know, as to his Being. Which is evinced and presupposed
and inferred even from hence, that they did seriously, and zealously, though
blindly worship him. All which as an Historian, (rather than as a Preacher,)
and as a matter of Fact our Apostle told them.

13. From hence it follows that Those Athenians who were the Ancestors of
These, did show themselves to be a wise and religious People, (...). Diodor.
Sic. l. 13. p. 137.
in that they offered by Proclamation a Talent of Silver for a Reward, to any
Person who should be so happy and such a Lover of Religion, as to kill the foul
Monster, Diagoras the Atheist, newly fled out of Attica for fear of Justice.
Nor had they only such an hatred of a positive Atheist, whose profession of
Atheism gave him Atheos, for his Name; but they were as much admired for their
Piety and Prudence, in that they banished Protagoras, and burned his Books, and
this for no other reason than that he clanculary worshipped, and writ but
doubtfully of a Deity; as if it were a moot point, whether there were any such
thing, or no. For to be doubtful of a Deity, (and not to say I know whom I
have believed,) I do suppose to be the utmost that the Affecters of Atheism
have been able to arrive at by all their Arts; whether tending to extinguish
the natural light of the Understanding, or to the making of the Conscience so
tough and callous by vicious habits of Debauch, as to justify and commend S.
Paul's expression of the Thing, when he says, that some Consciences are
cauteriz'd; they are so seared with an hot Iron, as to become quite insensate,
and past all feeling. I say, the thing we call Atheism I conceive to be no more
than a mere Doubting of a Deity; not at all a presumption that it is impossible
for it to be. For Protagoras Himself, and the Magicians who had debauched him,
(brought by Xerxes into Greece,) did privately offer Sacrifice to certain Gods
whom they adored, however they were in public too brave to own it, because
they scorned to have it thought by their dull Admirers, that any Deity did
assist them in whatsoever they could do above other men. Now this Doubting of a
Deity, implying a Deity to be Possible, (and that for any thing they know, it
either may, or may not be,) does accidentally demonstrate that a Deity there
is, and that it cannot but be. For seeing to doubt it, is to acknowledge that
it is Possible for it to be, (though not that it is actual,) and seeing the
Sense of the word Deity is a Necessary Being, altogether independent and
antecedent to all Causality, (which an Atheist will grant It must be, if it is
at all,) it does imply a contradiction, to grant that it is Possible, and yet
to deny that it is Actual; because to be Possible, but yet not Actual, is to be
perfectly contingent; which for a Deity to be, and yet be a Necessary Being, is
a most gross Contradiction in Adjecto. And a gross Contradiction being the
only way of proving any absolute Impossibility, is therefore one way of
proving the Actual Being of a God upon a naked confession that it is but
Possible for it to be. Which confession any Atheist will much rather make, than
undertake the harder Task, of proving a Godhead to be impossible. And yet it is
That he must do, or else be convinced there is a God, by his previous
Conviction that one there may be.

14. The Atheist's Sanctuary and Refuge, to which he makes his last flight from
the Necessity of a Godhead, (as the Fountain of Existence to all good things
which began to be,) is an aeternal Succession of Individuals. Which, however he
cannot prove, or perform any thing like it, he is resolved to take for granted,
to supersede (if it were possible) the strict Necessity of a Creator. But This
objection has been so baffled, and put so quite out of all Countenance, by
Paulus Venetus, and Amongst and above others, I mean the most acute and the
most learned Dr. Gunning, now my Lord Bishop of Ely, Paulus Venetus and others,
Mr. Latham in his Sermon upon Romans 1. 20. p. 3, 4, 5.
others, whose Argument leads it clearly to This Absurdity which it incurs,
that a Part must of necessity be equal to the whole upon that Hypothesis; that
I shall say no more of it than briefly This. That on the supposal of an eternal
Succession of Days, there must be a Medium Metaphysicum between the Two
Eviternities, the one before, the other after every Noon; because the Noon of
this day, (or of yesterday, or of the morrow,) cannot be more or less distant
from that which never did begin, than from That which shall never end. Which
infers an Aequidistance (in a negative way of Speaking) 'twixt two Durations
aeviternal, though not (in a positive) 'twixt two Extremes.

But I add, that the Objection confutes it self; in that the Succession of
Individuals, by the way of Generation in which we find it, affords a
controuling Demonstration of its Aeternity's being Impossible; and does not
need any such subtilty, as is required in the management of the Argument
foregoing. For, (to instance in the Succession of the Hen and the Egg,) we
cannot say that the Hen did lay the Egg, and that the Egg was hatched into the
Hen, and so backwards to all Aeternity; because the Hen (as a Parent) is by
nature before the Egg; the former being the Cause, whereof the later is the
Effect. From whence it is evident, that there was a First Hen; which being
absolutely impossible to have been by Generation, it cannot but be, that it was
created. And That which did create it, must needs be God.

15. Having thus far proceeded in solving the first of the three Quaeres, How,
and Why we are said to Know God, even as perfectly and as plainly as any thing
Knowable can be Known; I cannot choose but charge the Atheist with arrant
Dullness and Stupidity, (however he may pass for a Man of great Wit, with such
as having none at all are unfit to judge of it,) for being able to make a Doubt
in so clear a Case. Whereby he may seem to have too much, and too little
Subtilty; because if he had less, he would not start any Objections against his
Maker; and if he had more, he would be able to refute them. But because, though
we do Know whom we have believed, we do also Believe whom we truly Know, it
remains that I proceed to the Second Quaere which I proposed; How and Why our
bare Believing the hidden things of our God (however in the Scriptures revealed
to us) is much more proper, and more required, and more rewardable in Religion,
than our clear and full Knowledge of his Existence.

16. In order to the resolving of This Second Quaere, I must distinguish more
fully than in my Answer to the First, betwixt the Mysteries in Religion, or its
Subject in Hypothesi, and what in Thesi is the Ground and the Object of it.
There are matters in Religion, as well as Nature, which are most worthy of our
Belief, though much above the flight of our Comprehension. And though evidently
credible, are not evidently True, how True soever in Themselves. They have
evidence enough to require our Faith, though not enough to beget our Knowledge.
Thus the Trinity in Unity is as evident in it self, as the Godhead is; but not
so evident unto us. And humane Faith may be so strong, as to exclude from the
Agent all kind of doubting; though not from All Objects a Possibility that they
are false. For nothing can exclude This, but Knowledge properly so called, to
which a Certainty is as essential, as Credibility is to Faith. And the absolute
impossibility that the Mysteries of God should admit of falsehood, arises only
from the Verity and Veracity of the Godhead, not from the steadiness, or the
strength, much less from the Nature of our Belief. But there are other things
in Religion, which, though they are not more True than the Trinity in Unity,
are yet for all that more Truly Known. Thus the Evidence I have of God's
Existence, is so much greater than my Evidence of his being Three in one, or
the Scriptures being his Word; that I am certain of the former, because I know
it; and I doubt not of the later, because I steadfastly believe it. My Assurance
of the one makes me infallible in my assent, which I cannot say I am through my
Confidence of the other, unless I have it by a miraculous and immediate
Illumination, as fully as the Apostles their Gift of Tongues. Thus the Ground
of the Difference of the things spoken of in our Religion, is the Difference of
the Ground upon which they stand; to wit, a greater, or lesser Evidence to our
short sighted Souls; not a greater or lesser Truth, and Reality of their
Beings. For neither our Knowledge nor our Belief have any influence on the
Things we Believe or Know.

17. This Distinction being premised, I proceed thus to argue, and thereby to
answer the Quaere made. Every man's Understanding is too too saucy with his
Will, in pretending it is its Privilege to give a judgment universally of
Truth and Falsehood, an Error not the less grievous for its having been
occasioned by a very great Truth. For though it is the office of the Intellect,
in the Intellect's own Court, to pass a verdict upon Things within its
Cognizance; yet in such Transcendentals as are very much without and above its
verge, or by a natural Right and Title beyond all humane Comprehension, a good
understanding will confess, It must not determine, but obey. For to know things
exactly does only denominate us Learned, but not Religious: good Philosophers
indeed, but not good Men. The word [Religion] and the Thing, being well
considered, (as it is by few, and but seldom,) Its ratio formalis will be found,
not to stand in proud Knowledge, but meek Obedience. And in Obedience of the
whole Man; as well of the Soul, as of the Body. And in the Soul too, we owe an
absolute Obedience of all our Faculties to God, of our Appetites, our Wills,
our Understandings. Science and Religion do herein differ more especially, that
in the first our Understandings direct the Will; but in the second they concur
in submission with it: in That our Reason may command, as a proud Dictatrix;
but in This she must obey, as a most Teachable Disciple. And for This there is
very great reason. For it is so natural to Religion, to have its Mysteries; or
Objects peculiar to Faith alone; that neither the Greeks nor the Barbarians
could ever endure to be without them. And if there are few Mechanic Arts which
have not their Mysteries and Secrets, unknown to All who are not Artists; what
an unnatural thing were it, if the Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
God manifest in the Flesh, or the Religion of the True God who is
Incomprehensible, should have nothing contained in it beyond the fathom or
flight of a finite reason? What man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit
of man which is in him? even so the things of God knows no man, but the
Spirit of God. 1 Cor. 2. 11. And truly if it were otherwise, where were the
Merit, or the Mystery, or the Necessity of Believing, on which so great a
stress in Scripture is every where laid by our Lord Himself? We find in our
Gospel these two rational Expressions, The Obedience of Faith, (Romans 16. 26.)
and the Law of Faith. (Romans 3. 27.) It Is the Obedience of our Faith which is so
pleasing unto God, as that without This it is impossible for us to please Him.
(Heb. 11. 6.) If Faith it self were not Obedience unto That which is called the
Law of Faith, and to the Lawgiver himself who has commanded us to Believe, It
would not be so meritorious, or so rewardable in its Nature, as now it is. For
herein chiefly does consist the excellent Nature of Religion, and of all
religious Worship, (and withal the rationability of the immensity of our
Reward,) that it is attended with Self-denial, and a Resignedness of the All
that is most excellent in our Souls, unto the Will of that Object we thus
adore. Whereas if we absolutely Knew whatsoever by our Religion we are obliged
to Acknowledge, or were we obliged to acknowledge what we see or feel only;
there could not be possibly such a Thing as real Virtue in our Assent, when
'twould be impossible not to assent to what we should distinctly Know, and as
impossible not to acknowledge what with our brutish and common Senses we see,
or feel. Necessity and Virtue are incompatible in All, but in God Himself. And
even in Him (speaking (...)) they differ too. Our Knowledge indeed may be
called a Physical, but not a religious, or moral Virtue. There are Virtues
indeed which do lead to Knowledge; and Knowledge (truly so called) does dispose
to Virtues. But naked Science is a mere Intellectual Habit, (wherein the Devils
themselves excel,) and was never yet reckoned an Ethick Virtue. The reason of
all which is plain, and obvious. For the Object of a Man's Knowledge does
compel his assent; whereas the Object of his Faith does but invite it. To
matters of Faith our Assent is due; but to matters of Knowledge it is
unavoidable. Our Knowledge shows only we are intelligent in our nature; but
our Faith shows in us also the Grace of Meekness. That indeed infers the
Conspicuity of the Object; but This (which is more) the Flexibility of the
Will. (To sum up the difference in a word,) by light of knowledge it appears
that we are a reasoning sort of Creatures; but by the Obedience of our Faith,
that we are Religious ones.

18. From these Premises I infer, we ought not to trouble our selves at all,
that we cannot fully Know, so far forth as we can Believe. For God has given us
Knowledge enough (if we live not up to it) to greaten our future Condemnation;
and the knowledge which He denies us is not necessary at all to our future
safety. And seeing it is one of God's Attributes, to be by Nature
Incomprehensible, (who were he not so, could not be God,) It Is fit the
learned of his Creatures should be contentedly in the Dark, as to many
things; the firm Belief of which things they stick not to testify with their
Blood. If we believe the Will of God to be revealed in his Word, and therein
the Three Subsistences in but one and the same Substance, we may not be vexed
with the Experience, of our being yet unqualify'd to comprehend how it should
be. For whatsoever things they are we are commanded but to Believe, it cannot
possibly be a Sin, not to be able to know exactly. But it is a Vix sibi
temperant, quin eousque impudentia provehantur, ut Naturam oderint quod infra
Deum simus. Sen. de Benef. l. 3. 29.
Sin to be disquieted, that the sublimest Things of God do exceed our Reach;
and that whilst we are finite, Infinite Things will be above us. To comprehend
what is finite, a finite Intellect is sufficient; and as sufficient also it is,
to Apprehend what is Infinite, though not at all to comprehend it; (so great
and wide the difference is between an Apprehensive and a Comprehensive
knowledge; but an Adaequate knowledge of God, is only competent to God. As for
Certainty and Knowledge, God has wisely dealt to us such fit Proportions, that
we have Ground enough given us in God's own Word, to want with comfort what we
have not; and to enjoy what we have, with Moderation. It Is there we are assured
of a threefold (...), or Full assurance. A Full assurance of Faith, (Heb. 10.
22.) A Full assurance of Hope, (Heb. 6. 11.) A Full assurance of Understanding,
(Col. 2. 2.) The last imports a full Knowledge of what is Knowable in God, and
fit or good for us to Know; which leads us on to an ibid.
Acknowledgement of the Mysteries of God, in whom are hid all the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge. And this does prompt me to observe S. Paul's
Distinction, between (...), and (...), the Things of God which may be known,
(Romans 1. 19.) and the other Things of God which are Hidden from us. ( Col. 2.
3.) As for God's Existence from everlasting to everlasting, his omnipresence,
his omnipotence, his all-sufficience, and his omniscience, his Truth, and
Justice, his Love, and Goodness, and the like; in respect of all These, we
perfectly Know whom we Believe. We have (literally speaking) a Full assurance
of Understanding. But for the Trinity of Persons, the Incarnation of God the
Son, his Circumcision, his Crucifixion, his Satisfaction for all our Sins, the
Resurrection of our Bodies, and Immortality of our Souls; in respect of all
These, we rather Believe whom we have known. We have in These a Full assurance
of Faith, (...).
and Hope only. And the perfection of our knowing the things of God which may
be known, Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 2.
is Ground enough for our Believing the things of God which are Hidden from us.

19. Of what has hitherto been said; Two good Uses may here be made. The one of
Confutation, the other of Comfort. That belongs to Those men who are affectedly
Unbelievers; This will redound unto our selves, when in mere humane frailty we
sometimes waver. And Both together will be an Answer to the Third Quaere which
I proposed, touching the Powers, and the Effects, and the great Benefits of
Believing, (as well as of knowing whom we believe,) clearly implied in the Text
by the Causal For, as That imports S. Paul's Reason, why he was not ashamed of
the things he suffered. For this Cause (says He to Timothy,) I suffer these
things. But I am not ashamed. (...), For I know whom I have believed.

20. First, to the Wilful Unbeliever who does affect being Incredulous, and
casts about for all Colors to nourish the humor in himself, I shall argue
Thus. That He who is so thick-headed as to allege he is not sure there is a
Life after Death, and a Day of Judgment, must needs confess himself so Dull
too, as not to be surer that there is None. And it is sufficient to oblige a
prudent Person to live exactly, (upon the account of Prudence only,) that a
life after Death, and so a Judgment, if he does not yet fully know it, may
happen to him for ought he Knows. And that Aeternity of Punishments (as well as
of Rewards) is barely Possible. And that the Negative is not Demonstrable, any
more than the Affirmative. Yea, that the Negative cannot be possibly, because a
Negative; but the Affirmative (as it is such) has a passive power at least
(which the Negative has not) of being the subject of Demonstration. For thus
the Existence of a Deity may be demonstrated by a Person who is of greater
Perspicuity than the man who Doubts of it, though not by Him who is so stupid,
(and in a manner so unmanned,) as to be able to make a Doubt in so clear a Case.
Whereas the Negative to This, [that a Deity does not exsist,] can be
demonstrated by None, how acute soever; nor was ever yet pretended to be
Demonstrable by Any. The most insipid of Fools is able to say, [there is no
God;] and it can be but said by the wittiest Atheist. But (to return to That
Instance which was of an Article of our Faith, and of Faith alone, to wit, a
Punishment Aeternal, or a Life after Death, or a Day of Judgment;) I say, an
Evil which is uncertain, and by consequence so contingent, as that it may, or
may not be, must be provided against in Policy, if not in Conscience, or
Religion, by one who would not be a Fool, as well as an Epicure, or an Atheist.
A Lazarus may be sent out of Abraham's Bosom, (though de facto none is,) and a
Dives out of the Deep too, to certify the Truth of an Heaven and Hell, upon a
supposal that such there are. But on a supposal that there are not, nor an
Existence after Death, It Is plain that None can be sent to us with a
Certificate that there is None. From whence it is evident that the Believer must
needs be much on the safest side; because the Object of his Belief is under an
evident Possibility of Demonstration; whereas the Contrary to This is flatly
Impossible to be proved. Besides there is This great Difference too, that if
the Believer is deceived, he does but lose the short pleasures of vicious
living; but if the Incredulous is deceived, He incurs the long Torments, (or
rather endless, and so not long,) which will be one day the Wages of it.

21. But in dealing, as I now do, with the obstinate Skeptic, or the affected
Unbeliever, I only argue from his own Principles of carnal Reason, and common
Sense. And have spoken only of Faith as the Child of Fear, which is of the
Flesh. Not a word of That Faith which is the Fruit of Spirit; and is not
acquired, but infused; nor the product of Art, but a work of Grace. The Faith
imported in my Text is of a far more sublime and transcendent Nature; and such
as carried up S. Paul above the low sense of all his Sufferings. It Is no less
than the Victory which overcomes the World. Heb. 11. 1.
No less than the Evidence of Things not seen; no less than the Substance (that
is, the confident Expectation) of things hoped for. It refreshes our drooping
Spirits with unspeakable Comforts in the black and gloomy day of our greatest
Trial, when all the Comforters upon Earth are utterly unable to yield us
comfort. It fills us inwardly with Joy in the Holy Ghost. Conveys unto us a
full assurance that our Pardon is sealed, our Peace ratified, that God is our
Father, and we His Children. Gives us some Glimmerings and Fore-tasts of the
Glory to be revealed. It presentiates things future; and prepossesseth us with
the Enjoyment of things invisible. Reveals unto us, by the secret and powerful
Whispers of God's Spirit, the Beatifick and glorious Mansions prepared for us
in His House. Hereupon it does so place us above the Level of Temptations, as
to exempt us from the fear of whatsoever Men or Devils can do unto us. Insomuch
that what is intended by the Enemies of our Faith to make us sorry, by This is
wonderfully made to increase our Joy. By This we are enabled to trust in God
(as Holy Job did) although he kills us. So that lifting up our heads, and
looking up unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, we learn to love
and to kiss his Rod; and are so far from repining at his severest
Dispensations, that in regard unto the Joy that is set before us, we can enjoy
the very Torments, and scorn the shame of a Crucifixion. In a word, should I
exemplify all I have said concerning Faith, by making a Narrative of
Particulars, as far as from Abel to Charles the First, (which were to prove by
the Argument they call Induction the wonderful Powers and Effects and glorious
Benefits of Believing, as well as of Knowing whom we believe,) I must have
taken for my Text the whole Eleventh Chapter of the Epistle to the Hebrews.

22. But because This would prove an Enterprise too long and tedious, though
not too difficult to be performed; I shall conclude with some Directions for
the securing of our Faith (if at least we have any) from slipping from us; and
for the enabling us to say, with our Apostle in my Text, (...), we know whom we
have trusted; we Know whom we have Believed; and are persuaded that He is able
to keep that which we have committed unto Him against That Day.

23. If we find our selves wavering in the Belief of those Things whereof we
have not a perfect knowledge, (however a perfect knowledge of That, which is
the Ground of the Things Believed, and we have reason to superstruct the
strongest Belief to be imagined, upon so firm a Foundation as perfect
Knowledge,) we may comfort our selves, and reinforce our Sick Faith, by
observing these following Rules. Mar. 9. 24.
Lord I believe, help Thou my unbelief. Implying an unbelief in one, does
consist with belief in another measure. Just as contrary Qualities often meet
in one Subject, in gradibus remissis, although in gradibus intensis Confession
and Prayer our own. Lord, we believe in a degree; but with fears now and then,
and some dishonorable Faintings. Nor of our selves can we do more; but That
and more by thy Help. Help us therefore to believe, without the least degree of
doubting, or distrust, or diffidence. Whatever is wanting in our Belief, we
pray thee pardon, and repair, and replenish in us. We cannot acquire it by Art,
or Industry; but we can humbly wrestle with thee (as Jacob did) for this
Blessing, by Prayer and Fasting. And through the Grace which Thou have given
us, We will never let thee go, till thou have blessed us with a steady unshaken
Faith. Thirdly, by to be tempted (however strongly) is no Transgression. But
rather the more a man is tempted, and to the staggering of his Faith, the more
victorious is his Faith when he does not yield. Yield we do not, whilst we
dissent from our Waverings; and hate the unsteadiness of our Assent; and are
heartily grieved at its Haesitations; and are piously careful to make it
steady; and resolute in our Purposes to hold fast our Faith, even in spite of
those Doubtings we grapple with; and strive to make it so much the stronger,
(the more our Tempter attempts its overthrow,) by the Antiperistasis of
Temptations. We do not yield, though we are buffeted, (both by Satan, and the
Flesh, and the World we live in,) whilst we are obstinate in our purpose to
serve the God whom we own with our Self-denials; to serve him with the Denial
of all the Rivals of his Religion; (our Wit, our Reason, our Erudition, our
Profit, Pleasure, or Reputation;) and to honor him with the obedience of every
Faculty within us; not only with our Wills, but our Understandings, whilst we
make them stoop down, when they cannot rise so high as to things above us; and
the Mortuus est Dei Filius, prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum. Sepultus
resurrexit, certum est, quia Impossible. Tert. de Carne Christi.
rather to believe them, (if I may use Tertullian's (...),) because Impossible.
For what is impossible to us, to God is easy. What to us is miraculous, to Him
is natural. And therefore the Mysteries of our Religion, (to wit, the Trinity,
Incarnation, Resurrection, and the like,) which to the misty Eye of Reason our
Tempter would make to seem impossible, do to the clearer Eye of Faith appear to
be True so much the rather. I say, the rather in two respects; in respect of
our Tempter, whose ends we frustrate by our Belief; and in respect of the
Things Themselves, which do the better become Religion for being above the
short Reach of our stunted Knowledge; and which we are Therefore to believe,
because unable to comprehend them. For were we able to comprehend them (as we
do many things below us,) This gross Absurdity would follow, that what is now
our Religion, would be our Science. Wherein our finite Understandings would not
humbly submit, but proudly Triumph. And it would be an hard thing to be
Irreligious. The Pelagians of old, and our late Socinians, do seem to forget
the vast Distance, and Disproportion, betwixt the Faculties of Man, and hidden
Mysteries of God, when they contend for a Sufficience in natural reason to 1
Cor. 10. 14.
receive the 1 Cor. 10. 14.
deep things of the Spirit of God. For as God being a Spirit must (for that
very reason) be worshipped in Spirit, so the spiritual things of God must be
spiritually discerned. There must be 1 John 3. 2.
Similitude and Proportion 'twixt Acts and Objects. Lastly, it is matter of
comfort to us, and one of the means of reinforcing our wavering Faith, that
what does often seem to fail us in one regard, may yet in another be ever with
us for our support. We may with the Father of the Faithful, the Faithful
Abraham, Romans 4. 18.
believe in Hope against Hope. For as He could not hope for a great Posterity,
in regard of His Age, and Sarah's Barrenness, which yet he could not but hope
for, in regard of God's Promise, which could not fail; so, what we cannot
believe exactly, in regard of its being above the Reach of our Reason, and
common Vsages of Nature; we cannot choose but believe, in regard that God says
it who cannot lie. The Worthiness of our Faith does stand in This chiefly, that
though it is many times Wavering, like the tremulous Needle in the Mariner's
Compass, yet being touched by God's Grace, as That Needle by the Loadstone, its
prevalent motion is toward its Pole; and from That its Trepidations can never
wrest it. Insomuch that we may say, (as once S. Paul in another case,) we are
troubled on every side, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.
yet not in Distress; perplexed we are often, but not in Despair; Persecuted by
Satan, but by God not forsaken; cast down indeed, but not destroyed. Tremble we
may, (like Aristippus in a shipwreck,) but (like Him) we are not guilty of
yielding up our (...), (as it is worded by Aulus Gellius.) We do not basely
consent to our Perturbations, which arise not from our Spirits, but from our
Flesh. The Law in our Members (do what we can) will still be warring; but the
Law in our Minds does ever worst it. We still believe with our Wills; Lord,
help the Unbelief of our Understandings. Our Hearts are steady; Lord, fix our
Heads too. In spite of our very Unbelief (in point of doubt, or haesitation, or
now and then a dark interval,) We will believe, so as to love the Incarnate
Deity whom we admire; and so love, as to obey him; and obey him to such a
point, as to lay down our lives for the love we bear him. And so will prove by
all three, that we do really Believe what we cannot fathom, [God manifest in
the Flesh,] because without our Believing, we can do neither. Neither Love, nor
Obey, nor lay down our Lives in obedience to him. Let our Doubtings or
Disbelievings (in some Degree, and by Fits,) be what they can; or let them seem
to be what they will; yet we are certain of our Faith, whilst we are certain of
our Fear to offend our Maker; and of our Love to his Goodness, and of our
Obedience to his Commands. Without this last ('it is very true) we cannot speak
Peace to our selves, or others. For as S. John says expressly, By This we know
that we know him, if we keep his Commandments; so it is the keeping of his
Commandments, by which we know that we love, and obey him truly.

24. Now having arrived at a full knowledge of God's Existence, Est non scripta
sed nata lex; quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus, verum ex Natura ipsa
arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus; ad quam non docti, sed facti; non instituit,
sed imbuti sumus, etc. Cic. Orat. pro Milone.
and his good-pleasure, (expressed to us in his Precepts,) or of his Verity and
his Will, (revealed to us in his Word, and also engraven in our own Nature, as
a Law written in our Hearts;) and farther yet having attained unto a knowledge
also in part of his Glorious Essence; (as that he is a Spirit, Existing of
Himself from all Eternity, an omnipresent and an omniscient, and a necessary
Being, from whom, and by whom, is every Good Thing that is; and that he is a
Rewarder of Them that diligently seek him; Heb. 11. 6.
etc.) Having I say the satisfaction of knowing That which our Apostle does
call (...), Romans 1. 19.
That which may be known of God, which is as much as is needful, and as much
as is enough; we must not disquiet our Minds in vain, by Ecclus. 3. 21, 22.
seeking out things which are too hard for us, or by searching after Secrets
above our strength; or by being overcurious in unnecessary matters; as the
excellent Son of Sirach has very judiciously forewarned us. The Trinity of
Persons in the Unity of the Godhead is the chiefest of Those Insearchables;
which are indeed (...), Romans 11. 33.
past finding out, more impossible to be traced than all his most mysterious
ways, which our Apostle thought worthy of That Expression. Such a mystery it
is, as the most pious, and the most learned, and most acute of all Writers were
never well able to give account of. The most profound Divine Here is in the
condition of Simonides, when demanded by Hiero, a definition of the Deity. The
more he looks into This Mystery, by so much the obscurer it seems to be. The
longer he considers, the less he is able to apprehend it. S. John says
expressly, (and I believe him,) There are Three that bear record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word, the Holy Ghost, and These Three are One. (1 John 5, 7.) The
Ancient Fathers and Councils, to stop the Mouths of several Heretics, of Two
especially, Arius first, and then Sabellius, and to preserve the Christian
Church from the Plague of Schism, found it necessary to add This Form of Words,
(though not in a positive, but in an exclusive sense,) A Trinity of Persons in
an unity of the Godhead. But if it is Cum quaeritur, Quid Tres? magna prorsus
inopia humanum laborat eloquium. August. de Trin. l. 5. cap. 19.
asked what is meant by a Trinity of Persons, S. Austin says we want words to
express it by. Dictum est tamen Tres Personae, non ut illud diceretur, sed ne
taceretur quomodo Tres sint, etc. For who can speak fitly of what is Infinite,
and whilst he makes use of Terms, belonging only to finite Things? yet This
must be done, if we speak at all. Mornay de la Verite de la Religion
Christienne. c. 5. fol 41. b.
Il en fault parler en language humain, puisque le divin nous est incogneu.
Only let us not forget the wise Advertisement of Anselm, (whensoe're we so
speak,) Sic est summa essentia supra and extra omnem aliam Naturam, ut si
quando de illa dicitur aliquid verbis quae Communia sunt aliis Naturis sensus
nullatenus sit Communis. Ansel Monolog. c. 62.
that if we speak concerning God in Words which are Common to other Natures,
our sense and meaning must not be Common, but peculiar to God alone.

25. Nor is This All. For we want understanding to apprehend the Blessed
Trinity, as well as words to express it by. Anselm's excellent Understanding
was utterly lost in This Labyrinth. Vbi supra c. 86.
The Understanding of Boethius was also drowned in This Ocean. Boethius lib. de
Trinitate and Vnitate Dei.
Good S. Bernard's Understanding was swallowed up in This Abyss. D. Bern. de
Consid. l. 5. c. 7. p. 897. 878.
From whence I easily conclude, (because I do it with humility and due
submission,) that the Trinity in Unity only can be fathomed by it self.
Martialis in Epist. ad Eu^degal. c. 3.
And that to speak of Three Persons, in any acception of the word Persons which
is in use amongst Men, (when at any time they speak of created Beings,) were to
commit a grosser Haeresie, than that of the Antitrinitarians.

26. This does prompt me to go out of this long Discourse, at the very same
Door at which I entered. A Door of Hope and Consolation, which seems to hang on
These three Hinges.

First, that I know whom I have believed, by Knowledge properly so called.

Next, that I believe what I cannot know, as far as it is affirmed in God's own
word.

Lastly, that I contradict not what it is most difficult to believe, (because
not written in God's own word,) as far as I find it is agreed on by All my
Teachers, (especially met together in General Councils,) as an Act of
Uniformity, or as an Article of Peace.

For however I may err, it shall not be as an Haeretick, and as a Schismatic
much less. It being the Glory of a Man's Faith, to bow down his Reason to his
Religion; and the Dignity of his Religion, to study Charity, and Meekness, and
Obedience to his Superiors, above some Truths. I say therefore with Leo de
passione Domini Sermon. 12.
Leo, If I cannot explain what the Trinity is, I will not presume to say there
is not a Trinity. And with Radulphus Flaviacensis, Rad. Flav. in Levit. l. 10.
c. 2.
If I cannot apprehend how One is Three in the propriety of their Persons, and
how the same Three are One in the Communion of their Substance, I will not
despise, or gainsay, but obey the Church. I do not mean only the English, much
less the Roman, but I mean the Holy Catholic and Apostolic Church, in which
to believe, is the Ninth Article of my Creed. If this mystery of the Triune is
as Ineffable, as Inscrutable by Dust and Ashes, (which we are) I will content
my self (with Damascius) to sacrifice to him my Soul in Silence; and adore him
with Dionysius, (whether he is the Areopagite, or not,) Dionys. Areop. de
divin. Nomin. c. 1. p. 447.
ut Nomine vacantem, as being said to be without, because above every Name.
Neither Jehovah, in the singular, nor Elohim, in the plural, nor Both together
conjoined can sufficiently illustrate This stupendous (...), (as Divines love
to call it,) This Reciprocal Inhabitation of Three Subsistences in one another,
whereby the Unity of the Godhead (is rather perfected, than destroyed, and)
remains Entire.

27. It Is plain the word Persons is to be taken, (not so much in a Positive,
as) in a Negative sense. For that the Words of S. John [These Three are One]
might be no longer misunderstood and misreported, misexpounded and misapplied,
as they were by several Haereticks before the First Nicene General Council, And
that Christians every where might speak as 'twere with one Mouth, (in case they
could not be ( every where) of one mind,) It seemed good to Hist. Council.
Nicaeni ex Edit. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 322. and Alfons. Pis. l. 2. p. 383. and
inferius p. 603. Vide etiam Baron. ad Ann. 362.
That Council, to ordain that the Word Persons should be applied in Discourse
to the Three Witnesses in Heaven, which are but One God. Thereby intending, not
so properly, to give us a real knowledge of the Mystery, as to defend us from
Error in it. And above all other Errors, from those of Haeresie, and Schism.
Not so really to inform us what the Three in One are, as to preserve us from
Imagining that They are what they are Not. Not three parts in one whole, either
Integral, or Essential. Not three Qualities in one subject. Not three Modes,
Not three Formalities, Not three Names of one Thing. In which Act of
Uniformity, (as before I once called it,) and especially in reconciling the
whole Greek Church unto The Latin, Athanasius and Hosius were the most
eminently Instrumental. Now in the Business of Religion, (though not in That of
mere Philosophy) we are in all reason to yield assent to some High Things above
our reason. Else Religion were not Religion; and God himself would not be God,
or Man at least would not be Man, and Mystery would not be Mystery, if God's
knowledge of Himself, as a Trinity in Unity, could possibly be common to Man
with God. It is therefore, with Me, a prevalent Argument of His Verity, that
His Nature is so vastly above the Sphere of my Comprehension. Apprehensive of
his Nature indeed I am; but comprehensive of it I cannot be. For whatsoever I
can fathom, I cannot absolutely Adore; as seeing there are few of my fellow
Creatures, whose Natures I can say I do fully know. If I make a Man of Wax, or
a Statue of Marble, I cannot so truly transcend my Creature, as my Creator does
Me; because between Me and That, there is some proportion; but between my God
and Me, there is none at all. And if my Creature for want of Reason cannot
apprehend Me, much less for want of an Omniscience, can I comprehend Him. Thus
though I cannot discern the Reason, why in the Unity of the Substance there is
a Trinity of Subsistences which I admire, yet why I cannot discern the Reason,
I can discern reason enough; and (which is every whit as well for a finite
Reason,) I find it most reasonable that so it should be. For exactly to know,
why we cannot know exactly the things above us, is every whit as sufficient in
order to our Faith, as any kind of Demonstration can be in order unto our
knowledge. So far is any thing from reaching what is infinitely above or beyond
it self, that no Being (but the Divine) exactly knows its own Nature. And even
This our very Ignorance of God's entire Essence may lead us to the knowledge of
his Existence. For as my outward Eye sees, but cannot See that it sees, (This
later being the Work of a nobler Faculty within me,) or as a Brute does
apprehend its proper objects, but cannot apprehend at all How or Why it
apprehends, (for want of a power to reflect on its Apprehension,) so a Man
endued with reason, although he knows many things thoroughly, and also knows how
he knows them, yet How, or Why, or by What means he comes to know, that he
knows How he knows, he can never tell; unless it be by inferring, that it comes
to him from a Superior and Invisible Power, which Power is God's.

28. By stating thus the whole Subject of the Godhead in general, and of the
Trinity in particular, (which I have singled out as one of the highest
Mysteries in our Religion, the least understood, and the most stumbled at, by
such as set up mere Science against Religion, and depretiate all Faith in
respect of Knowledge,) I pay my Duty both to the Word, and the Church of God.
To each of these as a Christian; And as a Man, to the Law of Nature. I fully
satisfy my Reason, by weighing the Nature of Religion: and so I make a strict
Agreement between my Reason and my Faith. Nor can I better Conclude and dismiss
the whole Subject, than in the sense of the devout and acute S. Bernard. Bern.
de Consideratione l. 5. c. 8.
To inquire into This Mystery, (he speaks of a Critical Inquiry,) is a peevish
Curiosity: (and as perilous as it is peevish.) To Believe it in humility, as it
is Worded by the Church, (which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth,) is a Pious
Belief, and a Safe Profession. But to See it as it is, and to know it as we are
known, is the final Consummation of Bliss and Glory.

Which God the Father of his Mercy dispose us for, for the Merits of God the
Son, and through the powerful Operation of God the Holy Ghost.

To whom be Honor and Adoration for evermore.

FINIS.
Neither will the supposed, (and I fear truly supposed) greater Number of
Atheists, than either Papists or Sectaries, be any hinderance to the Papists,
for finally prevailing. See Dr. Sanderson 's long Preface to his Sermons in
fol.. 23.



The TABLE of particulars.
A
ABstinence from the Kinds, and the appearances of evil. p. 238, 239. to p.
272. from Fleshly Lusts in general. p. 273, etc. to p. 315. from Disobedience
to Authority in particular. 317. to 343. Antinomians from whence. 150. Atheism
expressed in the Denial of Spirits. 3, 4, etc. by Rebellion against Governors.
82, 83. by Impudence in Sin. 251. confuted, 390, 397, etc. to 421. an effect of
great Dullness in witty men. 430, 431, etc. Authority, though humane, is of
Divine Right; and as well the Subordinate as the Supreme. 319, 320, etc. See
Humane Laws. Obedient. Indifferent Things.
C.
CAlvinistical Doctrines. 148, 149, 170, 171, etc. Charity inconsistent with
Schism. 63, 64. Circumspection in thesi. 79, 80, etc. in hypothesi. 115, 116,
etc. Commandments how to be found in Peace and Holiness. 212, 213, etc. how the
most rigorous are indeed the most merciful. 263. Conscience what, and how a
Rule to live by. 103. 104. to 108, and 151, 152. Church of England, how far
from Popish, 68, 69, 142, 143, etc. Christ, how a stumbling block to titular
Christians, as much as to the Jews and Gentiles. 365, 366, etc. Christianity a
Warfare, 293, 294, etc. but full of pleasure. 206, 207, etc. brought into
credit by obedience to humane Laws. 321, 322, etc. Credulity antidoted. 29, 30,
31, etc.
D.
DAmnation, to whom it is due by way of eminence. 33, 34. Dangers incompassing
every Christian. 189, 190. Deceivers if old more plausible than of late. 26,
27, etc. Demonstration Metaphysical more compulsive of Assent than
Mathematical, 404, 405, 406, etc. 419, 420, etc. Discretion, of what moment in
Religion. 108, 109, etc. Distrust, a Duty. 124, 125, etc. Drollery how
dangerous, 138, 139. Duellers how Impious, 249, 250.
E.
ELect, why they cannot fall finally, though many Regenerate may and do. 180,
181, etc. Enemies, how to be obliged. 204, 279. Enthusiastical Pretenders their
most false Rule of Trial. 9, 10.
F.
FAith essential to Religion, and more rewardable than knowledge. 422, 423,
424, etc. Divine described as differing from humane. 432, 433. etc. How to he
secured from failing. 434, 435, etc. Fallacies in Religion and Practice
provided against. 103, etc. 140, 142, etc. 283, etc. False Prophets and False
Christ's in the Primitive times. 116, 117, 118, etc. 135. False Teachers,
Devils. 133, 134, etc. Fear consists with true Fortitude. 123, 124. Necessary
to Faith, 161, etc. Flattery fatal. 294, 295, etc. Flesh, its frailty in the
Best. 270, 271, 299, 300, etc. Fornication, how to be prevented. 289, 290, etc.
G.
GOD, His Glory the best motive to a good life. 278, 279. How he fights for us.
309, 310. His Being demonstrated by Mental and Metaphysical, more clearly than
other things by Mathematical Demonstration. 399, etc. 404, to 420. the things
of God which may be known. 428, 429. Gospel, brought into Disgrace by the
Schisms, and Seditions, and Disobedience of its Professors. 321, 322, etc. In
what degree to be heeded by us. 363, 364, etc. Grace sufficient not still
effectual. 167, 168, etc.
H.
HAeresie what, and how differing from Schism. 45, etc. Happiness not in this
life. 162, 163. Hobs how monstrous. 3, 10, 11, 12. Holiness how important. 198,
199, etc. Humane Laws asserted. 146, 147, etc. 227, 228, etc. 317, 318, to 343.
Humility a chief mark of God's Spirit. 35, 36. Hypocrisy in its Height. 31,
32, etc. 207, 208, 218, 219, 239, 240, etc. 248.
I.
Jealousy dangerous to Souls, (as well as too much want of it) 95, 96, 142.
Jesuits why Antichristian. 22, 23, 19, 20, 129, 130. Impudence in sinning
worse than hypocrisy. 249, 250, etc. Indifferent things become Necessary by
humane Laws. 71, 72, etc. 220, 221, 317, 318, etc. Infallibility of Rome
falsified. 153, etc. Justice, how a (...). 198, 199.
K.
KIngs alone can procure the Peace and Unity of Christendom, and they can do it
if they will. 227, 228, etc. Their Supremacy asserted, 318, 319, etc. Knowledge
damning without Obedience. 196, 364, 365, etc. how inconsistent with Belief.
392, 393. how less worthy, and why less required. 423, 424, etc. as such,
infallible. 401.
L.
LAws. See Humane, and Indifferent. Lawful things to be avoided. 262, etc.
Lent, why its Abstinences prescribed. 245, 246. how to be kept. 247, 275.
Liberty truly Christian, wherein it stands. 146, 147, etc. Life, when to be
despised. 266, 267. Lusts of the Flesh. 275, 276, etc. Luxury in its height.
250, 251.
M.
MAN to Man a God or a Devil. 125, 127, 128, etc. the Best not to be followed
in all cases and occasions. 155, 156.
O.
OBedience to Government a Fundamental to Christianity. 19, 20, 48, 49, 74, 75.
must be impartial. 230, 253, etc. to 260. to humane Laws due by the Laws
divine. 318, 319, etc. Occasions of Sin to be avoided. 110, 111, 112, 263, 264,
etc. 290, 291.
P.
PEace of what value. 76, 77, 194, 195, etc. Pleasures in Self-denial, 305,
306, etc. Popery, why laid to the charge of Protestants, and by whom. 68, 69,
142, 143, etc. confutes it self. 153, 154. Preaching condemns whom it does not
convert. 346, 347, etc. 365, 366, etc. The Best. 384. Pride in its Height is
seen in Schismatics. 58, 59, etc. Prosperity no constant mark of God's favor.
30, 31. Prudence consists of three parts. 84. 59, etc. wherein of most use.
163. Public good to be preferred before Private. 221, 222, etc.
R.
REbellion the constant effect of Schism. 66, 67, 68. the most damning piece of
Carnality. 118, 119, etc. Regenerate may finally fall from Grace. 173, 174,
etc. Religion lies in a little room. 194, 195. How it differs from Science, and
is more excellent than It. 421, 422, 423, etc. How evacuated by the Tongue.
257.
S.
SAlvation on what terms to be had. 217, 218, 231, 232, etc. Schism worse than
Haeresie. 45, 46, 47, etc. 54, 55. why more damning than other Crimes. 56, 57,
58, etc. an Amulet against it. 336, 337, etc. Scripture wrested by the
Heathens. 135, 136. to be attended, how much and why. 351, 352, etc. 372, 373,
etc. why more than the Discourses which are commonly called Sermons. 376, 377,
378, 379. how despised by some great Papists. 378, 379. and by others. 380,
etc. an Apology for it. 381, 382, etc. Security most treacherous. 98, 99, etc.
Self-deceiving the worst. 126. Self-denial for public Peace. 221, 222. how
pleasant. 305, 306, etc. 312, etc. Sense, the outward not so infallible as the
inward. 401, 402, etc. Separatists in England why the worst. 68, 69, etc.
Sermons how to be heeded, and why, and with what difference. 345, 346, etc. to
the end. Sincerity how to be proved. 253, 254, 255, etc. Sins the worse the
more spiritual. 33, 34. the least how damning. 255, etc. to 261. Soul of man of
what value. 302, 303, etc. Spirits to be tried, and by what Touchstone. 6, 7,
etc. 18, 19, 20, etc.
T.
TEmptations, how carefully to be shunned by the best and strongest. 110, 111,
etc. 270, 271, etc. how diversely to be encountered. 287, 288, etc. Thoughts why
damning. 260. Touchstone, how to be tried before allowed as a Rule of Trial. 8,
9, etc. Tongue, how great an Evil. 257, 259. Trinity of Persons in unity, etc.
the chief of Insearchables. 440, 441, etc. why called Persons, and when first.
444, 445, 446, etc.
U.
UNity among Christians of what consequence to be kept, and by what means. 222,
223, 224, etc. 340, 341, etc.
W.
WAR lawful under the Law as well of Christ as of Moses. 204, 205. Wisdom of
the Flesh why Devilish. 298, 299. Women why not to be conversed with usually,
268, 269, 270. etc. Words, how damning. 138, 139, etc. 257, 259. Word of God.
See Scripture.
ERRATA sic corrige.
Page 85. line 22. r. Dysasters. P. 106. l. 3. from the bottom, for with r. by.
P. 113. l. 2. r. Meribibula. P. 154. in Marg. after l. 10. add, [ Council.
Florent. Session. 4. and deinceps. Edit. Bin. Vol. 8. a p. 580. ad p. 593.] P.
156. l. 6. in Marg. r. facturam. P. 171. l. 19. dele but. P. 207. l. 20. r.
peace. P. 214. l. 17. after but, del. the seventh is set apart. P. 219. l. 17.
for ye, r. the. P. 220. l. 10. r. stamped. P. 280. l. 3. dele (...). P. 283. l.
4. for whereas, r. where, as. P. 284. l. 9. r. Curiosity. P. 286. l. 11. after
of, r. our. P. 295. l. 6. from the bottom, after are, r. we. P. 303. l. 17.
after is, r. yet. P. 312. l. 10. after Glory, add in the Text what is in the
Margin. P. 339. l. 8. for Joshua, r. Jeshua. P. 352. l. 3. for so, r. see. P.
356. l. 9. for How, r. Now. P. 386. l. ult. r. consider. P. 400. l. 4. from the
bottom, del. ratio formalis. P. 405. l. 3. after of, r. such. P. 409. l. 12.
after as, dele it. P. 410. l. 5. after are, r. therefore. P. 419. l. 12, 13,
14. in Marg. del. [Paulus Venetus, and others.] P. 432. l. 5. after of, r. The.
P. 435. l. 4. after doubting, dele or. P. 442. l. 1. dele and. Ibid. l. 6. from
the bottom, for only can, r. can only.

