The SECOND BOOK of the Pleasant Musical Companion: BEING A New Collection of
Select Catches, Songs, and Glees, for Two and Three Voices.

The Second Edition, Corrected and much Enlarged.



LONDON, Printed for John Playford near the Temple Church, or at his House over
against the Blue-Ball in Arundel-Street, 1686.

PREFACE.
OF this Second Volume of the Musical Companion a small Impression was Printed
and Published above two Years since, of which I have a considerable Number yet
remaining, it being not so complete and well done to my mind as I could have
wished afterward, and being not printed in a Volume to join with the First
Book. These Reasons did hasten me sooner than I intended to a Second Edition,
and to leave out several of those Catches not suitable to the present Mode, and
to add many new ones; and also, in the last Part of this Book I have joined
many new Songs for Two Voices, never before printed; and also some old revived
Songs sometime sung at the Theaters: All which, I doubt not, but to many
Judicious Lovers of Music will be very acceptable; having herein taken no
small Pains and Care to have True Copies from the Composers, and truly printed,
upon which account I also Recommend my First Volume, entitled, The Musical
Companion, though published ten Years since, which is a very excellent Magazine
of Vocal Music, containing four several Varieties of Music in one complete
Volume, viz. In the first Part, 100 Choice Select Catches; in the second Part,
6 Dialogues, and 33 Songs and Airs for two Voices, Cantus and Bassus; the
third Part contains 60 Songs and Airs for three Voices, Cantus, Medius, and
Bassus; in the fourth and last Part are 12 Songs and Airs for four Voices,
Cantus, Medius, Tenor, and Bassus: All which are contained in one Volume, and
the Parts so printed, that the several persons may sing their Parts out of that
one Book. These two Volumes contain most of the choicest Catches and Songs,
which have been Composed by most of the eminent English Masters for above this
30 Years last past, wherefore I leave these as my Vltimum Vale of this kind of
Music, and heartily wish, That they may prove useful and pleasant to all true
Companions and Lovers of Vocal Music.

John Playford.

An Alphabetical Table of the Catches and Rounds for Three and Four Parts, in
this Book.
Note: Those Catches that are marked thus were not printed before.
A. Number.
Although jolly Tom, great Fame thou have won 18 A Health to the Nut-brown Lass
27 As I went over Tawny Marsh 33 A Hogshead was offered to Bacchus his Shrine
56
B.
Be gone old Care, and I prithee be gone from me 13 Be jolly my friend for the
money we spend 15
C.
Come fill all the Glasses 5 Come let us drink, and never think 36 Come my
Hearts, how are you inclined 41 Come my pretty Wenches more nimble than Eels 51
Come my Hearts, play your parts 53
D.
Drink on, 'till Night be spent 3
F.
Full Bags, a brisk Bottle, and a beautiful Face 4 Fie! nay! prithee John! do
not quarrel, Man, 10 From twenty to thirty, good night, and good morrow 58
G.
God preserve His MAJESTY 23 Good indeed! the Herb's good Weed. [On Tobacco.]
64
H.
Hark, the bonny Christchurch Bells 1 Here Is that will challenge all the Fair 7
Here Is the Rarities of the whole Fair 8 Honest Ralph was a Merchant's man 11
Had she not care enough of the old man 38 How happy a thing were a Wedding 40
Here lies Simon, cold as Clay 45 Have you not in a Chimney seen, a Faggot that
is moist 47
I.
I would I were in my Father's Mill 16 Joan Easy got her a Nag and a Sledge 19
Joan has been gallopping 20 I Will tell my Mother, my Jenny cries, 25 John asked
his Landlady, thinking no ill 28 Joan, Joan, for your part, you love kissing 31
I have lost my dear Die -- na, therefore will I cry 39 I lay with an old man all
the night 54 If all true Friends of good Liquor now 61
L.
Let us love and drink our Liquor 50 Let Crystal White Wind cheer the drowzy
mind 55
M.
My Wife has a Tongue as good as e're twang'd 60
O.
Once I did see a Maid with a Basket 26 Once in our lives let us drink to our
Wives 35
Q.
Quoth the Thatcher to his man 48
S.
Strange News from the Rose boys 46 Sing merrily now my Lads, here is a Catch 62
T.
The Crab of the Wood is Sauce very good 9 Tom Jolly's Nose I mean to abuse 17
This Gallopping Joan I conclude 21 Tom Tory told Titus, the Whigs did design 34
It Is easy to force to the water your Horse 49 The Heart he loves the high Wood
52 There Is an odd sort of Liquor new come 63
V.
Under this Stone lies Gabriel John 7 Under a green Elm, lies Luke Shepherd's
Helm 30 Vds nigs, here ligs John Diggs, and Richard Digger, 59
W.
When Judith had laid Holifernes in bed 2 When a Woman that is Buxom 12 Who
comes there? stand, and come before the Constable, 14 Well rung Tom-boy,
Ding-dong 29 Would you know how we meet over our jolly full Bouls, 32 Will you
go by water Sir? I Am the next Sculler 65 Wine in a morning makes us frolic and
gay 66 Well played Stephen! he that love a Parson's Wife, 67
Y.
Young John the Gardener having lately got 22 Ye Cats that at midnight spit
Love at each other 24 You may talk of brisk Claret 57
A Table of the Last Part of this Book, containing Choice Merry Songs for Two
Voices, and some for Three Voices.
Note: Those with this mark were not printed before.
Number. Come Jack, come tipple off your Wine 1 The Delights of the Bottle 2
Away with the causes of Riches and Cares 3 If I live to be old. ( The Old-man's
Wish.) 4 We live in Woods, we live in Groves 5 Old Chiron thus preached to his
Pupil Achilles 6 What ails the old Fool, why do thou not drink 7 Come lay by
all Care, e'ne let her go 8 One night, scarce had the wearied Sun 9 How great
are the Blessings of Government made 10 The Storm is all over. [Rebels routed
in the West.] 11 When Teucer from his Father fled, and from the shore 12 Though
my Mistress be fair, yet froward she is too 13 Saccharissa's grown old, and
almost past sport 14 A Song on the downfall of Charing Cross. (3. voc.) 15
Mortali che fate. (An Italian Air. 3 voc.) 16 A poor Soul fate sighing near a
Ginger-bread stall, 17 The Infallible Doctor. 18 The Cambridge Milk-maids
Health. 19 Sir Eglamore that valiant Knight. (3 voc.) 20 A Tavern Song, called,
The Hectors of Holborn. 21 The Song of John Dory, (3 voc.) First Part. Another
Song to the same Tune. Second Part. 22
A Song made on the Power of Women. 23 A Song in Praise of the Dairy-maid. 24
The Song of Tom-a-Bedlam, as sung in the Theater. 25 The Banditte Song, in the
Play of Henry the Fourth. 26
FINIS.
A Catalogue of MUSIC Books Printed for John Playford, near the Temple Church.
THE whole Book of Psalms in Meter, as they are sung in all Parish Churches,
with the proper Tune to every Psalm, composed in three Parts, viz. Cantus,
Medias, and Bassus, by John Playford, in a small Volume to carry in the Pocket
to Church. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.

Musick's Recreation on the Lyra-Viol, containing variety of new Lessons, newly
Reprinted with Additions. Price stitcht 2 s.

Choice Airs, Song, and Dialogues, being most of the newest Songs sung at
Court, and at the public Theaters; composed by several Gentlemen of His
Majesty's Music, in Five several Volumes in Folio.

The Musical Companion, containing variety of Catches of three and four Parts;
and several other Choice Songs, Airs, and Dialogues, of two, three, and four
Parts, in one Volume in Qurto. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.

The Second Part of the Musical Companion, containing a new Collection of Merry
and Loyal Catches, and other Songs, of two and three Parts. Price 2 s.

A brief Introduction to the Skill of Music, both Vocal and Instrumental, by
J. Playford, newly Reprinted with Additions of a Third Part, containing the Art
of Composing Music, of two, three, and four Parts. Price bound 2 s.

The Division-Violin, containing a choice Collection of Divisions for the
Treble-Violin to a Ground-Bass, all fairly engraven on Copper Plates, being of
great benefit and delight for all Byactitioners on the Violin, and are the
first that ever were printe of this kind; newly Reprinted with large Additions.
Price 2 s. 6 d.

Musick's Handmaid, containing choice Lessons for the Virginals, and
Harpsicbord, newly Reprinted with Additions of plain Rules to understand the
Gam-ut, and the Notes, thereby to play from the Book, all engraven on Copper
Plates. Price 2 s. 6 d.

The Pleasant Companion, containing new Airs and Tunes for the Flagelet, with
Instructions for Learners, newly Reprinted with Additions. Price 1 s. 6 d.

Musick's Delight, containing new Lessons for the Flute or Recorder, with
Instructions for Learners. Price 1 s. 6 d.

The Dancing Master, or plain and easy Rules to dance Country Dances, with the
proper Tunes to each Dance, is new printed; with 45 new Dances never printed
before. Price bound 2 s. 6 d.

There is newly printed a new Edition of the Violin Book, Entitled, Apollo's
Banquet (first Part) containing new Airs, Theater-Tunes, Forn-pipes, Jiggs,
and Scotch Tunes. The second Part of this Book contains a Collection of
French-dancing Tunes, used at Court, and in Dancing-Schools; as, several new
Brawls, Corants, Bore's, Minuets, Gavots, Sarabads, etc. Most of which are
proper to play on the Recorder or Flate, as well as on the Violin. Price 1 s. 6
d.

Other Books lately Printed, and sold at the same Shop by Henry Playford.
THree several Books in Folio, entitled, The Theater of Music, containing
Songs and Dialogues sung at Court and public Theaters: Composed by the best
Masters.

A late Voyage to Constantinople, by Joseph Grelot, a Baron of France, and
newly Translated into English; in which is a Description of the Turkish
Government; their Religion, Customs, and Manners also, which was never related
by any Traveller before; the inside and outside of the ancient Fabric Sanda
Sophia, and other Mosques now in Constantinople; all fairly described and
engraven in 18 Copper Plates. Price bound 3 s. 6 d.

Wit and Mirth, an Antidote against Melancholy, compounded of witty Poems,
merry Ballads, pleasant Songs and Catches. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

The Merry Companion, or the Second Part of the Antidote against Melancholy,
compounded of merry Tales, witty Jests, and ridiculous Bulls: To which is
added, several delightful Histories, Tales, and Novels, some of Comical, and
some of Tragical Adventures. Price bound 1 s. 6 d.

Also all sorts of Ruled Paper, and Ruled Books for MVSIC of several sizes, are
to be sold at the same Shop.

[Upon Christchurch Bells in Oxford.]
A. 3. Voc.
Christchurch Bells, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6; they sound so woundy great, so ^
wondrous sweet, and they troul so mer -- ri -- ly, mer -- ri -- ly. Hark! the
first and second Bell, that e -- ve -- ry day at ^ Four and Ten, cries, Come,
come, come, come, come to Prayers, and the Virger troops be -- fore the Dean: ^
Tinkle, tinkle, ting, goes the small Bell at Nine, to call the Beerers home;
but the Dev'l-a-Man will ^ leave his Can, till he hears the mighty Tom.

[Judith and Holifernes.]
A. 3 Voc.
Mr. Mioh. Wise.
Judith had laid Ho -- li -- fer -- nes in Bed, she pulled out his Falchion,
and cut off his Head; the ^ reason is plain, he would have made her his Whore, so
she cut off his Head as I told you before, as I told you before*

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.


[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.


[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Jackson.


[An old Epitaph.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
Ga -- bri -- el John, in the year of our Lord, One thousand and one; ^ cover
his Head with Turf or Stone, it is all one, it is all one, with Turf or Stone,
it is all one: Pray for the ^ Soul of gen -- tle John, if you please you may, or
let it alone, it is all one.

[The Humors of Bartholomew Fair.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
Ba -- by -- lon, the De -- vil and the Pope, the Girl is just a going on the
Rope: ^ Here Is Dives and La -- za -- rus, and the World's Creation, here is the
Dutch Woman, the like's not in the Nation; ^ here is the Booth where the tall
Dutch Maid is, here are Bears that dance like a -- ny Ladies: ^ To -- ta, to --
ta, tot, goes the lit -- tle Pe -- ny Trumpet, here is your Jacob Hall that can
jump it, jump it; ^ sound Trumpet, sound, a sil -- ver Spoon and Fork, come
here is your dainty Pig and Pork.

[Second Part of Bartholomew Fair.]
A. 4. Voc.
Pimper-le Pimp, and the wise Dancing Mare; here is valiant ^ St. George and the
Dragon, a Farce, a Girl of Fifteen with strange Moles on her Ar --: Here is ^
Vi -- en -- na besieged, a rare thing, and here is Pun -- chi -- nel -- lo,
shown thrice to the King. Then Ladies masked to the ^ Cloister re -- pair; but
there will be no Raffling, a Pox take the Fair.

[On a Crab-tree.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Mich. Wise.


[A chiding Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
John! do not quarrel, man! let us be mer -- ry, and drink about: ^ You're a
Rogue, you have cheated me, I Will prove before this Company, I caren't a Farthing,
Sir, for all you are so stout. ^ Sir, you lie, I scorn your word, or a -- ny
Man that wears a Sword, for all you huff, who cares a Tur --, or ^ who cares
for you.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Ralph was a Merchant's man, and dwelt in Lumbard-street; merry Jack was his
own kins -- man, it is merry, it is mer -- ry when Malt-men meet: Here is lu --
sty Darby Ale, honest Ralph, let us not ^ part; the other Quart, Brother Jack,
with all my Heart.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Jackson.
A-la-mode in his ^ Garb, and his Tongue: His Looks have such Charms, and his
Language such Force, that the ^ drowsy Mechanick's a Cuckold of course.

[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. John Jackson.
Care, and I prithee be gone from me, for I faith, old Care, thee and I shall
never agree; it is ^ long thou have lived with me, and fain thou would me
kill, but I faith, old Care, thou never shall have thy will.

[The London Constable.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
Je -- su -- it for ^ ought I know. You may as well, Sir, take me for a Ma --
ho -- me -- tan. He speaks Latin, secure him, he is a ^ dan -- ge -- rous Man.
To tell you the truth, Sir, I am an honest To -- ry; but here is a Crown to ^
drink, and there is an end of the Sto -- ry. Good morrow, Sir, a ci -- vil Man
is al -- ways welcome, go ^ Bar -- na -- by Bounce, light the Gentleman home.

[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. John Jackson.


[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Jackson.
A; flat, ^ flat on my Back, over a well-fill'd Sack, and whilst the Mill goes
round A; round A, round A, round A, round, and ^ so the Mill goes round A.

[Tom Jolly's Nose.]
A. 3. Voc.
TOm Jol -- ly's Nose I mean to a -- buse, thy jol -- ly Nose Tom provokes my
Muse; thy ^ Nose jol -- ly Tom that shines so bright, I Will ea -- si -- ly fol
-- low it by its own light: Thy Nose Tom ^ Jol -- ly no Jest it will bear,
although it yields Matter enough, and to spare; but jol -- ly Tom's ^ Nose, for
all he can do, breeds Worms in it self, and in our Heads too. Tom's Nose, jol
-- ly Tom's Nose, the ^ more it is banter'd, the more it glows: Then drink to
Tom Jol -- ly a cooling Glass, or jol -- ly Tom's ^ Nose will fire his Face.

[Answer to Tom Jolly's Nose.]
A. 3 Voc.
Tom, great Fame thou have won, thy bloody red Nose shall look paler e're ^
long; for the rate that we drink at each Night, still procures such No -- ses,
as would quite discountenance ^ yours: And when the large Bumper floats round
in the close, we will despise thee, and swear, it is mine Ar -- of a Nose.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Jackson.
JOan Ea-sy got her a Nag and a Sledge, to the Privy-house for to slide A; the
^ Hole was so foul, that she could not sit, but did cack as she lay on her side
A: She was not bound, for she ^ sent forth a sound, did stretch her Fundament
wide A.

[Gallopping Joan.]
A. 3. Voc.
Dr. John Blow.
JOan has been gallopping, gallopping, gallopping, Joan has been gallopping all
the Town over, ^ 'till her Bumfiddle, Bumfiddle, Bumfddle, un -- til her
Bumfiddle was wondrous sore; without e're a ^ Saddle upon her old Jade, to
fetch her good Man from the Alehouse trade.

[Second Part of Gallopping Joan.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Lenton.
Joan, I conclude, has an Instrument sucks, sucks more than Leech or ^ Pump;
she at present, poor Girl, has no time to be lewd, for her Buttocks are so
sore, she cannot ^ jump: But however you may tickle her Virginal Rump, for
plainly I see with your Mouth how you mump.

[Young John the Gardener.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
John the Gardener having lately got a ve -- ry rich and fer -- tile Garden
Plot; bragging to Joan, Quoth ^ he, so rich a Ground for Mellons, cannot in the
World be found: That Is a damned lie, quoth Joan, for I can ^ tell a place, that
does your Garden far ex -- cell: Where Is that? says John; In mine Ar --, quoth
Joan, for ^ there is store of Dung and Wa -- ter* all the year.

[The King's Health.]
A. 4. Voc.
Dr. John Blow.
Repeat Amen all the while this Catch is singing, resting four Crotchets. ^
take off your Hock, Sir. Amen.

[A Catch on the Midnight Cats.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Mich. Wife.
Grimmalkin, with Goosberry Eyes, when a Kitten knew something for why she was
wise; you ^ find by experience the Love-fit's soon over, Puss, Puss, lasts not
long, but turns to Cat-whore. Men ride many ^ Miles, Cats tread many Tiles,
both hazard, both hazard their Necks in the fray; on -- ly Cats, if they ^ fall
from a House or a Wall, keep their Feet, mount their Tails, mount their Tails,
and away.

[Kind Jenny.]
A. 3. Voc.
Dr. John Blow.
Jen -- ny cries, and then a poor lan -- gui -- shing Lover dies; but ye-faith,
I believe the Gipsey lies, for all she is so grave and wise: She longs to be
tickled, to be ^ tickled, to be tickled, she longs to be tickled; Oh! she longs
to be tickled.

[The Maid with a Basket.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. William Turner.


[The Nut-brown Lass.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.


[John the Miller.]
A. 4. Voc.
JOhn asked his Land-la -- die, thinking no ill, where he might best set up a
Water-Mill; the ^ wanton La -- die seeing John all alone, returned this An --
swer to her Tenant John: Would thou all ^ o -- there is thy Mill should
disgrace? then 'twixt my Legs will be the fittest place; for I, at time of
need, ^ can from behind, when Wa -- ter fails before, supply't with Wind.

[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Tom-boy, well rung Tom, Ding-dong, Cuckoo, well rung Tom; the Owl and the
Cuckoo, the ^ Fool and the Song, well sung; Cuckoo, well rung Tom.

[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
Luke Shepherd's Helm, that steered him ev' -- ry way; ^ wherefore now she is
gone, mour -- ning there is none, he followed her Corpse in gray: He smiled at
the ^ Grave, like a flee -- ring Knave, she will tell him on it at the last day;
for if we must rise with the same ^ Bo -- die and Eyes, she will have the same
Tongue, folks say.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
JOan, Joan, for your part, you love kissing with all your Heart; I mar -- ry
do I, says jumping Joan, and ^ therefore to thee I make my moan.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.


[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Jackson.
Tawny March, there I met with a tawny Lass; tawny Hose, and tawny Shoon; ^
tawny Petticoat, tawny Gown; tawny Brows, and tawny Face, thy tawny Nose in her
tawny Ar --.

[Tom Tory, and Titus.]
A. 3 Voc.
TOm To -- ry told Titus, The Whigs did de -- sign to murder the King, and
subvert the Right Line: Quoth the Doctor, in a fury, you're a rascally Sot,
Sir, did ever you hear of a Protestant Plot, Sir! Marry ^ have I, quoth Tom,
and I migh -- ti -- ly fear it; You're a Je -- su -- it, quoth the Doctor, if
you vex me, I Will swear it.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.


[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Matthew Lock.
James, and His Queen, may His Reign be ever Pleasant, and ever Green; may all
His ^ Loyal Subjects faithful be, and never more disturb his Peace; but e --
ver still in Health and Wealth, may daily ^ prosper and increase.

[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.


[On a young Widow, who married an old Widower.]
A. 3. Voc.


[Vpon the Coy Mrs. Dy-na; Who would not kiss, nor come Nigh-na!]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Tho. Farmer.
Dy', therefore will I cry, and bid her good-by; though I do not know why, the ^
Jade is so shy, my Flame to de -- ny, when in Passion I fry; had she dropped from
the Sky, she ^ ought to comply, and not still to cry like a Jilt, Fie! fie! fie!
fie! Oh fie! fie!

[On a Wedding.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. John Roffey.


[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. John Reading.


[A Round.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Lock.


[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Dr. John Wilson.


[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
Jove! and damn, and damn the Thinking.

[An EPITAPH on an honest Citizen, and true Friend to all Claret-drinkers.]
A. 4. Voc.
Simon cold as Clay, who whilst he lived, cried, who whilst he lived, cried,
Tip away; and when ^ Death puts out his Taper, he needs no touch, he needs
no Touch up -- on a Paper. Now let him rest, since ^ he is dead, and asks not
for a bit, and asks not for a bit of Bread, before he died, and that is ^ much,
for Death gave him, for Death gave him a Racey Touch.

Now although this same EPITAPH was long since given,
Yet Symon's not dead, no more than any Man living.
[On Mun Saint.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Mich. Wise.
Rose Boys, never heard before Boys, Saint upon a Sunday, he played away his ^
Clothes Boys, never such a Saint was there e -- ver heard before Boys.

[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Robert Smith.


[The Thatcher.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. John Moss.
Jack, what do think? Let Us raise this Ladder if we ^ can, but first let us
drink: No Man can do more than a can, that is ve -- ry plain; a Can may does
much as a ^ Man, that is right a -- gain.

[A Catch on a Horse.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
Thames was his Glass; greater Man on some strand more cou -- ra -- gious
should stand, and quaff, and ^ quaff Seas in a hand.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Lenton.


[The Tinder-box, or Touch and go.]
A. 4. Voc.


[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.


[A Loyal Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.


[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.


[In praise of White Wind.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Reading.
Bac -- chus disgrace, we make the God mortal, by painting his Face: ^ He Is not
like a God, whose Image is red; over Night his Cheeks blush, in the Morning
they are dead.

[In praise of Claret.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. John Reading.
Bacchus his Shrine, the God was of-fen-ded because 'twas White Wind; then
cursed in a passion, Damn't, rot it, and mar it, did ever know Bacchus drink
other than Claret? So the ^ jol -- ly red God having emptied the White Wind,
returned the poor Vot'ry the Hogshead to shite in.

[A Catch upon a Liquor called Punch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Tho. Tudway.
Punch if you mean to be merry: A Boul of this Liquor the Gods being ^ all at,
thought good we should know it by way of new Ballad, as fit for both ours and
their Highnesses ^ Pallat. Then thanks to the Gods, those Tiplers a -- bove us,
they have taught us to drink, and therefore they ^ love us, and to drink ve -- ry
hard is all they crave of us.

[Counsel for Married Folks.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Mich. Wise.


[A Yorkshire Epitaph on two Abby-Lubbers.]
A. 4. Voc.
Dr. John Blow.
John Digs, and Ri -- chard Digger, and to say the truth, to say the truth,
none ^ knew which was the bigger; they fared well, and li -- ved ea -- sie, and
now they are dead, and now they are dead, and ^ now they are dead, and shall
please ye.

[On a Scolding Wife.]
A. 3. Voc.
Nunquam sa -- it is; for her Tongue and her ^ Tail, if e -- ver they fail, the
Dee'l shall have her gratis.

[A Catch upon Small Beer.]
A. 3. Voc.
Small ^ Beer, Small Beer, in be -- half of hey-diddle, ho-diddle, hey Small
Beer; it would all be too little the ^ Tiff to exalt, and to make out in Meter
what it wants in Malt: The French call it Little Beer, and ^ we call it Small,
and we call, we call it Small, and some sort of People never call for it at all:
But I ^ wish all those once, at least for a warning, Strong o -- ver night,
much Strong over night, and no, no ^ Small the next morning.

[A Catch upon NOTHING.]
^ nothing should put him by Sir; but nothing to purpose of Nothing he would write,
and no body should be the ^ wiser: It Is nothing to you if he would do so, and
if Nothing's in it you find; then thank him for Nothing, and ^ that will be more
than e -- ver he designed.

[A Catch in Praise of Mum.]
A. 3. Voc.
Hamborough 'twill stitch a whole Wapentake thorough and ^ thorough; it is
yellow, and likewise as bitter as Gall, and as strong as six Horses, Coach and
all: As I ^ told you, 'twill make you as drunk as a Drum; you would fain know the
Name on it, but for that my friend, MUM.

[A Catch on Tobacco; to be sung by four Men at the time of smoking their
Pipes.]
A. 4. Voc.
Will, and I prithee Sam fill, for ^ sure we may smoke, and yet sing still, and
yet sing still. What say the Learned? what say the Learned? Vita ^ fumus, vita
fumus; it is what you and I, and he and I; you, and he, and I, and all of us,
Sumus. But ^ then to the Learned; say we again, If Life's a Smoke as they
maintain, if Life's a Vapor, without doubt, ^ when a Man does dye, they should
not cry, that, His Glass is run, but, His Pipe is out. But whether we smoke, ^
or whether we sing, let us be Loyal, and remember the King; let him live, and
let his Foes vanish, ^ thus, thus, thus, like, like a Pipe, like a Pipe of
Spanish; thus, thus, like a Pipe of Spanish.

[A Catch on The London Waterman.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Barth. Isaac.
Fox-hall, or Westminster, or ^ Through-Bridge Hoa? Pray Master, trim the Boat,
and sit a little higher; you have a handsome Woman by you, methinks you might
sit nigh -- er! Come Boy, lay the Stretcher, and sit down to your Oar; ^ You
Sir! will you change a Rogue for a Whore? You Sculler! look before you, with
a-pox to ye hold water; look! ^ look! the Rogue runs foul of us, re -- mem --
ber this here -- af -- ter: Come land us here at Kings-Bridge, ^ Ay Sir, if
you're willing: Here Waterman, there is Sixpence; Good faith, it is worth a
Shilling.

[Wine in the Morning; a Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.


The End of the Second Part.
The Third Part, containing Choice Songs for two Voices, Cantus and Bassus.
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Richard Brown.
[CANTVS.]
Jack, come tipple off your Wine, and leave this foolish Game of Loving; where
Glasses ^ do so briskly shine, how can a Woman's Face be moving! The Cheeks you
praise, the Lips you kiss, ar'nt ^ half so pure, so pure, so pure, so red as
this, ar'nt half so pure, so red as this.

Both Care and Fears; and Sighs and Pain,
Make up your Life now you're a Lover;
And if you do at last obtain,
The happy Minute's quickly over,
But no such thing in Wine we meet, *
No Joys at once * are long and sweet. *
[BASSVS.]
Jack, come tipple off your Wine, and leave this foolish Game of Loving; where
Glasses ^ do so briskly shine, how can a Woman's Face be moving! The Cheeks you
praise, the Lips you ^ kiss, ar'nt half so pure, so pure, so red as this, ar'nt
half so pure, so red as this.

A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Matthew Lock.
[CANTVS.]


Love and Wine are the Bonds that fasten us all,
The World but for this to confusion would fall;
Were it not for the Pleasures of Love and good Wine,
Mankind for each Trifle their Lives would resign:
They Would not value dull Life, nor would live without Thinking,
Nor would Kings rule the World, but for Love and good Drinking.
[BASSVS.]


[A Glee.]
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Matthew Lock.
CANTVS.


BASSVS.


[The Old-man's Wish.]
A. 2. Voc.
CANTVS.


In a Country Town by a murmuring Brook,
With the Ocean at distance wherein I may look;
With a spacious Plain, without Hedge or Style,
And an easy Pad-Nag to ride out a Mile.
Chorus. May I govern, etc.
With Horace and Petrarch, and two or three more,
Of the best Wits that lived in the Ages before;
With a Dish of Roast Mutton, not Venison nor Teal,
And clean (though course) Linen at every Meal.
Chorus. May I govern, etc.
With a Pudding on Sunday, and stout humming Liquor,
And Remnants of Latin to welcome the Vicar;
With a hidden Reserve of Burgundy Wine,
To drink the King's Health in as often as I dine.
Chorus. May I govern, etc.
With a Courage undaunted may I face my last day,
And when I am dead, may the better sort say,
In the Morning when sober, in the Evening when mellow,
He Is gone, and left not behind him his Fellow.
For he governed his Passion with an absolute sway,
And grew wiser and better as his strength wore away,
Without Gout or Stone, by a gentle decay.
BASSVS.


[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
This was to follow after the 66th Catch.
Stephen, well, well played, well played Stephen, he that loves a Parson's
Wife, that ^ loves, that loves a Parson's Wife, his Sins shall be forgiven, his
Sins shall be forgiven, shall be forgiven.

[A Medly.]
A. 2. Voc.
J. Playford.
CANTVS.


BASSVS.


[Old Chiron.]
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Mich. Wise.
[CANTVS.]
Chiron thus Preached to his Pupil Achilles, I Will tell you, I Will tell you,
young Gentleman, ^ what the Fate's will is: You my Boy, you my Boy, must go,
must go, the Gods will have it so, to the Siege of ^ Troy, thence never to
return, thence never to return, never to return, never to return to Greece
again, ^ but before those Walls to be slain, but before those Walls to be
slain, before those Walls, those Walls to be slain. ^ Let not your noble
courage be cast down, let not your noble courage be cast down, let not your
noble courage, ^ let not your noble courage be cast down, but all the while you
lie before the Town, drink, all the while ^ drink all the while you lie before
the Town drink, and drive Care away, drink and be merry, you will never go the ^
sooner, you will never go the sooner, you will never go the sooner to the Sty -- gean
Ferry.

[BASSVS.]
Chiron thus preached to his Pupil Achilles, I Will tell you young Gentleman,
what the Fate's ^ will is: You my Boy, you my Boy, must go, must go, the Gods
will have it so, to the Siege of Troy, thence ^ never to return, thence never
to return, never to return to Greece a -- but before those ^ gain,Walls to be
slain, but before those Walls to be slain, before those Walls to be slain. Let
not your noble courage ^ be cast down, let not your noble courage be cast down,
let not your noble courage be cast down, ^ let not your noble courage be cast
down, but all the while you lie before the Town, drink, all the while ^ drink,
all the while you lie before the Town, drink, and drive Care away, drink and be
merry, you will ^ never go the sooner, the sooner, you will never go the sooner to
the Stygean Ferry.

[The Miser.]
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Mich. Wise.
CANTVS.
Devil.

BASSVS.
Devil.

[Adieu to his Mistress.]
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
CANTVS.


BASSVS.


[The Jovial Drinker.]
A. 2. Voc.
CANTVS.
CHORUS. ^ Compli -- sance was great, she kindly ligh -- ted each Man home.
Such is thy Care over Mortals shown, ^ Bacchus, who dares thy Power profane;
the Moon and Stars as -- sert thy Throne, and fix -- es ^ thy E -- ter -- nal
Reign.

BASSVS.
CHORUS. ^ yet her Complisance was great, she kind -- ly lighted each Man home.
Such is thy Care over Mortals ^ shown, Bacchus who dares thy Power profane;
the Moon and Stars as -- sert thy Throne, and fixes ^ thy E -- ter -- nal Reign.

[A Health to King James II.]
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
CANTVS.


BASSVS.


A SONG upon the late Victory over the REBELS in the West.
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. John Jackson.
CANTVS.
Jove the proud Titan subdued in a trice, that we may for ever, that we may for
e -- ver, for CHORUS. ^ e -- ver re -- joyce. Then a Health to that one, whom
Heaven to the Throne, did in spite of Pre -- tenders,in spite of Pre -- ten --
ders restore; may the Friends of the Crown be installed with Re -- nown,and his
E -- ne -- mies hang, hang at the Door; may the Friends of the Crown be
installed with Re -- nown,and his E -- ne -- mies hang, hang, hang at the Door.

BASSVS.
Jove the proud Titan subdued in a trice, that we may for e -- ver, that we may
for e -- ver, for CHORUS. ^ e -- ver rejoice. Then a Health to that one, whom
Heaven to the Throne, did in spite of Pretenders, ^ Pretenders restore; may the
Friends of the Crown be installed with Renown, and his E -- ne -- mies ^ hang,
hang, hang at the Door; may the Friends of the Crown be installed with Re --
nown, and his E -- ne -- mies hang, hang at the Door.

[Teucer's Voyage.]
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
CANTVS.
Teucer from his Fa -- there fled, and from the Shore of Sa -- la -- mine; when
Teucer ^ from his Fa -- there fled, and from the Shore of Sa -- la -- mine, and
from the Shore of Sa -- la -- mine; with a ^ Popler wreath he crowned his Head,
that glowed with the warmth of ge -- ne -- rous Wine, ^ and thus to his droo --
ping Friends he said, and thus to his droo -- ping Friends he said: ^ Cheer up
my Hearts, cheer up my Hearts, your Anchors weigh; though Fate our Native Soil
debar, Chance is a ^ better, better Father far, Chance is a better, better
Father far; and a bet -- ter Country, a bet -- ter, better ^ Country is the
Sea: Then cheer up my Hearts, then cheer up my Hearts, your Anchors weigh. Come

BASSVS.
Teucer from his Fa -- there fled, and from the Shore, and from the Shore of Sa
-- la -- ^ mine; when Teucer from his Fa -- there fled, and from the Shore of Sa
-- la -- mine; with a Poplar ^ Wreath he crowned his Head, that glowed with the
warmth of ge -- ne -- rous Wine, and thus to his ^ droo -- ping Friends he
said, and thus to his droo -- ping Friends he said: ^ Cheer up my Hearts, cheer
up my Hearts, your Anchors weigh; though Fate our Native Soil debar, ^ Chance is
a better, better Father far, Chance is a better, better Father far, and a bet
-- ter Country, a better ^ Country is the Sea: Then cheer up my Hearts, then
cheer up my Hearts, your Anchors weigh.

^ Plo -- w, my Mates, come Plo -- w, my Mates, the wa -- try, wa -- try ^ way,
and fear not, and fear not, fear not un -- der my Command; we that have known,
have known the ^ worst, we that have known the worst at Land, with the morrow's
Dawn, with the morrow's ^ Dawn, we will An -- chor weigh: Let us drink, and drown
our Cares a -- way; let us ^ drink, and drown our Cares away, and drown our
Cares, and drown our Cares; let us drink, let us ^ drink, let us drink, let us
drink, let us drink, and drown, and drown our Cares a -- way; let us ^ drink,
and drown; and drown our Cares a -- way.

^ Come Plo -- w, my Mates, come Plo -- w, my Mates, the wa -- try, wa -- try
way, and ^ fear not, and fear not, fear not, under my Command; we that have
known, have known the worst, we that have ^ known the worst at Land, with the
morrow's Dawn, with the morrow's Dawn, we will An -- chor weigh: ^ Let us drink,
and drown, our Cares; let us drink, and drown our Cares away; let us drink, let
us ^ drink, let us drink, let us drink, let us drink, let us drink, and
drown,and drown our Cares a -- way;let us drink, and drown, and drown our Cares
a -- way; let us drink, and drown, and drown our ^ Cares a -- way.

A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
CANTVS.


BASSVS.
^ Come fill up, come fill up my Glass, and a -- pox on her Face; may it never
want Scars and ^ Scratches, may it never want Scars and Scratches, Wash, Paint,
and Patches: Give me all my ^ drin -- king Ma -- ga -- zine, I Will blo -- w up
the scorn -- full Queen; give me Bot -- tles and ^ Jugs, the Glass -- ses and
Mugs, I Will hug 'em, and tug 'em, I Will hug 'em, and tug 'em, and ^ Court 'em
much more, than e're I did the pee -- vish Girl before, than e're I did, than
e're I ^ did the pee -- vish Girl be -- fore. ^ ^ Come fill up my Glass, come
fill up my Glass, and a -- pox on her Face; may it never, may it ^ never want
Scars, want Scars and Scratches, Wash, Paint, and Patches: Give me all my drin
-- king ^ Maga -- Zine, give me all, I Will blo -- w up the scornful Queen; give
me Bottles and Jugs, the ^ Glasses and Mugs, I Will hug 'em, I Will hug 'em, and
tug 'em, and Court 'em much more, than e're I ^ did the pee -- vish Girl be --
fore, than e're I did the pee -- vish Girl before. ^

A. 2. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
CANTVS.
SAc -- cha -- ris -- sa's grown old, and al -- most past sport, she to her Phy
-- si -- cian at ^ last, at last does resort; him kind -- ly she greets, and
his Counsel entreats, how best, with her ^ Health, she may taste of Love's
sweets? Why Madam, (quoth he) if my Judgment be right, in the ^ Morning it is
Physic, a Banquet at Night: She smiling, replied, I Will take each in its turn;
For my ^ Plea -- sure at Night, and for Health in the Morn'.

BASSVS.
SAc -- cha -- ris -- sa's grown old, and al -- most past sport, she to her Phy
-- si -- cian at ^ last does resort; him kindly she greets, and his Counsel
entreats, how best, with her Health, she may ^ taste of Love's Sweets? Why Madam
(quoth he) if my Judgment be right, in the Morning, in the ^ Morning it is
Physic, a Banquet at Night: She smiling, replied, I Will take each in its turn;
For my ^ Pleasure at Night, and for Health in the Morn'.

A SONG made on the Downfall, or pulling down, of Charing Cross, An. Dom. 1642.
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. F. Farmeloe.
CANTVS.
Westminster, now Charing Cross is down: At the end of the Strand they make a
stand, swearing they ^ are at loss; and chafing, say, That Is not the way, they
must go by Charing Cross.

II.
The Parliament to Vote it down, conceived it very fitting,
For fear't should fall, and kill 'em all, in the House as they were sitting;
They were informed 't had such a Plot, which made 'em so hard-harted,
To give express Command, it should be taken down and carted.
III.
Men talk of Plots, this might been worse for any thing I know,
Than that Tomkins, and Chalenour, was hanged for long ago:
But as our Parliament from that, themselves strangely defended;
So still they do discover Plots; before they be intended.
IV.
For neither Man, Woman, nor Child, will say, I Am confident,
They ever heard it speak one word against the Parliament*
T'had Letters about it some says, or else it had been freed;
'Fore-God I Will take my Oath, that it could neither write nor read.
V.
The Committee said, Verily to Popery 'twas bent,
For ought I know it might be so, for to Church it never went:
What with Excise, and other loss, the Kingdom does begin
To think you will leave 'em never a Cross, without Door, nor within.
VI.
Methinks the Common Council should of it have taken pity,
'Cause good old Cross, it always stood so strongly to the City:
Since Crosses you so much disdain, Faith if I was as you,
For fear the King should Rule again, I Would pull down Tyburn too.
MEDIVS.
Westminster, now Charing Cross is down: At the end of the Strand they make a
stand, swearing they ^ are at a loss; and chafing, say, That Is not the way,
they must go by Charing Cross.

BASSVS.
Westminster, now Charing Cross is down: At the end of the Strand they make a
stand, swearing they ^ are at a loss; and chafing, say, That Is not the way,
they must go by Charing Cross.

[An Italian Air.]
A. 3. Voc.
CANTUS.


MEDIUS.


BASSUS.


[The Ginger-bread Man.]
A. 2. Voc.
CANTVS.
Smithfield, what ^ would you be at, who talks of Plumb-pudding, here is better
than that; for here is Ginger-bread, oh! Oh Ginger-bread, oh!

BASSVS.
Smithfield, what ^ would you be at, who talks of Plumb-pudding, here is better
than that; for here is Ginger-bread, oh! Oh Ginger-bread, oh!

[The Infallible Doctor.] Sung by Mr. Reading.
France, from Spain, from Rome I come, and from all Parts of Christendom, for
to cure all ^ strange Diseases, come take Physic he that pleases: Come ye
broken Maids that scatter, and can ne -- ver ^ hold your water, I can teach you
it to keep; and other things are very meet, as, Groaning backward in your sleep.

Come any ugly dirty Whore,
That is at least Threescore, or more,
Whose Face and Nose stands all awry,
As if you would fear to pass her by;
I can make her plump and young,
Lusty, lively, and also strong;
Honest active, fit to weed,
And can recall her Maidenhead:
All this is done as soon as said.
If any Man has got a Wife,
That makes him weary of his Life,
With Scolding, cajouling, in the house,
As though the Devil was turned loose;
Let him but repair to me;
I can cure him presently:
With one Pill I Will make her civil,
And rid her Husband of that Evil,
Or send her headlong to the Devil.
The Pox, the Palsy, and the Gout,
Pains within, and Achs without,
There is no Disease, but I
Can find a present Remedy:
Broken Legs and Arms, I Am sure,
Are the easiest Wounds I cure;
Break your Neck, I Will set it again,
Or ask you nothing for my pain.
Or if any Man has not,
The heart to fight against the Scot,
I Will put him in one, if he be willing,
Shall make him fight, and never fear killing:
Or any Man that has been dead
Seven long years, and buried;
I can him to Life restore,
And make him as sound as he was before,
Else never let him trust me more.
If any Man desire to live
A thousand Ages, let him give
Me a thousand Pounds, and I
Will warrant him Life, unless he dye;
Nay more, I Will teach him a better trick
Shall keep him well, if he never be sick:
But if I no Money see,
And he with Diseases troubled be,
Then he may thank himself, not me,
Alone. [The Milk-maid's Health.]
A Cambridge Catch.


[Now drink off the Tail.]
CHORUS. 3 Voc.
^ Turn her up, turn her up Boy, if her Tail chance to heat, and to fool ye;
it is but tur -- ning her [Now drink off the pail] ^ Turn her up Boy, if her
Tail chance to heat, and to fool ye; it is but ^ Turn her up Boy, if her Tail
chance to heat, and to fool ye; ^ down Boys, she has that on her Head that will
cool ye. ^ tur -- ning her down Boys, she has that on her Head that will cool
ye. ^ it is but tur -- ning her down Boys, she has that on her Head that will
cool ye.

The occasion of this Song, was upon a small piece of Plate at the Rose Tavern
in Cambridge, being made in the form of a Milk-maid, containing two
Drinking-Cups, the Pail on her head, and her Tail below, commonly called, The
Milk-maids Boul.
A. 3. Voc.
CANTVS.
E -- gla -- more, that valiant Knight, Fa la, lan -- ky down dil -- ly; he
took up his Sword, and he ^ went to fight, Fa la, lan -- ky down dil -- ly: And
as he rode over Hill and Dale, all Armed with a ^ Coat of Male, Fa la la, la la
la, lanky down dil -- ly.

There leaped a Dragon out of his Den,
That had slain God knows how many Men;
But when she saw Sir Eglamore,
Oh that you had but heard her roar!
Then the Trees began to shake,
Horse did tremble, Man did quake;
The Birds betook them all to peeping,
Oh! 'twould have made one fall a weeping.
But all in vain it was to fear,
For now they fall to it, fight Dog, fight Bear;
And to it they go, and soundly fight
A live-long day, from morn' till night.
This Dragon had on a plaguey Hide,
That could the sharpest Steel abide;
No Sword could enter her with cuts,
Which vexed the Knight unto the Guts.
But as in Choler he did burn,
He watched the Dragon a great good turn;
For as a yawning she did fall,
He thrust his Sword up Hilt and all.
Then like a Coward she did fly
Unto her Den, which was hard by;
And there she lay all night and roared,
The Knight was sorry for his Sword.
But riding away, he cries, I forsake it,
He that will fetch it, let him take it.
MEDIVS.
Eglamore, that valiant Knight, Fa la la la lan -- ky down dilly; he took up
his Sword, and he ^ went to fight, Fa la la la lan -- ky down dilly: And as he
rode over Hill and Dale, all Armed with a ^ Coat of Male, Fa la la la la la la
la la la, lanky down dil -- ly.

BASSVS.
Eglamore, that valiant Knight, Fa la lanky down dilly; he took up his Sword,
and he went to fight, ^ Fa la lan -- ky down dil -- ly: And as he rode over
Hill and Dale, all Armed with a Coat of Male, Fa ^ la la la la, la la la la la,
Fa la la lanky down dil -- ly.

[A Tavern Song, or The Hectors of Holborn.]
A. 2. Voc.
Mr. John Banister.
London's New Troy, fill us more Wine, more Wine; Master. ^ Ha Drawer, Boy!
speak in the Dolphin, speak in the Swan; Draw'r, Draw'r! a -- non Sir, a --
non! ^ George, George! Ralph, Ralph! go speak in the Star; the Recining's
unpaid; We Will pay't at the Bar. Master. ^ A Quart of Claret in the Miter, score;
the Hectors are Ranting, Tom! shut the Door: The Skirmish be -- gins,beware
Pates and Shins; the Piss-pot runs down, and the Candles are out, the Glasses
are broken, the ^ Pots fly about. George! Ralph! speak in the Che -- quer, By
and by; To -- bin is wounded, the Hectors do fly; ^ Call for the Constable, let
in the Watch, these Hectors of Holborn shall meet with their match. At midnight
you ^ send the Justice among us; but all the day long you did us the wrong,
when for Varinus you sent up Mundungus. ^ Your Rec'nings are large, your
Bottles are small, still changing your Wine as fast as we call; your Canary has
^ Lime in it, your Claret has Stum, tell the Constable this, and then let him
come.

A. 3. Voc.
a, and up -- on a Holy-tide a, and upon a Holy-tide a.

II.
And when John Dory to Paris was come,
A little before the Gate a;
John Dory was fitted, the Porter was witted,
To let him in threat a.
III.
The first Man that John Dory did meet,
Was good King John of France a;
John Dory could well of his courtesy,
But fell down in a Trance a.
IV.
A Pardon, a Pardon, my Liege and King,
For my merry Men, and for me a;
And all the Churls in merry England,
I Will bring them all bound to thee a.
V.
Sir Nichol was then a Cornish man,
A little beside Bohide a;
And he manned forth a good black Bark,
With fifty good Oars on a side a.
VI.
Run up my Boy, unto the main Top,
And look what thou can spy a;
Who ho! who ho! a goodly Ship I do see,
I trow it be John Dory a.
VII.
Thy hoist their Sails, both top and top,
The Meisein and all was tried a;
And every Man stood to his Lot,
What ever should betide a.
VIII.
The Roaring Cannons then were plied,
And Dub-a-dub went the Drum a;
The sounding Trumpets loud they cried,
To 'courage both all and some a.
IX.
The grappling Hooks were brought at length,
The brown Bill, and the Sword a;
John Dory at length, for all his Strength,
Was clapped fast under Board a.
A Second Part of John Dory, made to the same Tune, upon Sir John S --
Expedition into Scotland, 1639.
I.
SIr John got him an embling Nag,
To Scotland for to ride a;
With a hundred Horse more than his own,
To guard him each side a.
II.
No errant Knight e're went to fight,
With half so gay a Serado;
Had you seen but his Look, you would a sworn on a Book,
He Would conquered a whole Armado.
III.
The Ladies run all to the Windows to see
So noble and gallent a sight a;
And as he rode by, they began to cry,
Sir John! why will you go to fight a!
IV.
But he like a cruel Knight rode on,
His Heart would not relent a;
For 'till he came there he showed no fear,
Why then should be Repent a?
V.
The King (God bless) had singular hopes
Of him, and all his Troop a;
The Bord'rers as they meet him of the way,
For joy did hollow and hoop a.
VI.
None liked him so well as his own Colonel,
Who took him for John Du-wart a;
But when there were shows of Gunning and Blows,
Sir John was nothing so pert a.
VII.
For when the Scotch Army came in sight,
All men were prepared to fight a;
He ran to his Tent, and asked what they meant*
And swore be must needs go shite a.
VIII.
His Colonel sent for him back again,
To Quarter him in the Van a;
But Sir John did swear, he came not there
To be killed the very first man a.
IX.
To cure his fear, he was sent in the Rear,
Some ten miles back and more a;
Where he fell to play at Tray-trip for Hey,
And never saw the Enemy more a.
A SONG made on the Power of Women.
To the Tune of the Blacksmith.
John Dory; which no bo -- die can de- ^ which no bo -- die can de -- ny.

It Is no Story of Robin Hood, nor of his Bow-men,
I mean to demonstrate the Power of Women,
It is a Subject that is very common;
Which no body, etc.
What though it be, yet I Will keep my Station,
And in spite of Critics give you my Narration,
For Women now are all in fashion;
Which no body, etc.
Then pray give me Advice as much as you may,
For of all things that ever yet bore sway,
A Woman bears the Bell away;
Which no body, etc.
The greatest Courage that ever yet ruled,
Was baffled by Fortune, though never so well scool'd,
But this of the Women can never be cooled;
Which no body, etc.
I wonder from whence this Power did spring,
Or who the Devil first set up this thing,
That spares neither Peasant, Prince, nor King!
Which no body, etc.
Their Scepter does Rule from Caesar to Rustic,
From finical Kit, to the Soldiers so lustick;
In fine, it rules all, though never so Robustick:
Which no body, etc.
For where is he that writes himself Man,
That ever saw Beauty in Betty or Nan,
But his Eyes turned Pimp, and his Heart trapan?
Which no body, etc.
I fain would know one of Adam's Race,
Though never so holy a Brother of Grace,
If he met a loose Sister, but he would embrace;
Which no body, etc.
What should we talk of Philosophers old,
Whose Desires were hot, though their Nature's cold,
But in this kind of Pleasure they commonly roul'd;
Which no body, etc.
First Aristotle, that jolly old fellow,
Wrote much of Venus, but little of Bellow,
Which showed, he loved a Wench that was mellow;
Which no body, etc.
From whence do you think he derived his Study,
Produced all his Problems, a Subject so muddy?
'Twas playing with her -- at Cuddle my Cuddy;
Which no body, etc.
The next in order, is Socrates grave,
Who triumphed in Learning and Knowledge, yet gave
His Heart to Aspacia, and became her Slave;
Which no body, etc.
Demosthenes to Corinth he took a Voyage,
We shall scarce know the like on it, in thy Age, or my Age,
And all was for a Modicum Pyage;
Which no body, etc.
The Proverb in him a whit did not fail,
For he had those things which make Men prevail,
A Sweet Tooth, and a Liquorice Tail;
Which no body, etc.
Lycurgus and Solon was both Lawmakers,
And no Men I Am sure are such wiseacres,
To think that themselves would not be partakers;
Which no body, etc.
An Edict they made with Approbation,
If the Husband found fault with his Wives consolation,
He might take another for Procreation;
Which no body, etc.
If, the Wife found coming in short,
The same Law did right her upon her Report,
Whereby you may know, they were Lovers of the Sport;
Which no body, etc.
And now let us view the State of a King,
Who is thought to have the World in a String,
By a Woman is captivated; poor thing!
Which no body, etc.
Alexander the Great, who conquered all,
And wept because the World was so small,
In the Queen of the Amazon's Pit did fall;
Which no body, etc.
Antonius and Nero, and Caligula,
Were Rome's Tormenters by night and by day,
Yet Women beat them at their own Play;
Which no body, etc.
A SONG in Praise of the Dairy-maid with her Cream-Pot, and Fair Rose the
Milk-maid.
To the Tune of Packington's Pound.
Plu -- to drink Coffee, and Jove his rich ^ Nector; neither Sider nor Sherry,
Metheglin nor Perry, shall more make me drunk, which the Vulgar call ^ Merry:
These Drinks over my Fancy no more shall prevail, but I Will take a full soop at
the merry Milk-pale.

II.
In praise of a Dairy I purpose to sing,
But all things in order; first, God save the King
And the Queen, I may say,
That every May Day
Has many fair Dairy-maids all fine and gay:
Assist me, fair Damsels, to finish this Theme,
And inspire my Fancy with Strawberries and Cream.
III.
The first of fair Dairy-maids, if you will believe,
Was Adam's own Wife, your Great Grandmother Eve;
She milk'd many a Cow,
As well she knew how,
Though Butter was not then so cheap as it is now:
She hoarded no Butter nor Cheese on a Shelf,
For Butter and Cheese in those days made it self.
IV.
In that Age or Time there was no damned Money,
Yet the Children of Israel fed on Milk and Honey;
No Queen you could see,
Of the highest degree,
But would milk the brown Cow with the meanest she:
Their Lambs gave them Clothing their-Cows gave them Meat,
In a plentiful Peace all their Joys were complete.
V.
But now of the making of Cheese we shall treat,
That Nurser of Subjects, bold Britain's chief Meat;
When they first begin it,
To see how the Rennet
Begets the first Curd, you would wonder what is in it:
Then from the blue Whey, when they put the Curds by,
They look just like Amber, or Clouds in the Sky.
VI.
Your Turkey Sherbet, and Arabian Tea,
Is Dish-water stuff to a Dish of new Whey;
For it cools Head and Brains,
Ill Vapors it drains,
And though your Guts rumble, 'twill never hurt your Brains:
Court Ladies in the morning will drink a whole Pottle,
And send out their Pages with Tankard and Bottle.
VII.
Thou Daughter of Milk, and Mother of Butter,
Sweet Cream thy due Praises, now shall I utter?
For when at the best,
A thing's well expressed,
We are used to reply, That Is the Cream of the Jest:
Had I been a Mouse, I believe in my Soul,
I had long since been drowned in a Cream-boul.
VIII.
The Elixir of Milk is the Dutch-man's delight,
By motion and tumbling thou bring to light;
But oh! the soft Stream,
That remains of the Cream,
Old Morpheus never tasted so sweet in a Dream:
It removes all Obstructions, depresses the Spleen,
And makes an old Band like a Wench of Fifteen.
IX.
Amongst the rare Virtues that Milk does produce,
A thousand more Dainties are daily in use;
For a Pudding I Will tellye.
E're it goes in the Belly,
Must have of good Milk, both the Cream and the Jelly:
For a dainty fine Pudding without Cream or Milk,
Is like a Citizen's Wife without Satin or Silk.
X.
In the Virtues of Milk, there is more to be mustered,
The charming Delights of Cheese-cake and Custard;
For at (...)-Court
You can have no sport,
Unless you give Custards and Cheese-cakes for it:
And what is the Jack-Pudding that makes you to laugh,
Unless he has got a great Custard to quaff.
XI.
Both Pancakes and Fritters of Milk have good store,
But a Devonshire Whitepot requires much more;
No state you can think,
Though you study and weak,
From the lusty Saok-posset, to the poor Posset Drink:
But Milk's the Ingredient, though Sack's never the worse,
For it is Sack makes the Man, though Milk makes the Nurse.
XII.
But now I shall treat of a Dish that is cool,
A Rich-clouted Cream, or a Gooseberty-Fool;
A Lady I heard tell,
Not far off did dwell,
Made her Husband a Fool, and yet pleased him full well:
Give thanks to the Dairy-maid then every Lad,
That from good-natured Women such Fools may be had.
XIII.
When the Damsel has got the Cow's Teat in her hand,
How she merrily sings, whilst smiling I stand;
Then with pleasure I rub,
Yet impatient I scrub,
When I think of the Blessings of a Syllabub:
Oh Dairy-maids! Milk-maids! such Bliss never oppose
If e're you will be happy, I spoke under the Rose.
XIV.
This Rose was a Maiden once of your Profession,
'Till the Rake and the Spade had taken possession;
At length it was said,
That one Mr. Ed -- mond,
Did both dig and sow in her Parsly-bed:
But the Fool for his labor deserves not a Rush,
For grafting a Thistle upon a Rose-bush.
XV.
Now Milk-maids take warning by this Maidens fall,
Keep what is your own, and then you keep all;
Mind well your Milk-pan,
And never touch a Man,
And you will still be a Maid, let him do what he can:
I am your Well-wisher, then list' to my word,
And give no more Milk than the Cow can afford.
[Tom of Bedlam: As it was sung at the Theater.]
For a Bass alone.
Tom is come to ^ view the World again, to see if he can cure his distempered
Brain: Fears and Cares oppress my Soul, ^ hark how the an -- gry Fu -- ries
howl! Pluto laughs, and Proserpine is glad, to see poor angry Tom of ^ Bedlam
mad. Through the World I wander night and day to find my straggling Senses, in
an angry mood I ^ met old Time, with his Pentateuch of Tenses: When me he
spies, a -- way he flies, for Time will stay for ^ no Man; in vain with Cries,
I rend the Skies, for Pi -- ty is not common. Cold and comfort. ^ less I lie,
Help! help! oh help! or else I dye! Hark, I hear Apollo's Team, the Carman'
gins to whistle, ^ Chat Di -- a -- na bends her Bow, and the Boar begins to
bristle: Come Vulcan with Tools and with ^ Tackles, to knock off my troublesome
Shackles; bid Charles make ready his Wain, to bring me my ^ Senses a -- gain.

II.
Last night I heard the Dog Star bark,
Mars met Venus in the dark;
Lymping Vulcan heat an Iron Bar,
And furiously made at the Great God of War.
Mars with his Weapon laid about,
Lymping Vulcan had got the Gout;
His broad Horns did hang so in his light,
That he could not see to aim his blows aright.
Mercury, the nimble Post of Heaven,
Stood still to see the Quarrel;
Gorrel-belly'd Bacchus, Gyant-like,
Bestrid a Strong-beer Barrel:
To me he drank, I did him thank,
But I could drink no Sider;
He drank whole Buts, 'till he burst his Guts,
But mine was never the wider,
Poor Tom is very dry,
A little Drink for Charity!
Hark! I hear Acteon's Hounds,
The Huntsman hoops and hollows;
Ringwood, Rockwood, Jowler, Bowman,
All the Chase does follow.
The Man in the Moon drinks Claret,
Eats powdered Beef, Turnep, and Carret;
But a Cup of Malaga Sack
Will fire the Bush at his Back
A Song in the Play of Henry the Fourth.
(...)
De -- li -- ver your Purse, Sir.

FINIS.
A new Additional Sheet to the CATCH-BOOK.
[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Richard Brown.


[A Catch.]
A. 4. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
Macedon Youth left behind him this Truth, That nothing was done with much
thinking; he ^ drank, and he fought, and he got what he sought, and the World
was his own by fair drinking: He ^ washed his great Soul in a plen -- ti -- full
Boul, he cast a -- way Trouble and Sorrow; his Mind did not ^ run of what was
to be done, for he thought of to day, not to morrow.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.
V and I together meet, we make up 6 in House Street; yet I and V may meet once
^ more, and then we 2 can make but 4: But when that V and I am gone, alas! poor
I can make but one.

[A Catch.]
A. 3. Voc.
Mr. Henry Purcell.


A. 2. Voc.
Dr. John Blow.
[ALTVS.]
Eu -- cha -- ri -- a; vain are thy ^ Charms, fair Creature! I for -- bear to
invoke Eu -- cha -- ri -- a, lest she grant my Prayer: He dear -- ly ^ buys his
Life in a Disease, who has froward Children, and a Wife to please; he dear --
ly ^ buys his Life in a Disease, who has fro -- ward Children, and a Wife to
please.

[BASSVS.]
^ 5 VAin are thy Charms, fair Creature! I forbear to invoke Eu -- cha -- ria,
lest she ^ grant my Prayer; to in -- voke Eu -- cha -- ria, lest she grant my
Prayer: He dear -- ly buys his Life ^ in a Disease, who has froward Children,
and a Wife to please; he dear -- ly buys his Life ^ in a Disease, who has
froward Children, and a Wife to please.


