Faces About. OR, A RECRIMINATION charged upon Mr. JOHN GOODWIN, In the point
of fighting against God, and opposing the way of CHRIST.

AND A Justification of the Presbyterian way in the Particulars by him unjustly
charged upon it. With other short Animadversions upon his late Book called,
THEOAXIA. Or, The Grand Imprudence of men running the hazard of fighting
against God, etc.

Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you Brethren, mark them who raise Divisions and
offenses.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Bostock, dwelling at the sign of the Kings head in
Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

Faces About: OR, A Recrimination charged upon Mr. John Goodwin, in the point
of fighting against God, and opposing the way of Christ.
CHristian Reader, my thoughts are not (God knows) against the Author of these
Sermons, in the least measure, but against his dangerous Doctrine, though
intermingled with truths. To be silent in this business, I dare not, my
Conscience forbidding me. To say all that might be said, I cannot, my
employments hindering me. Therefore I have thought good to offer thee, these
few Animadversions, to make thee to be the more awake, and cautious. Believe
not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they be of God or not.

FIrst of all it is to be observed, he builds upon a rotten and unsound
foundation, page 10. affirming, that we may build upon what Gamaliel spoke in
the Counsel, as good, and from God. The principal end and scope of what he
spoke, being the rescuing of the Apostles, etc. And there being nothing in all
this speech (excepting only the historical instances of Theudas and Judas)
but what is fully consonant with the Word of God, (unquestionably so
acknowledged) elsewhere, the credit and authority of it, for matter of truth,
is one and the same with those other Scriptures corresponding with it.

Ans. 1. I never heard so much good of Gamaliel, except from Popish
Interpreters, who tell us out of the Traditions of Clemens, and out of the
Roman Martyrologies, that Gamaliel was a godly man, and a Disciple of the
Apostles. Sure I am, our best Interpreters judge of him, as an irreligious
Politician, adieophorit, neutralist, Nullifidian.

2. His principal end and scope was not the rescuing of the Apostles, but the
preservation of himself Act. 5. 26.
and the Council from the wrath of the people of the Jews, whom he feared,
because they favored and magnified the Apostles and from the wrath of the
Romans, which he well knew would fall upon Joh. 18 34.
the Counsel, if they should presume to put any man to death, the liberty of
capital punishment, not being permitted to them. And this was his meaning,
when he said, verse. 35. Ye men of Israel, take heed to your selves, what ye
intend to do. Beware of provoking the people. Beware of provoking the Romancs.
3. Though there be some truths* in that which he spoke in the Council, yet
there are there three exceeding great errors in it. One is, that he makes it
an uncertain and dubious thing, whether the Gospel preached by the Apostles,
and Miracles wrought by them, were from God, or from men: he puts an If, where
he should have put a Surely. Another is, that he judges himself, and would
have others to judge what is of God, and what not, by the event, according as
the thing prospers, or not, whereas he should have judged according to the
truth, and the rule of the Word, let the event be what it may be. A third is,
that whatsoever damnable and pernicious Heresies do infest a Church, all men,
even Magistrates, must refrain from the Authors and spreaders thereof, and let
them alone, in confidence, that such ways, if not of God, will come to naught
of themselves.

Page 21. He makes a most odious comparrison betwixt those Ministers who
appear for the Congregationall way (as he calls it) and the Ministers who
appear for the Presbyteryall way, describing the Ministers of the former way
thus, some Ambassadors and Messengers of his (Gods) of a very choice
anointing, and endued with strength from on high. The Ministers that stand for
the Presbytery, thus, some that would be thought Pillars, and prime men in the
House and Temple of God. Surely they that would be thought so, are not worthy
to have the smallest place in the Temple of God. Again, he describes the
people, who adhere to the former sort of Ministers, thus, many thousands more,
and those (for the most part) of the best and choicest servants of God amongst
us. The people who adhere to the Presbyterian Ministers, thus, the generality
of people, who know little of God, or of his ways. If this be suitable to a
Spirit of Christian moderation, and humility, that men shall thus commend and
magnify themselves, as having greater gifts and graces then others, and judge
the Ministers to be presumptuous, and the people ignorant, who are of another
opinion; let every one judge, whose understanding is not very much biassed with
partiality. Nay, let us but judge him out of his own words. I would gladly know
how he can reconcile these things with what himself says, page 27. where he
tells us what opinion the Gongregationall way holds of such as are contrary
minded to it. It thinks no evil (says he) it speaks no evil of such: if
it conceives them upright and faithful, with God, and with Jesus Christ, it
imbraceth them with all love, tenderness and honor, as pertakers of the
precious Faith with it self, and nothing doubts but that they serve and worship
God with as much sincerity and singleness, of heart, and are accordingly
accepted by him in their way, as it self. In the transcribing of this Passage,
I have some light, to reconcile him with himself. There is a great If here, If
Presbyterians be faithful and upright with God, and not only so, but If
Independents conceive them to be such. He had said positively of the other way,
many thousands are for it, of the best and choicest Servants of God. But of
this way, he greatly doubts whether he can say near half so much, as if Godly
Presbyterians were hardly to be found, and -- Vix totidem quot,
Thebarum portae and divitis ostia Nili.


Page 23. He would make us believe, that the Presbyterian Reformation, needs
suffer nothing, nor lose an hours time, by the Congregationall way. For, says
he, What does the poor fly, sitting on the top of the wheel to hinder the
Waggoner from driving on his way, etc. The irregularity of the Mountains and
valleys in the surface of the earth troubles no man's opinion concerning the
perfect roundnesse of it, because it is swallowed up into Victory by the
roundnesse of the Globe, etc. The gleanings of Independency (so called, will
not hinder the Vintage of the Presbytery. Would God he could make these things
good. Would God it were not as the Remora to the Ship. If it be as the fly on
the top of the wheel, why has it hindered us from driving on our way, not for
an hours time, but for a years time, and much more. If Independency be the
irregularity of mountains and valleys, it will at least trouble the opinion of
many thousands who are not good Cosmographers concerning the roundnesse of the
Globe. And what should hinder a full and perfect roundnesse, since every valley
shall be filled, and every Luke 3. 5.
mountain and hill shall be brought low. And if Independency does but gleane,
why does it glean before the Vintage. And when after, Is not the gleaning of
Judge. 8. 2.
the grapes of Ephraim, better then the vintage of Abiezer.

Page 23, 24, 25. J would gladly know, says he, what or what manner of
Reformation can reasonably be expected, or hoped for without her, (the
Congregationall way.) And here he enlarges himself to show, that without this
their way, our Reformation is but a reforming of Satan, a reforming of open
loosenes and profaneness into Pharysaicall hypocrysie; a taking of the members
of an harlot, to make them the members of Christ, a quashing and crushing and
breaking of the hearts and bones of the one half of the most
Religiously-affected, for trading in Apes and Peacocks (I wish he had told us
where their Tarshish lies) for holding some erroneous opinions, perhaps
erroneously so called. That the Presbvterian Reformation is directly
destructive to the edification of the Saints, and does impede their growth in
grace. More of this stuff you have, page 29, 30. If matters, faith he, were
duly and fairly examined between the two combitants in this case, the way we
plead for, would be found via lactea, the candid, harmless and peaceable way:
and her corrivall or competitresse, via sanguinea, the trouble and strife
making way, etc. See also p. 33. 34 37. What no Reformation without the
Independent way except a Satanicall Reformation, a Pharasaicall Reformation, a
Meritricious Reformation, a Persecuting Reformation, a bloody Reformation, a
Grace-destroying-Reformation* Is this his so much pleaded for Toleration of
that way, that there can be no Reformation without it? Is this his so much
boasted of Charity of that way, that it thinks so much evil, and speaks so
much evil of any other Reformation? Where is that Presbytery that does embrace
the ungodly, or persecute the religiously affected, or hinder their
edification? For my part I shall cast the first stone at it. The Lord rebuke
this Spirit of belying and calumniating the way of Christ, by which God has
been so much honored, Satan so much foiled, true grace and knowledge so much
propagated and advanced. And what is this but a Fighting against God, even that
sin which he himself holds out as the Achan, the troubler of our Israel, and
that which makes the Sun of our Peace to go so often backwards in the
Heavens.

Page 34. 35. he speaks thus: We suppose that the Lord Christ, so far tendered
the spiritual felicity and peace of his Churches, as to leave them
sufficiently furnished, and every ways appointed with internal provisions for
the effectual procurement and preservation of them, without any concurrence of
any heterogeneall or external power, especially considering that he foresaw
that these Churches of his for the space of 300 years together, and somewhat
more, were not like to have any accommodation at all in this kind, from any
secular or civil power. Now let it be remembered that this does quite overthrow
one of the grounds, whereupon those that are for the Independent way, do
usually justify it. When it is objected, that, that way provideth no
sufficient nor effectual remedy for reducing an Offending or Apostatizing
Congregation: the answer we receive is this; Other Churches may admonish,
rebuke, and (if that do it not) non-communicate such a Congregation. It is
replied, What if that Congregation slight all this, both reproof and
non-communion. What say they for that cause?

The Apologeticall Narration, page 19. Tells us, If the Magistrates power do
but assist and back the sentence of non-communion, then it will be as
effectual, as the Presbyterian way is supposed to be. To this I say no other
thing but what John Goodwin says, The Lord Christ has provided for his
Churches sufficient intrinsecall remedies, without the concurrence of any
external power. And so I leave it betwixt them to unty the knot.

Page 43. 44. Whereas the Vote and suffrage of a Reverend, Learned, and Pious
Assembly, might be objected against the Independency. He tells us for Answer
the observation of Gregory Nazianzen, That he never saw good end, or desirable
success of any Council, or that they procured any decrease, but rather
increase of evils.

He farther looks upon Synods as the Eclipsings of the glory of God, That
there are too many learned and wise men in a great Council, for God to reveal
Truth, or to give truth Victory against error by, Page 45. As exercising
Dominion over our faith, Page 46. As swayed by one or few of predominant parts
or authority, as you may read, Page 47.

Let him who pleases compare these Passages with the Arminians, their
declamations against Synods, Exam. Cens. page 288. 289. and elsewhere in their
writings: comparing also what is written by Zepperius, Pareus, Whittaker, and
diverse other Protestant Divines of the most profitable, excellent, and (in some
respects) necessary use of Counsels or Synods, and then observe how near
Master Goodwin comes to the former, and how far he recedeth from the latter.
Neither need we to stumble at that passage of Nazianzen to Procopius.

He had reason to say so, having seen so many Counsels of those Bishops who
did so much favor the Arrians, that he was out of all hopes, ever in his days,
to see a free and rightly-constituted Council. Nevertheless Nazianzen himself
afterward was present in the General Council of Constantinople, and did
subscribe the Decrees thereof, as is manifest by the Subscriptions. Therefore
distingue tempora. If things had continued in this Kingdom as they were in the
Prelates time, we had said of Counsels even as Nazianzen did: But, Tempora
mutantur, and nos mutamur in illis.

Page 50. He gives a sore Blow to the Parliaments Power. To hold, says he,
that the persons so elected (unto Parliamentary Trust and Power) have a power,
by virtue of such Nomination or Election, to enact Laws and Statutes in matters
of Religion, and to order, under Mulcts or Penalties, how men shall worship and
serve God; as it is a means to awaken the eye of Jealousy upon them and so is
seven times more destructive, etc. Surely this is a means to ^waken the
Parliaments eye of Jealousy upon himself. Shall every one in Israel do in
Religion what seems good in his own eyes? Shall the Covenant, how necessary
soever for the good of the Kingdom, be left free, that every man may take it or
refuse it, as he lists? May the Civil Power inflict no punishment on those
that do evil? and who do more evil then soul-destroying, and Church-disturbing
Heretics? Has the Magistrate no coercive power in matters of Religion? Let
the five Apologists animadvert to this, and look how sweetly it agrees with
their solemn professing, that Apol*Nar. p. 19.
they give more to the Magistrate, then the Principles of Presbyteriall
Government will yield.

Page 52, and page 18, he wishes it may be the firstborn of religious
Advertisements and Cautions to us, That no man, or rank of men whatsoever, do
appear, especially in any high handed Opposition or Contestation, nor so much
as lift up an hard thought against Doctrine or Way, claiming Origination and
Descent from God, till we have Security upon Security, Proof upon Proof,
Demonstration upon Demonstration, Evidence upon Evidence, that such Ways or
Doctrines only pretend unto God, as the Authors of them; and that in truth
they are not at all from him. This is the substance of those two Passages put
together. Now I assume, The Presbyterian way claims Origination and Descent
from God; yet Master Goodwin does not only lift up an hard thought against it,
but in these Sermons extremely oppose it, and contest against it, without
Security upon Security, Proof upon Proof, Demonstration upon Demonstration,
Evidence upon Evidence, that it only pretends unto God as the author of it,
and that in truth it is not at all from him: Therefore now let him give this
his firstborn for his transgression, What if I have but one good Proof,
Demonstration, Evidence, or Security, that this or that Doctrine is Heresy,
which yet claims Origination from God and his Word, may I not appear in
contestation against it, nor so much as lift up an hard thought against it,
till I have multiplied Proofs, Demonstrations and Evidences, and all those as
clear as the noonday, as he preaches? I fear, if the Genealogy of this same
Doctrine of his were searched for, it should be found to have an Origination
and Descent from Socinians and Arminians, which (I conceive) I could
demonstrate, if I had leisure to turn over my Books. However, let him consider
whether this Doctrine does no ways fall upon the Excommunication of Heretics
in the Congregationall Way: of which he himself speaks thus, Page 34. If the
error be dangerous, amounting to, or near an Heresy, after two or three
admonitions (that is, according to her Warrant from heaven) she casts it out of
the line of her Communication, to him who cast it in, I mean Satan.

FINIS.

