A NEW DISCOVERY OF THE PRELATES TYRANNY, In their late prosecutions of Mr.
William Pryn, an eminent Lawyer; Dr. John Bastwick, a learned Physician; and
Mr. Henry Burton, a reverent Divine. Wherein the separate, and joint
proceedings against them in the High Commission, and Star Chamber; their
Petitions, Speeches, Cariages, at the hearing, and Execution of their last
sentence, and the Orders, Letters for, and manner of their removes to, and
close imprisonments in the Castles of Lanceston, Lancaster, Carnarvan, and
Isles of Sylly, Garnsey and Jersy; The proceeddings against the Chestermen, and
others before the Lords and High Commissioners at York for visiting Mr.
Pryane; The Bishop of Chesters order, for Ministers to preach against M.
Prynne, and the York Commissioners decree to deface, and burn his pictures at
Chester high-Crosse. The House of Commons Order for, and manner of their
returns from Exile; their petitions to the Parliament; the Votes of the
Commons house upon the report of their Cases, declaring the proceedings and
censures against them illegal, groundless, and against the Subjects liberty,
with M. Prynnes Argument, proving all the parts of his censures, with the
proceedings against him, and his Chester friends at York, to be against Law;
are truly related; for the benefit of the present age, and of posterity.

Seneca, Medea. Qui aliquid statuerit part inaudita altera; licet recte
statuerit, haud aequus est Iudex. PSALM 94 20, 21, 22, 23. Shall the throne of
iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by a Law? They
gather themselves together against the soul of the Righteous, and condemn the
Innocent blood: But the Lord is my defense, and my God is the Rock of my
Refuge; And he shall bring upon them their own Iniquity* and shall cut them
off in their own wickedness; yea, the Lord our God shall cut them off.
Printed at London for M. S. 1641.

To the Courteous Reader.
Kind Reader, I here present thee with a late tragical History, or new
Discovery of the Prelates tyranny, in their unjust Prosecutions, and bloody
Persecutions of three eminent persons of the three most noble Professions in
the Kingdom, Divinity, Law, Physic; all suffering together on the Pillory
(much honored by them, and they by it) and losing all their Ears at once, to
make themselves hear better, and the Prelates Qui male facit male audit.
worse. Such a spectacle both to men, and Angels, no age ever saw before; and
posterity is never like to behold hereafter. To hear of Lord Bishops
metamorphosed into Acts 20. 28. 29. Matthew 7. 15.
ravenous Wolves, is no Noveltie; they have been thus in every age, and will be
so, whiles they have continuance: But to see them mounted to such an Altitude
Altitude of Authority, and Tyranny, as to crucify Divinity, Law, Physic on
the Pillorie together, and to make Judges, Peers, and Courts of Justice, if
not Soveraignitie it self, the Sea Fox Act^ ^ Monuments v^l. 1. p. ^26. Ed^t.
ult.
executioners of their Malice, cruelty, and private revenge, by such
extravagant and untroden courses as were unknown to our Ancestors, is such a
prodigious Innovation, as neither Africa nor England ever beheld the like; and
never had been brought forth into the World, had not a venomous Archprelate
proved a Father to engender, a Mother to foster, a Midwife to produce and bring
it to its birth.

But alas poor silly Politician! whiles he sought these innocents ruin by
those unwarrantable practices, he laid but the foundation of his own overthrow;
in the Prove. 26, 27. c. 28. 10. Psalm. 7. 15, 16. Psalm. 9. 15, 16. Psalm. 124. 7.
Psalm. 140. 9. 10, 11.
snare that he laid for them, is his own foot taken, into the pit that he
dug for them, he is fallen himself; his snares are broken, they are
escaped, and he now lies entangled in them; he is Psalm. 20. 8.
cast down and fallen, but they are risen and stand upright; his mischief now
returns on his own head, and his violent dealing comes down upon his own
pate; evil now hunts this man of violence to overthrow him, and the mischief
of his own lips does cover him. Judges 1. 7.
As he has done, so God has requited him. Pro. 1. 16. 18.
Whiles he made have to shed their blood, he did butlie in wait for his own;
And he Prove. 28. 17
that did violence to the blood of these persons, now flees to the pit, (as
God has threatened) let no man stay him; but let all stand admiring Gods
Justice upon him, and his admirable providence, and mercy in preserving,
delivering, and Psalm. 3. 7, 5, 6.
acquitting them from his unjust censures, and that in the highest Court of
Justice, without one negative voice. The manifestation of this remarkable
Justice, Mercy and Providence of our great God, ( Exodus 15. 11.
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, working wonders; not only of
old, but at this present, even in all our Eyes, Psalm. 126 2, 3,
doing great things for these Patients, for the whole Land, whereof we rejoice)
was the chief end of publishing this Discovery, whereby to daunt all
graceless Persecutors, and cheer the souls of all sincere professors. If
thou reap Benefit or Comfort from it, let God enjoy thy praises, the Compiler
hereof thy prayers.

Farewell, and profit by what thou read.
A New Discovery of the Prelates tyranny, in their late prosecutions of Doctor
Bastwick, Mr. Burton, and Master Prynne.
THE now Archbishop of Canterbury, with some other Prelates of the Arminian
combination, maligning Master Prynne, and Master Burton, for some books they
had written against the Arminians and D. Cosens his private Devotions; about
12. years since, getting the raines of Ecclesiastical authority into their
own commands, prosecuted them several times and terms in the High
Commission, for those their profitable, and innoxious books: whence being
delivered by prohibitions, granted them out of the Kings temporal Courts at
Westminster; these Prelates grew more This Archb. at the delivery of the rule
for Master Prynnes prohibitio^ was so extremely enraged, that he and some 3. or
4. Bishops more rose and went out of their Court (then kept in the Consistory
at Paul's) in a Fury, saying they would immediately repair to the King, and make
a bolt, or a shaft of it; using many angry words; and threatening to lay M.
Prynne by the heels for delivering the Rule.
enraged against them, watching every opportunity, and laying hold on any
occasion to work their ruin. Master Prynne not long after, about Christide
1632, published a book against common Enterludes, entitled, Histrio-Mastix,
licensed for the press by one Master Buckner, house-hould Chaplin to the then
Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbot; and published with his approbation, after
serious perusal thereof, both in the written, and printed copy. It came to
pass, that some six weeks after the publication of this book, the Queens
Majesty acted a part in A pastoral at Somerset House; and there being some
passages in this book against Women-actors, among the ancient Romans,
Grecians, and Spaniards, quoted out of Fathers and foreign authors; and this
reference to them in the Table of the book, Women-actors notorious whores,
relating to those Women-actors only whom these authors thus branded; Canterbury
and the prelates by their instruments, the next day after this pastoral acted,
carrying Master Prynnes book to his Majesty, Mr. H. I. that first presented,
and showed the book to the King, was a few months after committed prisoner to
the Tower for begetting one of the actors of this pastoral with child soon
after it was acted, and making a real commentary on M. Prynnes misapplyed
text, both the Actresse, and he for this cause be*comming M. Prynnes fellow
prisoners in the Tower, A strange providence* and worthy observation
showed him some of those passages, especially that in the Table, and
misinformed his Highness^ and the Queen, that Master Prynne had purposly
written this book against the Queen, and her pastoral; whereas it was
licensed, and most of those passages printed near two years before; and the
whole book finished at the press at least three months, and published six
weeks before the personating of this pastoral: But this misinformation only
exasperating the King and Queen against Master Prynne for the present, and not
taking effect to work his restraint, their Majesty's being truly informed by
others, that this book was written* and printed long before this pastoral was
thought of; the now Archbishop thereupon caused Doctor Heylin (whom Master
Prynne had refuted in Page 671 to ^78.
that book by the by* in a point concerning Saint George.) to collect such
passages out of the book, and digest them into several heads, as might draw
Master Prynne into Question for supposed scandals therein of the King, Queen,
State and Government of the Realm* Hereupon the Doctor draws up such
Collections, digested into seven heads, with his own malicious Inferences upon
them, not warranted by Master Prynnes Text, and delivers them in writing to
Secretary Co^ke, and the Archbishop. The prelate thus furnished by his minion,
takes Mr. Pryns book, and these collections, and repaireth with them, on the
second Lords-Daymorning in Candlemas Term 1632, to Lincolns Inn, to Master
Noy then Kings Attorney general; and keeping him on that sacred day both from
the Chapel and Sacrament, (which he then purposed to receive) showed him the
said book and collections of some passages out of it, which he said, his
council informed him to be dangerous: and charged him on that duty he owed to
his Master, the King, to prosecute Master Prynne for the same. Master Noy
before this, had twice read over the said book very seriously, and protested,
that he saw nothing in it that was scandalous or censurable in Star Chamber, or
any other Court of Judicature; and had thereupon commanded one of the books
(which Master Prynne delivered him) to be put into Lincolns Inn library for
the use of the house; in so much that he was so discontented at this command of
the Arch-prelate, that he wished he had been twenty miles out of town that
morning. But being commanded he must obey; and within few days after, Master
Prynne, by this prelates instigation, was sent for before the Lords to the
inner Star Chamber, and by them sent prisoner, with 4. of the Kings Guard to
the Tower of London, on Feb. the first 1632, with this warrant, to which this
prelates hand among others, was subscribed.

AFter our hearty commendations; whereas there is cause to restrain William
Prynne Esquire* and to commit him to your custody, these are therefore to will
and require you to receive into your charge the person of the said William
Prynne, and to keep him safe prisoner in the Tower, without giving free
access to him, until you shall receive further Order: for which this shall be
your warrant.

From the Star Chamber the first of Feb. 1632. Thomas Coventry. Archbishop of
York. H. Manchestour. Dorset. Faukland. Guil. Land. now Canter. Edward
Nuburgh. John Cook. Tho. Germine. Francis Windebanke.

To our loving friend, Sir William Balfore, Knight Lieutenant of his Majesty's
Tower of London.
BY force of this general warrant, against Law, wherein no cause of co^^itment
is specified, Master Prynne was kept pri^^^^r in the Tower, without bail or
maineprise, notwithstanding his often petitions for release absolute, or upon
bail, till Master Noy, (sending for the said Heylins collections,) exhibited
an Information against him in the Star Chamber for his said licensed book the
21 of Inn following, and prosecuted it so, that not permitting Master Prynne
to be bayled, not yet so much as to repair to his Counsel, with his keeper;
on the 17 of Feb. 1633. he procured this heavy sentence against him in that
Court: That Master Prynne should be committed to prison during life, pay a fine
of 5000 pounds to the King, be expelled Lincolns Inn* disbarred* and disabled
ever to exercise the profession of a Barrester; degraded by the University of
Oxford, of his degree there tak^^; and that done ^e set in the Pillory at
Westminster, with a paper on his head declaring the nature of his effence, and
have one of his Ears there cut off, and at another time be set in the pillory
in Cheap Side, with a paper as aforesaid; and there have his other Ear cut
off; and that a fire shall be made before the said pillory, and the hangman
being there ready for that purpose, shall publicly in disgraceful manner,
cast all the said books which could be produced, (to gather up which,
Messengers with special warrants, were sent to bookesellers into diverse
Counties) into the fire to be burnt, as unfit to be seen by any hereafter; no
particular passages of the said book, on which their unparallelled sentence
was grounded, being so much as mentioned in the Information, replication, or
decree as by Law they should, and doubtless would have been, had they been
really effensive, demeriting such a Censure. But the innocence of these
misconstrued and perverted passages (being for the most part the words of other
approved authors,) was the cause of their concealment and not recording: and
though many of the Lords never dreamed of any execution of this hard judgment,
and the Queen (whom it most concerned) earnestly interceded to his Majesty to
remit its execution; yet such was the prelates power and malice, that on the
seventh, and tenth of May following, (even in cold blood) it was fully executed
with great rigor. Whiles Master Prynnes wounds were yet fresh and bleeding,
within three days after his execution, this Arch-prelate of Canterbury, to
add more weight to his affliction, against all Law and equity, when there was
no suite pending against Master Prynne in the High Commission, and his fine in
Star Chamber un^streated, granted this warrant out of the High Commission for
the seizure of the books of his study, (conveyed to his Tailors house in
Holborne) of which his spies had given him Intelligence.

Upon special consideration, These are to will and require you in his
Majesty's name, by virtue of his Highness Commission for causes
Ecclesiastical under the great Seal of England, to us and others directed,
that forthwith upon the receite hereof, you (taking a Constable and such other
assistance with you which you shall think meet) enter into the house of
Thomas Edwards dwelling in Holborne, and therein and in every several room or
place thereof, or in any other house or place, as well in places exempt, as not
exempt, and that thereupon you do make diligent search for all Pamphlets,
books and writings, either in hampers or otherwise, belonging to Master Prynne,
and all such so found to seize and apprehend, and attach, or cause to be
seized, apprehended and attached, and that thereupon you detain them under
safe custody, and bring a true Inventory of them forthwith before us or others
our colleagues. His Majesty's Commissioners in that behalf appointed, that
thereupon they may be disposed of according to the What Law is there for you to
false, and dispose of the Books of men's studies, against whom nosuites are
peding before you? Or with what face can you pretend Law, when you do directly
against law?
Law, and as shall be thought meet, and agreeable to Justice* willing and
requiring in his Majesty's name, by authority aforsaid, al Justices of peace,
Majors, Sherifes, Constables, Bayliffes, and all other his Majesty's officers,
and loving subjects to be ayding and assisting unto you, in and about the
execution hereof, as they tender his Majesty's service, and will answer the
contrary at their peril.

Given at London, this thirteenth day of May, 1634. Will. Canter. Na. Brent.
Jo. Lamb. Utro. Gwynne. Arth. Ducke. To. Aylett. Tho. Mottershed deputatus
Geo. Paul mi. Regstrar, Regij.

To Humphry Cross one of the sworn messengers of his Majesty's Chamber, and
also to William ^la^sted his deputy, and to either of them.
BY virtue of this warrant one cartlode of Master Prynnes books were there
seized, and carried away by Cross; of which Master Prynne complaining, the
Archbishop in the open Court in Star Chamber denied the granting of this
warrant, though yet extant under his hand, and promised present restitution of
the books; and yet gave under hand order for detaining them till they were
extended, and sold for Master Prynnes fine in Star Chamber; such says and
truth is there in Prelates words and actions. Master Prynne remained sundry
years a prisoner in the Tower by force of the former censure: during his
imprisonment (...), the prelates brought Doctor Bastwicke into their High
Commission Inquisition, for his Elenchus papismi, and Flagellum Episcoporum
Latialium: and there* without any just ground or cause at all, passed a heavy
and unjust censure upon him; by virtue whereof he remained close prisoner two
years in the Gate House, the limbus pat^^m of our ghostly fathers; where he
writ a latin book sti^ed, Apologeticus ad praesules: Anglicanos, dedicated to
the Lords of Council, declaring the injustice of the proceedings and censure
against him in the High Commission, which was printed, and a letany in English.
Not long after Master Burton upon the fifth of November, 1636. preached two
Sermons in his own Parish Church in Friday-streete in London upon Prove. 24.
21. 22. My son fear thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with those
that are given to change, etc. wherein he laid open the Innovations in
doctrine, worship and ceremonies, which had lately crept into our Church, and
wished the people to beware of them, The Archbishop hearing of it, causes
Articles to be drawn up against him in the High Commission, and summoned him
to answer them, out of term, before Doctor Ducke, at Cheswick; where he
appearing, instead of answering, appealed to the King, which appeal was
formally entered by the Register: yet notwithstanding, within 15. days after,
they summoned him to appear before a private Commission at Doctors Commons, by
direction from the Archbishop, and there suspended him, both from his office
and benefice, and granted out attachments to apprehend him: he hereupon keeps
his house, prints his Sermons, with an Apology, to justify his appeal; which
he dedicated to the King, with Epistles to the Lords of the Counsel, to whom
his wife presenting some of those printed Sermons, by his direction, was
committed by the Lords for her pains. The High Commission pursevants not
daring to break open Master Burtons doors to apprehend him, the Archbishop,
and Bishop of London made a warrant to one Dendy a sergeant at arms, to
apprehend him, of which this is a true Copy.

THese shall be to will and require you to make your immediate repair to any
place where you shall understand of the present being of Henry Burton Clarks,
and having found him, to take him into your custody, and to bring him forthwith
and in your company (all delays and excuses set a part) before us, to answer
to such matters as shall be objected against him. And you are further by virtue
hereof to require and charge all Majors, Sheriffs, Justices of peace,
Bailiffs, Constables, Headborughs, and all other his Majesty's Officers and
loving Subjects, to be ayding and assisting unto you, in the full and due
execution of this service, whereof neither they nor you may fail at your
perill^. And this shall be unto you and them a sufficient warrant,

Dated at Star Chamber the first of Feb. 1636. The (...) and first (...) in all
the warrants.
W. Cant. Guil. London. Henry. Vain. Tho. Coventrey. Arundell and Surrey* I.
Coke.

To Edward Dendy Esquire, one of his Majesty's Sergeants at Arms.
BY force of this illegal warrant (expressing no cause of Master Burtons
apprehension as by law it ought) sergeant Dendy came to Master Burtons house in
Friday-streete, the same evening between ten and eleven of the Clock at
night, accompanied with Alderman Abel* then Sh^^iffe of London, and diverse
armed Officers and Pursevants, and be^^^ting his house, Which Act the
Parliament has resolved to be against Law, and that Sergeants at Arms (...)
break open men's hous^^.
violently broke open his doors with Iron Crows, and attached him in his
house, he making no resistance: and the High Commission Pursevants entering in
along with him, by warrant from the High Commission under Canterburies hand and
others searched his study, and took away such books, and papers with them as
they pleased, and Master Burton that night was lodged where the preachers at
Pauls-Crosse were entertained, and there kept prisoner till the next day, when
instead of being brought before the Lords as this warrant required, he was by
another warrant, without any cause expressed, committed close prisoner to the
(...), the Copy whereof (to which Canterbury's (...)) here follows.

THese (...) will and require you to receive into you^ ^^^tody the person of
Henry Burton Clerk, sent herewith unto you, and to keep him Canterbury
himself and Str^fford, though accused and committed by the Parliament for high
Treason, had far more liberty, and were not close imprisoned, as they committed
others.
close prisoner in the Fleet, not suffering any one to speak with him until
further Order, whereof you may not fail at your perils, and this shall be your
warrant.

Dated at White Hall the second of February. 1636. W. Cant. Guil. London.
Arundell and Surry. Pemb^ooke and Mountgomery. T. Jermyn. Io ^^oke Fra*
Windebanke*

To the Warden of t^^ Fleet or his deputy.
MAster Burto^ ^ereupon was shut up sundry weeks close prisoner in the Fleet,
so as neither his wife nor friends could have free access unto him. In the
interim, between his Sermon preached and his imprisonment, two books, the one
entitled, A Divine Tragedy, containing a Catalogue of Gods late Judgments
upon Sabbath Breakers, the other News from Ipswich, discovering some late
Innovations in Religion brought in by the Prelates, and some extravagancies of
Bishop Wren in his late Visitation, were published in print, without any
Authors name annexed to them, wherewith the Prelates were much vexed and
perplexed. And consulting with themselves which way to vent the extremity of
their malice upon Doctor Bastwick, Master Burton, and Master Prynne, they at
last resolved to exhibit an information against them into the Star Chamber in
Sir John Banks his Majesty's Atturnies name, with these two last named books,
Doctor Bastwicks Apology and Letany, and Master Burtons Apology of his appeal,
and two Sermons, thereto annexed, which was done accordingly. This information
was exhibited into that Court the eleventh day of March 12. Caroli, in the
Vacation time, against these three Gentlemen, and others, who were ordered to
appear and put in their answers to it immediately. They, served with
Sub-poenas returnable immediate, contrary to the usual proceedings of the
Court, refused to appear (being all three prisoners, and two of them close
prisoners, before,) unless they might have liberty of access to counsel, to
advise and assist them in their answers, it being the Prelates aim to deprive
them of this liberty; Of which the Lords being informed, made this ensuing
order; wherein, though they granted them access to Council, yet they denied
them the liberty of conferring together at Counsel, though joint defendants
(who might have jointly answered) contrary to the rules of Law, and all former
presidents. One Copy of which order (sent indifferently to their three
distinct prisons) I shall here annex.

At White Hall the 15. of March. 1636.

Present.

Lo. Archbishop of Cant. Lo. Keeper. Lo Treasur. Lo. Privy-Seale. Lo. High
Chamberlain. Ea. Marshall. Lo. Chamberlain. Ea. of Northumberland. Ea. of
Dorset. Ea. of Salisbury. Ea. of Holland. Lo. Cottington. Lo. Nuburgh. Mr.
Tresur. Mr. Comptroller. Mr. V. Chamberlain. Mr. Sec. Cook. M. Sec.
Windebanke.
Whereas information was this day given to the Board by Master Attorney
General, that he had prefe^red a Bill of Complaint in the Star Chamber against
Henry Burton Clerk, and others, and that the said Master Burton does refuse to
make answer to the said complaint, unless he may have liberty to go abroad to
prepare and advise with his Counsel, though his Counsel had leave to have
access and to confer with him in the Prison: Yet to take away all allegations
or pretense for excuse herein, their Lordships have thought fit, and ordered,
that the said * God forbid he should have so much favor, being in disfavour
with the Prelates.
Master Burton shall have liberty to go abroad with his Keeper, to speak and
confer with his council when he desires the same, and that his said Keeper is
to have special care that the said (Master Burton do not make use of the
liberty to) confer with other persons, and that he be permitted to go to no
other place, but to his said Council. And that the said Master Burton shall
immediately appear to the said Bill, and make answer within ten days after.
And thereupon the Board will give such further Order as shall be fit.

Ex. Will: Becher.

THe Prisoners upon this order having liberty to go abroad with their Keepers,
first repaired to the Lord Keeper, and petitioned for counsel to be assigned
them: which granted, they repaired to their counsel at Lincolnes and Grayes
Inn, where meeting together, and conferring a short speech (in the presence of
their keepers) with their counsel, notice thereof was immediately given to the
Archbishop, whereupon their Keepers were sharply checked, and charged not to
permit them to meet or speak together any more, which was strictly observed.

Master Prynne, fearing that they should not be permitted to make a full answer
to the Information, draws up a Crosse-Bill against the Archbishop and others;
wherein he charged them, with usurping upon his Majesty's prerogaetive royal,
with Innovations in Religion, Licensing of popish and Arminian books, and
other particulars: which Bil being engrossed and signed with all their three
hands, Master Prynne tendered to the then Lord Keeper, with a petition, praying;
that it might be accepted under their own hands, since it concerned his
Majesty and Religion so much, and counsel durst not sign it for fear of the
prelates; alleging, in the petition, that if the charges of the Bill were
true (as they were ready to make good with their lives,) then their Lordships,
as they hoped, would think meet they should be examined, and the prelates put
to answer, and punished for them: If false; that then the Bishops to clear
their suspected Innocence to the World, would be willing to answer it, since
their declining its answer, would imply a guiltiness in them. The Lord keeper
receiving this Petition and crosse-Bill, upon reading the contents thereof,
refused to admit it, delivering it to the Kings Attorney, and (as I am
informed) the Archbishop demanded the opinion of the Judges; Whether these
three complainants might not be punished as Yea, and have their lives taken
away.
libellers for exhibiting this Crosse-Bill against him* and other Prelates: who
all but one, resolved; that they could not, because the Bill was tendered in a
legal way, and might not in point of law be refused; the Kings Courts of
Justice being open indifferently to all his Subjects, to sue or be sued.
However this Bill was suppressed, by the Prelates power, and Master Prynne
within a week after his appearance to the Information, by the Archbishops
procurement, had his Chamber in the Tower searched by Master Nicholas, one of
the Clerks of the Counsel, and a This Pursevant was, so officious that he
searched Mr. Prynnes foul close-stoole, though Master Nicholas wished him to
forbear, where he found nothing but a fitting Nosegay to recompense his
industry.
pursevant of the Bishops sent to over-looke him; part of his instructions for
his answer they s^ised, and carried them away to the Archbishop his servant who
should solicit his business, was attached by a messenger and kept close
prisoner in his house above ten weeks (till after the hearing) without bail
or mainprise; which was utterly refused; the liberty of Pen, Ink and Paper, to
draw up his answer and instruct his counsel was then also inhibited; himself
shut up close prisoner, and all his friends debarred from him; by a verbal
order only. By which strange proceedings he was utterly disabled to put in his
answer, which he earnestly desired, and was denied access to his council
contrary to the Lords former order; This done, on the 28 of April Master Pryn,
and his Co-defendants by an order of the Court, were enjoined to put in their
answers to the Information by Monday next came sennight, by the advice of their
counsel, and under their hands, or else the matters of the Information should
be taken against them pro confesso. He (having no liberty then to go to his
council, and they for fear of the Prelates being unwilling to repair to him,
or to meddle in the cause) thereupon petitioned the Court, that (having been a
Barrester at law) he might have liberty to put in his answer to this
Information under his own hand; annexing sundry reasons to the petition, why
his own answer, in this case ought to be received without the hands of his
counsel. This petition (together with an Affidavit of the particulars therein
alleged) was presented and read in open Court the fifth of May 13. Caroli. of
which this is a true Copy.

Master Prynnes first Petition to the Lords the 5. of May 13. Caroli.
To The right Honorable the Lords of his Majesty's High Court of Star Chamber.
The humble Petition of William Pryn close prisoner in the Tower of London.
Humbly shows,
THat whereas the petitioner, on monday last, received from Master Goad, an
order of this Honorable Court, Dated the 28. of April 1637. Whereby he is
enjoined to put in his answer to the Information against him, by monday next,
under his counsels hands, or else the matters therein contained shall be taken
against him Pro confesso, That the petitioner, in regard he has been debarred
all access to his council a weeks space and more, deprived of the use of his
Servant, who should solicit his business for him, being detained close
prisoner in a Messengers hands; debarred all acc^sse of friends, the use of
Pen, and Ink, and disabled both in respect of the quality of his cause, the
greatness of the persons whom it concerns; the diversity of his counsels
opinions, and the difficulty of procuring his council to repair to him to the
Tower, during the Term, to advise him, he having no means to reward them
according to their pains; and for other reasons mentioned in his Affidavit, is
utterly disabled to perform the said Order, to put in any answer without great
prejudice both to himself and his cause, which much concerns both the King,
his Crown and dignity, the Religion established, and the liberties of the
Subject infringed by the Prelates, and their confederates.

He humbly therefore beseeches your Lordships, not to exact impossibilities at
his hands; but in this case of necessity (according to many late presidents in
this Honorable Court) to grant him liberty to put in his answer by the said day
under his own hand, he having been a Barrester at law, and not under his
counsels, who refuse to do it out of fear and cowardice (being more fearful
of the Prelates, then of God, the King, his Crown, and dignity;) and also for
the causes hereunto annexed, which he in all humility submits to your Lordships
wisdoms and Justice. And the petitioner for the concession hereof shall ever
pray for your Lordships, etc.

The reasons why the petitioner (Master Prynne) humbly conceives, that this
honorable Court ought in point of law and Justice, to admit his answer under
his own hand, without his counsels, which he cannot procure.
FIrst, because there are many late presidents in this 1.
Court, wherein diverse defendants answers have been admitted without the hands
of council, in cases where no council would set their hands to them, as
Close, and Doctor Laytons cases, with many others, and but one president only
against it: which being ancient, singular, upon a special reason, in case of a
Woman, not of a man, much less of a Lawyer, and in a far different case from
this defendants, ought not, as he humbly conceaveth, to overballance the
presidents for him.

Secondly, because upon an Ore-tenus and Interrogatories 2.
in this Court, in many cases before his Majesty and the Lords at the
councell-Table, in Parliament, and in the King's Bench upon Indictments, and
Informations [especially for Felony or Treason] the defendants are allowed
freely to make their own answers and defense without counsel, if they please,
and in some cases are denied Counsel.

Thirdly, because counsel [who were not ab initio, 3.
but came in long after causes,] both in this honorable Court, and elsewhere,
are allowed and assigned, not out of necessity, but favor only, for the help
and benefit of defendants, not to be so strictly tied unto them, but that they
may have liberty to make answer without them in case where they and their
council differ in the substance of their answers, or where council advise
them to their prejudice, either out of fear, ignorance, or otherwise, else it
would lie in counsels power both to prejudice* and betray their causes, and
make them liable to censure though innocent.

Fourthly, because every answer in the eye of the law 4.
is the defendants only, though signed by his council for forms sake: he
only is summoned to make answer, he only is to swear it, and he, not his
council, is to undergo the hazard of it: therefore he alone in point of law
and Justice is only bound of necessity to sign it, not his Council.

Fifthly, because else there would be a fayler of Justice 5.
in many Cases, through the want, fear, neglect, ignorance, diversity of
opinion, or treacher of council: for if one be peremptorily enjoined to put in
an answer by a day, as this defendant now is, and counsel neglect, refuse,
delay or fear to do it upon any occasion by the time, (which is this
defendants Case) he must (without any default, contempt, or neglect in him)
suffer thereby as a delinquent, though innocent, without any legal conviction;
which were injury and injustice in the highest degree.

Sixthly, because the very law of nature teaches every 6.
Creature, but man especially, to defend, preserve and make answer for
himself, either when the party accused cannot procure others to do it, or can
do it better then others will, can, or dare do, himself: But in the present
Case, this defendant cannot procure his council to make such an answer as his
cause requires, which resting upon books, matters of Divinity, and on other
points, wherein his counsel have but little skill, all which he must justify
in his answer, he is better able to make his answer and defense thereto, then
his counsel can, will, or dare to do, in case they were willing to undertake
it* (which now they utterly deny and refuse only out of fear and cowardice,)
as aforesaid, and therefore ought, as he humbly conceives, to be permitted to
do it, both in point of Law and Justice.

Seventhly, because God and Christ, the supreme Judges 7.
of the World, and patterns of all Justice both here on Earth, have, and at
the general day of judgment, when all men shall appear before their
dreadful tribunalls, will allow every man to make his own personal answer,
and defense, without counsel or proxy, much more then should every inferior
Judge, and Terrene Court of Justice do it, if the party desire it, and others
will not, dare not do it.

Eighthly, because by the judicial Law among the Jews, 8.
every man was to make his own defense, neither did their Law judge any man,
before it heard him and knew what he did. John 7. 51. And by the civil Law,
even among the Pagan Romans, it was not the manner to condemn any man, before
that he who was accused had the accusers face to face, and had License to
answer for himself concerning the crime laid against him, Acts 25. 16. If then
the Laws amongst Jews, and Pagans, gave every defendant leave, thus to make
answer for himself, and never condemned any as guilty for not answering by
counsel (as appears by the cases of Naboth, Susanna, Christ and others,
though unjustly condemned, yet not without a full hearing, and witnesses first
produced, though false,) this defendant humbly conceives, that by the Laws
and Justice of this Christian Commonwealth, and this honorable Court, he
ought to have like liberty in this cause of so great consequence, and that the
Information against him ought not to be taken, Pro confesso, without hearing
witnesses, or defense, in case he tender an answer under his own hand, only
without his counsels who refuse to advise or direct him, else our Christian
Laws, and Courts of Justice, might seem to be more unreasonable then the
Jews, or Pagan Roman Laws and tribunalls, which God forbid any man should
imagine.

Ninthly, because S. Paul when he was slandered and accused 9.
by Ananias the Jews High Priest, with the Elders, and Tertullus their Orator,
to be a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition among the Jews, throughout the
World, and a ringleader amongst the Sect of the Nazarens, and that several
times, both before Felix, Festus and King Agrippa, (three heathen Governors and
Magistrates,) had still free liberty granted him by them all both to answer and
speak for himself to the full, to justify and clear his innocence, without
any counsel assigned. Act. 24, and 25, 26. neither did nor could the Jewish,
High Priest except against it. This defendant therefore being now accused in
this honorable Court of the like crimes, by some English Prelates and
Highpriests instigation, hopes to enjoy the self same privilege and freedom
before so many honorable Lords, and Christian Judges, which Paul did before
these Pagans. And he supposes his said adversaries will not be against it,
unless they will be thought to fear, and decline the defendants answer, as
guilty persons, who dare not admit their actions to be scanned in so honorable
a Court; or men unwilling to have this defendant clear his own Innocence; or
else be deemed more unreasonable then Ananias himself, especially in this
defendants particular case; who having been a Barrester, and counselor at the
Law formerly admitted, even in this honorable Court, to put in answers under
his own hand in other men's cases, cannot but hope and presume to obtain the
like Justice, and favor from it now, in his own cause, (being thereto
necessitated through his counsels fear and deserting of him) for the premised
reasons, which he in all humility submits to this honorable Court.

Upon the reading hereof in open Court, and of a like petition from Doctor
Bastwick, to put in his answer under his own hand, since his counsel refused
to sign it; the Court ordered the same day, that they should put in their
answers by monday next under counsels hand, or else be then taken Pro confesso;
denying them liberty to answer under their own hands.

Hereupon Doctor Bastwick, when no counsel would sign his answer, tendered it
at the Star Chamber office, under his own hand, and there left it: and Master
Burton having his answer drawn, engrossed and signed by his assigned counsel,
Master Holt, who afterward withdrew his hand, because his other counsel would
not subscribe it, out of fear to displease the Prelates, tendered it to the
Court, desiring it might be accepted, or Master Holt, ordered to new sign it;
upon this the Court, the 10th of May (being the next sitting) made this Order.

In Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem, decimo die Maii, An. Decimo tertio
Car. Reg.
Whereas by several orders of this Court, John Bastwick Doctor in Physic,
and Henry Burton clerk defendants, at the suite of his Majesty's Attorney
General plaintiff, were ordered to put in their answers under counsels hand
by Monday last, or in default the matters of the Information, to be taken
against him pro confesso: forasmuch as the Court was now informed that the said
Doctor Bastwick, has not yet answered, nor will be drawn to put in any
answer under the hand of his Counsel, but has thrown into Master Goads
Chamber, the deputy Clarke of this Court, five skins and a half of parchment
close written, with his own hand subscribed thereunto, wherein, as is alleged,
is contained much scandalous and defamatory matter: It is therefore ordered,
that all the matters of the said information wherewith the said Doctor Bastwick
is charged, in the same shall be taken against him Pro confesso And that his
Majesty's attorney General do take into his custody, and consideration the
said several skins of parchment, subsigned as aforesaid, for such farther
order to be therein had and taken, as to Justice shall appertain. And for as
much as the Court was now informed, that the defendant Burton has caused his
answer to be drawn by counsel, and engrossed, and would have put it in, if
his counsel who drew the same, or any other of his counsel, would have set
their hands thereunto: The Court therefore did forbear to take him Pro
confesso, and has ordered, that his answer be received under the hand of
Master Holt alone, and that after his answer put in, and interrogatories
exhibited, the examiner shall repair unto him in person, where he is to take
his examination upon the said Interrogatories.

Jo. Arthur. Dep.

DOctor Bastwick upon this Order, the next Court-day petitions the Court, that
his answer left in the Court might be accepted under his own hand, in default
of council; and Mister Prynne, (much grieved that he could neither gain
liberty nor possibility to answer the Information, for his just defense,
formerly ordered to be taken pro confesso against him,) the same day petitioned
the Court in this manner.

To the right Honorable the temporal Lords of his Majesty's high Court of
Star Chamber The humble petition of William Prynne, prisoner in the Tower.
IN all humbleness shows, That the petitioner ever Master Prynnes second
petition to the Lords.
since his appearance to the Information exhibited against him, has been
denied the liberty of Pen, Jnke or Paper at his Chamber* to draw up his answer,
or instructions for his counsel: That his servant who should solicit his
business, copy and engrosse his answer, has for a months space been kept
close prisoner from him in a Messengers hands, by his chief adversaries
practice and power, contrary to Law and Justice, of purpose to retard his
answer, and disable him in the prosecution of his cause: That his friends have
been restrained from him, and himself ever since the day before the Term,
prohibited all access to his counsel (granted to his Codefendants) who
without any neglect or default in the petitioner, for reasons best known to
themselves, refuse to repair to him, or to undertake any thing in his cause,
which they have all quite deserted. By means whereof the Petitioner (though
ever desirous to answer, and submit to the Orders of this Honorable Court)
neither has nor possibly could put in his answer under his counsels hands
according to the last orders: which disabling him to draw up his own answer,
and requiring mere impossibilities of him beyond his power to effect (his
counsels hands and wills being not at his command, much less their
consciences and judgments,) he hops neither shall nor ought in point of Law
or equity, to be so far obligatory and penal to him, as to make him culpable
of all the charges in the Information, without any proof on his Prosecutors
part, or default and contempt on his own. Since by such away of proceeding (of
very dangerous consequence and example scarce paralleled in any age,) the most
innocent person may be betrayed, and condemned as nocent of any crimes
whatsoever falsely charged against him, without any neglect or guilt in him,
through the unfaythfullnesse, wilfulness, fear, corruption or default of
counsel, and especially in the case of powerful and malicious opposites.

He therefore in the midst of these his exigents, and desertions of his
counsel, most humbly beseeches your Lordships, not to require impossibilities
at his hands (thus bound) beyond his power to effect, but so to deal with him
in this case of extremity, and necessity, as your Lordships would be dealt with
your selves, were you (which God forbid) in his present condition, and as you
would have Christ himself to proceed with you at the great day of judgment,
when you shall all appear before his Tribunal to give accoumpt of all your
proceedings in this and all other causes: Or if this be overmuch, then only to
grant him such common favor, and justice in this honorable Christian Court, as
Christ himself found before Pilate, and Paul before Faelix, Festus, and
Agrippa, mere heathen Judges; or as every Traitor or Felon (though never so
vile or guilty) usually claims, and enjoyes of common right in other his
Majesty's Courts of Justice, to wit, free liberty to answer for himself, when
his counsel either will not, cannot, or at least wise dare not do it; with
the use of Pen, Ink and Paper, until friday next, to draw up an answer under
his own hand, according to the truth and weightinesse of his cause, since he
cannot procure his counsels; and not to prejudge him as guilty, before his
answer or defense first heard* or witnesses produced. A request so just and
reasonable (as he humbly conceives) that his adversaries themselves whether
innocent or guilty, cannot in point of honor, justice and conscience, in
regard of their places and professions) but willingly (condescend unto, much
more then this honorable Court, especially in this weighty cause (not to be
precipitated) which highly concerns his Majesty's royal prerogative, the
state and safety of Religion, and the weal of the whole Realm, as he hops
to make good in his answer, and by his cross Bill exhibited to this honorable
Court against some great Prelates, and their confederates, under his own and
codefendants Bastwicks, and Burtons hands for want of counsel (who refuse to
appear in this case of God and the King, against the Prelates, dreaded much
more then both) which bill being for the Petitioners, and his said Codefendants
necessary defense, and justification, (who are ready to make it good at their
uttermost peril) and tending only to the maintenance of his Majesty's Crown
and dignity, our established Religion, and the subjects liberties, against the
said Prelates late dangerous encrochments, Innovations, practices and
oppressions, he now humbly prays may be admitted, it being (as he humbly
apprehends) a cause of infinite consequence, and a thing of common right,
which ought not to be denied to, or against any subject in an ordinary way of
Justice.

And your Petitioner (upon the concession of his petition) shall ever pray for
your Lordships. etc.
THis petition being read in open Court the 12. of May; the Court commanded
Master Holt, one of Master Prynnes counsel forth with to repair to him to the
Tower to take instructions for his answer; and in the afternoon the Lieutenant
of the Tower, was sent for by the Prelates instigation, and checked by the
Lords for suffering Master Prynne to dictate such a petition, and one Gardener,
(a Clerk belonging to the Tower, who writ it from his mouth by the Lieutenants
license) was for this capital offense by a warrant from the Archbishop, and
others, the same evening apprehended by a Pursevant, and kept prisoner by him
some 14 days, and not released, till he had put in bond to appear before the
Lords when ever he should be called; after which he was hunted after by the
Archbishops pursevants out of the high Commission: Who upon the reading of this
petition, and Doctor Bastwicks, made a motion in Court of purpose to prejudge
the cause before it came to hearing, tending highly to affront his Majesty's
prerogative, and thereupon procured this forejudging order, wherein his
insolent motion is recited.

In Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem, duodecimo die Maii, Anno decimo
tertio Caroli Regis.
THis day several petitions being read in open Court, presented on the behalf
of John Bastwicke Doctor in Physic, and William Prynne Gent. defendants at
the suite of his Majesty's Attorney General; The most reverend Father in God
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his It should here be his injustice rather.
Grace Informed the Court that in some of the Libellous Books, and Pamphlets
lately published his Grace and others the reverend Bishops of the Realm are
said to have The Parliament has now resolved this for a truth, however, the
Court of Star-Ch^mber or Judges determined contrary in favor of the prelate^.
usurped upon his Majesty's prerogative Royal, and to have proceeded in the
High Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts contrary to the Laws, and
Statutes of the Realm; about which he prayed the Judges might be attended, and
they prayed and required by this Court to certify their opinions therein upon
consideration whereof, the Court has ordered, that the two Lords chief
Justices now present in Court, the Lord chief Baron, and the rest of the
Judges, and Barons shall be attended by his Majesty's learned Why not by the
defendants too, to hear what they could say.
Council, touching the Particulars hereafter ensuing, viz.

Whether process may not issue out of the Ecclesiastical 1.
Court in the names of the Bishops?

Whether a patent under the great Seal be necessary 2.
for the keeping of Ecclesiastical Courts, and inabling of citations,
suspensions, and excommunications, and other censures of the Church? and
whether the Citations, ought to be in the Kings name, and under his Seal of
arms, and the like, for Institutions, and Inductions to benefices, and
corrections of Ecclesiastical offenses?

Whether Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical 3.
persons may or ought to keep any Visitation at any time, unless they have
express Commission, or Patent under the great Seal of England to do it, and
that as his Majesty's visitors only, and in his name and right alone?

Jo. Arthur, Dep.

THese three questions highly concerning his Majesty's prerogative, debated,
and determined by the defendants against the prelates for the King, were the
maine scandals and libels complained of in this new Information, and the books
thereto annexed; to prejudge which before the hearing, without the defendants
privity (never summoned to be heard what they could say in these particulars,
agai^nst the prelates encrochments, in defense of the Kings right and of
themselves) was nothing else but the extremity of injustice, and a forestalling
of the cause by a previous judgment of the Judges (then at Canterburies beck)
before it was heard.

Upon this Order, all the Judges before the hearing returned this Certificate
for the prelates, whom then to disobay or contradict in any thing had been
fatal, if not capital; whereupon this following order was made, which will
abundantly evidence the Archbishops insolency, treachery and injustice in the
carriage of this cause, and the unpatternd compliency both of the Judges, and
Court of Star Chamber to his ambitious, unreasonable, and unjust desires.

In Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem quarto die Junii, Anno decimo tertio
Caroli Regis.
THis day was read in Court, the Certificate of the two Lord chief Justices,
the Lord chief Baron, and other the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench, and
Common Pleas, and Barons of the Exchequer, made according to an Order of
reference to them granted the 12 of May, last past, upon a motion made in the
Court, wherein his Majesty's Attorney General, is plaintiff against John
Bastwick, Doctor in Physic, and others defendants; In which respect the said
Judges have decla^ed their opinions in point of Law, touching the several
matters to them referred by the aforesaid Order, and the same being so read in
Court, his It is a strange age when his Majesty's own sworn counsel, must
thus be of counsel with the prelates against the King contrary t^ their o^^h,
and promote their ^ncroachments upon his prer^g^tive Roy ^ll.
Majesty's Attorney General humbly prayed that the said Certificate may be A
strange president and motion, I think no age can show the like.
recorded in this Court, and in all other the Courts at Westminster, and in the
high Commission, and other Ecclesiastical Courts for the satisfaction of all
men, that the proceeding in the High Commission, and other Ecclesiastical
Courts are agreea^le to the Law and Statutes of the Realm; which the Court
held reasonable, and has ordered it shall so be; and that after the same is
enrolled in this Court, and other the Courts aforesaid, the original
Certificate of the said Judges shall be delivered to the most reverend Father
in God It is fit it should end as well as begin with him.
the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his grace to be kept, and preserved amongst
the records of his Court,

Which Certificate follows in these words.

May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to your Lordships Order, made in his Majesty's Court of Star Chamber
the twelfth of May last, we have taken consideration of the particulars wherein
our Opinions are required by the said Order, and we have all agreed:

That Process may issue out of the Ecclesiastical Court in the name of the
Bishops, And that a Patent under the great Seal, is not necessary for the
keeping of the said Ecclesiastical Court, or the inabling of Citations,
Suspensions, Excommunications or other censures of the Church. And that it is
not necessary, that Summons, Citations, or other processes Ecclesiastical in
the said Court, or Institutions or Inductions to benefices, or Corrections of
Ecclesiastical offenses in those Courts, be in the It seems then they are no
one of the Kings Courts, because they have neither his name nor Image.
Kings name, or with the Style of the King, or under the Kings Seal, or that
their seals of Office, have in them the Kings Arms, And that the Statute of
primo Edwardi sexti. Chapter 2. which enacted contrary, is not now in force.

We are also of opinion that the Bishops, Archdeacons, and other
Ecclesiastical persons may keep their Visitations, as usually they have done,
without Commission under the great Seal of England so to do.

Primo die Julii 1637. Jo. Bramston, Jo Finch, Hum. Davenport, Wm. Jones, Jo.
Denham, Richard Hutton, George Crook, Thomas Trever, George Vernon, Robert
Barkley, Richard Weston. Jo. Arthur Dep.


DOctor Heylin in his Brief and moderat^ Aswer t^ Master Burton (the matter
whereof contradicts the Title) written by the Archbishop of Canterburies
special command p. 102. avers, that it was positively delivered by my Lords
the Judges, with an unanimous consent, and so declared by my Lords chief
Justices in (...) last past (before this Certificate) that the Act of Repeal
the first of Queen Mary, does still stand in force, as unto the Statute of
first Edward 6 ^. 2. by you so much pressed, and that the Bishops might
lawfully issue out process in their names, and under their own seals. Which if
true, it is apparent that the Archbishop (from whom the Doctor had his
information) had received all the Judges resolutions in this point, not only
before the hearing of the cause, but even before his motion in Court, that the
Judges might be attended to know their resolution in these points. Is not this
pretty underhand juggling, and square prelaticall proceeding, deserving
extraordinary Laud? But to return to the defendants, where I last left them.

Master Prynne, upon Master Holts resort to him by the Lords command, upon his
last petition, to his Chamber at the Tower where he was shut up close prisoner,
gave him both a fee and instructions to draw up his answer by, with all
possible speed: hereupon Master Helt draws an answer according to his own
mind different from his instructions which he sent to Master Prynne to peruse;
who disl^king the generality of it, desired him to confer with his other
counsel, and to amend it in some particulars; whereupon Master Tomlins another
of his counsel, and Master Holt after two meetings agreeing upon his answer,
Master Holt gave order to his Clerks to ingrosse it, and promised to sign it
the next morning, that it might be put into the Court. Master Prynne informed
hereof paid Master Holts Clerks for engrossing it, and the next morning by his
keeper sent another fee to Mr. Holt to sign it according to promise; who then
refusing both the fee and the signing of the answer, and being taxed for it by
Master Tomlins (who had signed the paper Copy) and demanded the reason by
Master Prynnes keeper, why he refused to sign it contrary to promise;
answered, that he had received express order not to sign it, and afterward
being taxed for it by master Prynne himself, who demanded the reason of this
denial; he told him, that he durst not subscribe it for an 100 pounds though
he had drawn it, for fear of being put from the Bar, he having received a
command to the contrary. In the mean time Master Tomlins who was willing to
sign it, departed into the Country upon his necessary occasions, so that his
hand could not be gotten; Master Prynne thus deluded, acquaints the Lieutenant
of the Tower with this false dealing, requesting him to inform the Lord Keeper
of it; and to desire his Lordship in his behalf, either to enjoyne Master Holt
to sign his answer according to promise as he had done in Master Burtons
case; or to accept of it without an hand; or of it, or another answer signed
with his own hand, since he had done his utmost, and had no means to compel
his counsel to subscribe his answer against their wills; The Lord Keeper upon
this Information, answered, that he had no power to force counsel to sign an
answer, and that it was not his use to do it, or to receive any answer without
counsels hands.

Upon the return of which answer, Master Prynne replied; that if the Lord
Keeper being chief Judge of the Court, the greatest officer in the Realm
under the King, and a freeman, had no power to enforce his counsel to sign
his answer according to duty, equity and promise; then certainly he, being a
poor close prisoner had far less power to do it; and ought not to suffer
for his default, which he could not remedy. Hereupon instead of accepting his
answer, this order was made against him, and Doctor Bastwick to take them both
pro confesso for their contempt in not answering, and to appoint a day for
hearing the Cause.

In Camera Stellata coram Concilio ibidem, 19o. die Maii, An. Decimo tertio
Car. Reg.
Upon information this day to this honorable Court, by Sir John Banks Knight,
his Majesty's attorney general, that he has exhibited an information into
this Court against John Bastwick Doctor of Physic, William Prynne Gentleman,
and others defendants, for framing, Printing and publishing several libellous
and seditious Books; and that upon the said defendants Bastwick and Prynnes
Note.
contemptuous refusal to answer the said Information, several Orders have
been made to take them Pro confesso: It was humbly prayed, and accordingly
thought fit and ordered by this Court, that the said cause as against them
shall be heard, the first cause the first sitting of the next Term, when the
Information shall be read, and the matters thereof be taken against them, Pro
confesso.

Where you see, that the sole charge against them, and the ground of their
censures was a supposed contemptuous refusal to answer, when as the Offense,
and contempt was on the contrary side, in refusing to accept of their answers
tendered, and ordering Counsel not to sign their answers.

In the mean time, Master Burtons answer signed by Master Holt, after it had
lain in Court near three weeks, upon Master Atturnies suggestion to the
Court, the 19 of May, that it was scandalous, was * referred to the
consideration of the two chief Justices, Bramston and Finch: who calling
Master Holt privately unto a Chamber, before them, Judge Finch ratled and
reviled him exceedingly for putting in such an answer, which he said, was the
most pernicious that ever came into the Court; telling him, that he deserved
to have his Gown pulled over his ears for drawing it. To whom he replied,
that he had been an ancient practiser in the Star Chamber, and had drawn it
according to his best understanding and wit; that all of it was only a
confession, or explanation of the charge in the Bill, and a recital of Acts of
Parliament; and how this could be scandalous or impertinent, it went beyond his
capacity to conceive. And so without more words, these Judges resolved the
answer scandalous, and ordered all the substance of it tending to Master
Burtons justification and defense, to be expounded; as will appear by this
their certificate.

The certificate of Sr. John Bramston Knight, chief Justice of his Majesty's
Court of Kings Bench; and Sir John Finch Lord chief Justice of his Majestes
Court of common-Plees, in the cause wherein his Majesty's Attorney general is
plaintiff, and Henry Burton Clerk, and others, defendants.
ACcording to the direction of an Order of this Honorable court, Dated the
Ninteenth day of this instant May, we have considered of the Impertinent, and
scandalous matter in the said Defendants, Henry Burtons answer, And are of
opinion, that Master Holt the ancientest practisar in the Court then living,
Master Bartons assigned counsel was very much over-seene, if all his answer
but this (consisting of 40. sheets of paper at least) was scandalous and
impertinent.
all the said answer is Scandalous or impertinent, and fit to be expounded,
except these words in the beginning thereof, viz. The said defendant by
protestation, not confessing, or acknowledging, any matter or thing alleged
against him, in, or by the said Information to be true, and saving ever to
himself all advantage of Exception to all, and every the uncertainties and
imperfections thereof: And these words in the end of the said answer, viz. This
defendant to all and every such supposed unlawful Combination, Confederacies
Disloyalties, Seditious, scandalous and factious Libells, or other unlawful
offenses examinable, or censurable in this Honorable Court, wherewith he is
charged in, or by the said Information, answers and says, That he is not
guilty thereof, or of any part thereof in any such manner and form as is
supposed thereby; All and every which matters of answer this defendant does
aver, and is ready to prove, as this Honorable Court shall award. And humbly
prays, that all and every such errors as shall be adjudged by this Honorable
Court, to have been by any ignorance of his in the common-Lawes, or Statutes
of this Realm, or by any frailty, or infirmity of his, contrary to the loyalty
of his Heart, and integrity and sincerity of his intention, and profession, may
by his Majesty's gracious Interpretation thereof, and by this Honorable Courts
favorable advice, or mediation to his Majesty therein be remitted, and
pardoned, and himself dismissed by the same Court. All which nevertheless we
humbly submit to the grave judgment of this Honorable Court.

22 May 13. Car. Regis. Jo. Arthur Dep.

Upon this strange Certificate of the Judges Master Burtons answer was
miserably mangled, the whole body and substance of it being quite rased, and
naught but the head and feet left upon record; whereby he was made to deny that
to be done by him, which he confessed and justified upon oath in his answer, as
it stood before this rasure of it.

VVhereupon the examiner coming to Master Burton to the Fleet, where he was
close prisoner, to examine him upon Interrogatories grounded on his answer, he
hearing of this expungement, refused to be examined, unless his answer might
be admitted as it was put in; or he permitted to put in a new answer; he
disclaiming this answer to be his, since altered in all the material points
tending to his justification and defense, and turned from a special, to a
general not-guilty, necessarily involving him in the danger of perjury: Of
which the Court being informed by Mr. Attorney, made this ensuing Order, to
take the Bill pro confesso against him, only for not answering Interrogatories;
a thing never heard of before in that Court, when there was an answer admitted.

In Camera Stellata coram Concilio Ibidem, secundo die Iulii. Anno decimo
tertio Caroli Regis.
UPon information this day, to this Honorable Court, by his Majesty's Attorney
General, that Henry Burton Clarke defendant at his suite, being served with
Process, stood forth Process of contempt, and would not be drawn to answer,
until several orders were made, that the matters of the Information should be
taken against them as Pro confesso, Unless he did answer the said information
by the times limited by the said Order, and at length he did put in an answer
stuffed with impertinent, scandalous matters, which upon a reference to the two
Lords chief Justices is since expunged, and Interrogatories are exhibited into
Court for examination of the said defendant, and the examiner, as appears by
his certificate now read, has been with him to take his examination, but he
refused to be examined, so that an attachment is awarded against him, and
delivered to the Warden of the Fleet, in whose custody he remains, A close
pris^er; It was humbly prayed that the matter of the said Information, and
Interrogatories may be taken against him Pro confesso. Upon consideration
whereof the Court has ordered, that the examiner do go again unto him, and
if he shall not thereupon by this day senight answer the said Interrogatories,
they shall be taken against him, Pro confesso, as is desired.

Jo. Arthur. Dep.

AFter this Order, the examiner repaired again to Master Burton, who upon his
former grounds, (because he had no answer in Court of his own or his
counsels, but only of the Judges making, which he disclaimed for his, and
because his answer to the Interrogatories would contradict the general answer
of Not-guilty, which the Judges had now made out of his special Not-guilty;)
refused to be examined; and so though his answer were in Court as the Judges
altered it, yet for not answering to Interrogatories framed on it as it stood
before its expungement, the Information was taken against him Pro confesso, and
this order made at a prirate seal out of Term, to bring the cause to hearing
upon one days warning only given to the Defendants, when as by the course of
the Court, a Subpaena ad audiendum judicium should have been served on them,
and 15 days warning at least given them before the day of hearing.

Apud Aedes Domini Custodis magni Sigilli Angliae, de cimo tertio die Junii,
Anno decimo tertio Caroli Regis.
IT is this day ordered by the right Honorable the Lord Keeper, that John
Bastwick. Doctor in Physic, Henry Burton, etc. William Prynne Gentlemen
defendants at the suite of his Majesty's Attorney General, shall have liberty
with their keepers to attend their council, and to appear at the Bar of
this Court on wednesday the 14. of this instant month, when the cause is
appointed to be heard.

Jo. Arthur Dep.

THese prisoners having this liberty granted them just the day before the
hearing, Master Prynne thereupon repaired with his answer (formerly drawn up
and engrossed by Master Holt) to Master Tomlins another of his counsel, newly
returned out of the Country the evening before; and having got him to sign
this engrossed answer, he goes therewith to Master Holt, desiring him likewise
to subscribe it according to promise; who refused to do it now as he had done
before, protesting, that he durst not for an 100 pieces sign it, because he
had received an express command to the contrary. Whereupon Master Prynne
caries it signed with Master Tomlins hand to the Star Chamber Office, where he
tendered it to Master Goad, together with another longer answer signed with his
own hand, and an Affidavit, that he could not possibly procure his counsels
hand to his answer before that time; But Master Goad advising with his deputy*
refused to receave either the answers or Affidavit, though earnestly pressed to
it by Master Prynne: who thereupon returned with his answers to the Tower; and
prepared himself for the hearing the next morning, resolving, that since he
was thus fore judged, and taken pro confesso, upon a mere false pretense of a
contempt in refusing to answer, to speak nothing, but what the Court should
give him occasion when he appeared at the Bar; Doctor Bastwick, and Master
Burton taking up the like resolution; because they were certainly informed,
that whatever they spoke, their sentence was already determined, and set down
in writing before the hearing came, all being thus taken pro confesso as you
have heard and seen by the former orders.

Thus I have given you a faithful relation of the proceedings in this cause
before the hearing, out of the Orders and Records of the Star Chamber, the
legality whereof you shall find discussed in the close of this Treatise; Now
before I come to the day of hearing, give me leave to acquaint you only with
one particular touching Master Holt, he being sharply checked and terrified
for drawing and signing Master Burtons answer, and charged not to sign Master
Prinnes answer when he had drawn it, as you have heard before, was much
troubled at it; and being in Court at the hearing the next day, he offered two
or three times to speak something in defense of Master Burtons cause; which
the then Lord Keeper perceiving, beckoned and held up his finger to him to hold
his peace, whereupon he kept silence. And coming home to his house, as soon
as the sentence was passed, his wife inquiring of him how the cause went; he
broke out into these speeches. O wife, I never saw a just cause, so unjustly
carried, which I could have defended by Scripture against all the World. I had a
great desire to speak in the cause for my client, but my Lord Keeper beckened
and held up his finger to me* to hold my peace: And the poor Gentlemen have
received the most unjust, and hardest censure, that ever I heard in that Court.
For my own part, I gave over my practice in other Courts, and be took my
self wholly to this Court to enjoy the liberty of my conscience, thinking to
find nothing but Justice, and just proceedings there: But now alas J find
things so carried there, that for this days work sake, I desire never to come
more to that Bar, J desire of God, that this may be the last cause that ever
I may plead in that Court, which has partly miscarried through my default (as
I am afraid most will judge) though I durst not do otherwise, being so
checked and threatened. This said, he continued sad, and soon after falling
sick for conceit only of the miscarriage of this cause (as his wife and
friends believed) he died; never going to the Star Chamber after this
sentence: the proceedings and passages whereof, I shall next relate.


