A KEY TO OPEN Heaven-Gate. OR, A ready Path to lead to HEAVEN. Written and
Printed for the benefit of all true Christians, to read, hear and make good use
of, before it be too late. And therefore I advise every Man, and every woman to
observe and give good heed to what is spoken in this little Book, and they
shall be sure to find sweetness, and happiness in this world, and eternal
joys in the world to come, through the Might, Merits, and Mercies of Jesus
Christ; who says, Ask and you shall have, seek, and ye shall find, knock
and it shall be opened unto you. Written by Laurence Price.

London, Printed for T. Vere at the sign of the Angel without Newgate, 1666.

A Key to Open Heaven-Gate. Or, A ready way to lead men to Heaven.
Here follows good and sound Directions to set Men in the ready way to
Heaven; which way if they mistake, they are never like to come there.
DEar and beloved Christians, I would have you thus much to understand, that
all those that have a desire to go to Heaven, must well and wisely endeavor
themselves to follow this Pathway.

First, you must truly and unfeignedly labor to serve God, and obey his
Commandments which is a duty that ought to be done without any grudgings,
murmurings, or delays; for he that is alive to day, may be dead before to
morrow: and then it will be too late to look after a way that they never sought
for in their life time: and therefore I davise you all (good Christans) to seek
the Lord while he may be found, for he his a God of truth of Justice, of Peace,
of Mercy, of Love and such a one as would have all Men and woman to be saved.

Secondly, here is another duty to be preformed by all Men that will find the
ready way to Heaven: as your brother is your ueighbor, even so is your
neighbor is your brother, and therefore ought every man and woman to love,
cherish, and comfort each other, and to live in peace and unity one with
another, and not to wrangle, brabble, fight, scold, and go to Law, until they
have undone one another, for they that do such things are gone far out of the
way to Heaven. Remember therefore what our Savior Christ says in the Gospel.
A new Commandment give I unto you, see that you love one another, for if you
love not your neighbor whom you see every day how can you love God whom you
never saw, therefore consider and take heed in time what you do: he that hates
his neighbor, hates his brother, and he that hates his brother hates God,
and he that hates God, will never find the way to Heaven and therefore I
desire all them that are called by the name of Christians to show themselves
like Christians, laying aside all hatred, spite, envy, malice, lying,
slandring, backbiting, hypocrisy, and dissimulation, and withal to break such
bread as you would have broken; and likewise to do unto all men as you would
they should do unto you. This be sure is the readiest way for to please God,
and the nearest way to Heaven: Yet more then this is to be done before, you
come to your journeys end: You must repent you of all your former iniquities;
you must be good to them yt have done evil to you: and must forgive them their
trespasses, as you look to be forgiven at the hands of God. And so far must
your minds and your hearts be given to quietness, that you must not so much as
to let the sun go down while you are in wrath, For vengeance is mine says the
Lord, and I will repay it.

In the next place, every christian ought at all times very early and late, to
pray unto the Lord, that he will add a blessing to their endeavors, and the
better to be employed, let them follow after Gods Preachers, and hear them
Preach and Teach, that are both able and willing to declare the word of God
unto them, and so by degrees they shall find the mercies of the Lord redoubled
unto them, and thereby they shall be brought to ripeness of understanding,
whereby to know and distinguish between good and bad, which may be great
furtherance to them in the way to Heaven.

True knowledge is of such an excellent virtue that it is sufficient to bring
us acquainted with the principal things that are to be had in this life, and
after this life ended, it shall bring our Souls into everlasting happiness.

True knowledge will make you understand that God the Father Created us, that
God the Son redeemed us, and that God the holy Ghost sanctified us, and
preserves all those that faithfully believe that our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ suffered death upon the Cross, to save our souls from the tyranny of
the devil, and from the torments of Hell; as you may read in the 13 Chap. of
the Gospel written by St* Matthew, where it is said, Blessed be your eyes for
they see, and your ears for they hear, and your hearts for they understand.

And to be brief, true knowledge and understanding may very well be termed a
Key to open the gates of Heaven, Then what man or woman will be so wilfully
blind as to neglect the seeking for such an excellen^ virtue; yet there are
some, and too many in these sinful and wicked times, that are so careless and
regardless, that they had rather choose to follow the vain delights and
pleasures of this wicked world, than to seek for the Redemption of their souls,
and the joys of Heaven hereafter, whom our Savior Christ bought and paid for
with his most precious blood.

Some there are likewise; that bear a show of Godliness, and yet they cannot or
will not spaire an hour in a day to hear a good Sermon, or to serve God in*
Others their are, that do utterly deny, and as it were to make a scoff of the
Scriptures, and the word of God; but I wish that all such persons may speedily
amend their lives, lest at the last day the righteous Judge of all the world,
Jesus Christ shall say unto them, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

But now beloved Christians I would have you to consider and think on this that
ye day of vengeance is near at hand, and every soul shall stand at the Bar of
Araignment before the righteous Judge to tender up an account of al their deeds
and actions good and evil: and then shall the good be severed from the bad, and
the one sort with joy and triumph be received into everlasting happiness, and
the rest be cast into utter darkness, where is nothing else to be heard or
seen, but weeping, howling, and gnashing of teeth.

Moreover I would have you to consider that at the general judgment there are
none to be excused from coming to their answers, and every one shall be forced
to appear in their persons; the rich and the poor, the King and the Beggar, the
strong and the weak, the bound and the free; all must come whether they will or
no: for God has no respect of persons: and at that great and notable day of ye
Lord our God, there is no delays to be made, there shall be no Lawyers to plead
a cause for another man or woman: for he shall be sure to have work enough to
do of his own, neither shall there be any bribes accepted of, therefore look
well about you, and prevent the wrath of the Judge while you may; and provoke
not God to Anger, lest your souls perish in displeasure.

Yet furthermore I would have you remember this, yt as the Saints of Heaven are
crowned with glory, and the wicked sent unto the gulf of misery, there is no
returning from neither of the places, but where soever they are sent by the
Judge, there they are to continue world without END. Oh! what a heavy sight
will it be to the Wicked? when they shall see the godly entertained into Heaven
among the glorious Saints and Angels of the Lord, and they themselves to be
cast into utter darkness for ever, where they shall never behold the brightness
of the Sun, nor the glory of Christ again: alas dear friends what a sad thing
it is to think upon? but ten thousand times worse to them that shall suffer
themselves to be banished from the presence of Christ for ever.

Such cursed wretches as are here spoken of, are them who have lost their way
to heaven, and can never find the Key to open Heaven Gate withal.

The last thing that I have to put you in mind of is yt every one should
remember his End, and think upon the day of his death while he is alive on the
Earth. To this purpose the wise man Solomon has taught us our Lesson, and to
the Life; when he says, Remember thy end, and thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, as much as if he said, Remember thy end to day, to morrow, and the next
day, and all the days of our lives. And also that every night before we sleep,
we make our peace with God, by way of humble Petition and prayers unto his
heavenly Majesty, that he will be pleased that if we never live to see the
morrow morning, to forgive all our sins and receive our souls into his
heavenly Kingdom: if every one will make use of what is here set down, and
constantly practice it in their lives and conversations, they need not fear
death let him come early or late, sleeping or waking, or what time soever it
be, neither can the gates of Hell* nor the power of Devils prevail against them
yt have found the right way to Heaven. And to conclude this point; let all yt
ever mean well to their own souls, take good notice of what is said, it may be a
means through Gods great mercy to bring them that are gone astray, in the right
and perfect way to Heaven, where at the first entrance, our Savior Jesus
Christ will be ready to welcome us in with these sweet and comfortable
greetings and imbracements, with words as follows: Come ye blessed Children
of my Father, receive a Crown and Kingdom of Glory, which was prepared for you
at the beginning. To which kingdom, The Lord in his good time bring us all.
There shall the blessed souls of ye righteous behold the celestial Saints of
the Lord, and be partakers with them of the everlasting felicity which is
unspeakable, then shall they that mourned here, be converted there. And they
that suffered reproachful words, abusefull slanders, shamfull disgraces, and
presecutions for Christ and the Gospels sake shall have a full reward, and
sweet satisfaction in the Sanctuary of the most high God, and al those which
have been wronged on Earth, shall be righted in Heaven, which consideration may
very well serve to comfort all such as have been or are any ways afflicted,
derided, or oppressed, and falsely accused in this present life; since there is
a Crown of glory laid up for them in the life to come, then let all true and
faithful Believers be valiant-hearted, and never be dismayed for all that can
be done against them by the world the flesh, and the Devil.

And for your further instruction, I would wish you all to be well advised, and
to follow the Doctrine and Counsel of the Apostle St. Paul, who bids, you
to put on the whole armor of God, Having your loins girt about with the
truth, putting on the breast plate of righteousness, and feet shod with the
preparation of the Gospel of peace, taking up the sh^e^d of faith, and helmet
of salvation, And being thus armed you need not fear all the Enemies that ever
can assault or come against you; as you may read in the 6 Chapt. of Ephesians. 14,
15, 16, 17, verses, how to come by this Armor, and how to use it, you must
learn that of our Captain and Leader Jesus Christ, who suffered many
persecutions when he was upon earth, as hunger, cold, banishment, scorns and
taunts, whippings, and buffetings, spitting on the face, and at last nailed on
the Cross, and pierced to the heart with a bloody spear; in all which
afflictions he was never seen to look upon Enemies with a frowning Eye, nor to
give them so much as an angry word, but at the very point of death he took all
things patiently, and prayed for his enemies, saying, Father forgive them, they
know not what they do. And when he fetched his last gasp at the yielding up of
the ghost, he cried with a loud voice, Father into thy hands I commit my Spirit.

Thus was our Savior Jesus Christ made a sufferer for our sakes, and all those
torments did he undergo while he was on earth, to teach us the way tr Heaven,
and this has he purchased with his most dear and precious blood, to save us
from the torments of Hell; and after that Christ had suffered the sharpness of
death he ascended into heaven, where he has made already intercession for all
them that are his followers. And seeing that our Savior has led the way, why
should not we be as willing to come to him? he has promised he will never
leave us nor forsake us, if we do not leave nor forsake him: Therefore let us
look to our selves, if we will not find the way to Heaven, the fault is our
own.

Therefore to finish up all, I once more desire you all, that you will never
leave Practicing to find the way to Heaven. For blessed are they that continue
to the END.

A PRAYER.
O Most mighty Lord God full of mercy and compassion to all that call upon thy
holy Name, and seek after thy Heavenly Kingdom: We thy poor distressed
Servants and Children, do upon the bended knees of our hearts, prostrate our
selves before thee, with all humility both of souls and bodies; desiring that
of thy infinite goodness thou will be pleased to teach us the way to come unto
thee, for we are not able to do any good thing of our selves, without thy
powerful help; we are weak, but thou art strong; and therefore draw us, and
we will follow thee; direct our ways to come unto thee, so that when the time
comes that our souls shall be separated from our bodies, we may be received
into the Joys of Heaven, and that for the sake of Jesus Christ our Savior, to
whom with the Father, and Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, Power and
Praise, both now, and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

