Queen Catharine: OR, THE Ruins of Love. A TRAGEDY, As it is Acted at the New
THEATER in Little-Lincolns-Inn-Field, BY His MAJESTY's Servants.

Written by Mrs. Pix.

LONDON, Printed for William Turner, at the White Horse without, and Richard
Basset, at the Mitre within, Temple Bar. MDCXCVIII.

To the Honorable Mrs COOK of Norfolk.
Madam,
DID not some of the brightest and best our Sex can boast of Encourage Attempts
of this kind, the snarling Cynicks might prevail and cry down a diversion,
which they themselves participate, though their ill Nature makes them grumble
at their Entertainment, but when they shall see this Glorious name in the
Front, when they shall know a Lady beloved by Heaven and Earth, Mistress of all
Perfections, the bounteous Powers give, or human nature is Capable to receive:
when, I say they understand you protect, and like Innocent Plays, they must
Acquiesce and be forced to own so much goodness, cannot choose amiss. Queen
Catharine, who tasted the Vicissitudes of Fate, will now forget her sufferings,
and under such a Noble Patroness remain fixed in lasting Glory; and if my weak
Pen has failed in the Character of that Great Princess: now I Have made her an
ample recompense, for where could I have found a Lady of a more illustrious
descent, or more Celebrated for her Virtues? The name of Carry Graces all our
English Chronicles and is adorned with the greatest Honors; yet that Noble
stock did never produce a lovelier branch than your fair self, and as if Heaven
Correspondent to our wishes, designed you its peculiar blessings, you are given
to a Gentleman, of whom we may venture to say, he merits even you? Oh! may you
appear many, many succeeding years, the bright Examples of Conjugal Affection,
and shame that barefaced Vice out of Countenance, which breaks the Marriage
Vows without a blush: May you still remain blessed in each other, pleased to see
your Beauties and your Virtues renewed in your Charming Race, whilst the
admiring World shall wonder at your happiness, and reform in hopes to obtain
some of those blessings. May every thing contribute to your continual
satisfaction, and amongst your more solid Joys, give me leave, Madam, to hope
this trifle may find a vacant hour, when you will deign to peruse it, and be so
good to forgive the Authors presumption in laying it at your feet.

I could not, without a plain Contradiction to the History, punish the
Instruments that mademy Lovers unhappy; but I know your Ladyship will trace
Richard the Third into Bosworth Field, and find him there, as wretched as he
made Queen Catharine.

I dare not add more, knowing how unworthy all I have said, or can say, is of
you; therefore shall only reiterate my Prayers for your lasting Happiness, and
beg to subscribe my self,

Madam, The humblest of your Ladyships admirors, and Most obedient Servant,
Mary Pix.

PROLOGUE:
Spoken by Mr. Batterton. IT IS grown so hard a Task to please the Town,
We scarce can tell what Prologue will go down:
But right or wrong a Prologue must be writ,
A dull one sometimes may divert the Pit,
Substantial dullness does as well as wit.
For if you laugh, what matter whence the mirth,
Whether from plenty of the Wit, or dearth?
A heavy English Tale to day, we show
As ever was told by Hollingshead or Stow,
Shakespeare did often his Countries worthies choose,
Nor did they by his Pen their Luster lose.
Hero's revive through him, and Hotspur's rage,
Doubly adorns and animates the Stage:
But how shall Woman after him succeed,
And what excuse can her presumption plead.
Who with enervate voice dares wake the mighty dead;
To please your martial men she must despair,
And therefore Courts the favor of the fair:
From huffing Hero's she hopes no relief,
But trusts in Catharine's Love, and Isabella's grief.
EPILGOUE:
Written by Mrs. Trotter.
Spoken by Miss Porter. WHat Epilogues are made, for who can tell,
'Twere worth the pains to write and speak'em well.
If they could gain your favor for bad Plays,
But by their merit you will condemn or praise:
It Is but a form, no matter then by whom,
Or what is said, and therefore I am come.
I, who no partial Voice can hope to engage,
No graces of my own, nor of the Stage:
But though I cannot yet expect to move,
Or merit either your applause or love:
Sure practicing so young I may improve.
That Is all I come for: what is the Play to me,
And since I Am here, I think I Will let you see,
What you're to hope, I may hereafter be.
Come, a short taste of some Heroic now?
But do not trust me, no, for if you do,
By all the furies and the flames of Love:
By Love, which is the hottest burning Hell,
I Will set you both on fire to blaze for ever.
How was that done, I Will swear it pleases me,
And though I came careless of your decree,
If favoring, or against our Tragedy,
Methinks I Am now grown tender of its fate,
Who knows but I may come to act Queen Kate.
THE Actors Names.
Edward the Fourth. Mr. Scudamore. Duke of Clarence Mr. Verbruggen. Duke of
Gloucester Mr. Arnold. Earl of Warwick Mr. Kynnaston. Malavill Mr. Bailey.
Citizens, Guards, etc. Owen Tudor Mr. Batterton, Lord Dacres Mr. Freeman. Sir
James Thyrrold Mr. Thurmond.
WOMEN.
Queen Catharine Mrs. Barry. Isabella her Ward Mrs. Bracegirdle. Esperanza
Woman to Isabella Mrs. Martin. Ladies of Honor.
ACT the First.
Scene the First.
Enter Edward IV. Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Warwick, and several Lords, as
rising from Council. Edw. NOble are your resolves, my worthy Friends:
Yes! we will meet again this Warlike Queen,
Who wields her self the Sword, and gives the Distaff
To the Effeminate and Holy Henry:
My Lord of Warwick, Guide and Father now,
Ever Unconquered leader of the War!
You saw, your Eyes beheld the fall of York,
Made a short promise to his mounting spirit,
That you would still assist his daring Sons.
The dying Hero at the assurance smiled,
Pleased, and secured, he left this Earth to us.
With Warwick on our side, what Foe can shock us,
So Guarded, even Giants to our Souls
Appear like Infants, and can move no terror.
Shall then a Woman, a rash giddy Woman,
Oppose the Force and Arm of Hercules?
O Vanity!

Warw. Vain are indeed these Words; go, Royal Edward,
Pour on the fairer Sex thy Oily speeches,
Joined with thy goodly Person, there they cannot
Fail of Success; but give me trust, not flattery.
The rule of Sacred Justice be thy word?
As well in virtue, as in name be King;
And then if I forsake thee, may this Arm,
To which I owe the Power of executing
Your Noble Orders in the dusty field,
Be lost, and all the Courage that inspires it.

Edw. I Am hushed, the talking Genius now is silent,
Listening to those great Oracles you utter.

Enter Clarence. War. Here comes Clarence, like a Bridegroom dressed.
My Lord of Gloucester! I believe these gay Princes
Think we rough Fellows were only made
To tug for them for Conquests in the War;
Force from Crowned heads their feeble Sceptres;
Then all our toil and labor's paid, when we
Behold how well the gaudy Robe becomes them.

Glou. Rather let the bright Circle tear, tear
Their beauteous Fronts, and leave them horrid,
[Aside. As spightfull Nature has formed mine.
I Am of your mind, my Lord, observe how
[To Warwick. Exactly my Brothers locks are curled.

Clar. I Am glad to find you thus disposed, my Lords,
And the Foe within our view.

Edw. I thought you knew not of their near approach,
Else what made you absent at our last grand Council?
You have yet been learning, why the shining Court
Of Catharine, thus hovers near our Camp,
Forsaking her more peaceful Palaces?
She now is garrisoned in Ludlow Castle.

Clar. Of the motions, that Beauty makes, my Lord,
As I expected you are always first informed.

Warw. This discourse will be too hot. Come,
You lovely branch of the Plantagenets,
Let Us view the Troops: though a Courtier now;
Yet in the fight you will prove an English Hero.
[Exeunt War. Clar. Ex. Lords,
Edw. Brother, come near. My Lords, pray retire.
Brother and Friend, I long have sought these moments,
In which I might pour the secrets of my Soul
Into your faithful Bosom: Much I expect
From thee, though Nature seems thy body
To have rufled up in haste, the rich gifts
Within have amply made amends; for there
Thou excellest all her humane Sons, as far
As they do thee in Empty, Worthless, though
Beauteous forms.

Glou. For all my Step-dames gifts, I only thank her,
In that she has firmly fixed my Faith and Love
To you, my Royal Brother and my Lord.

Edw. Did thou observe how Clarence frowned and sighed
When Warwick asked him to view our Troops.
The Court of Catharine's the cursed Cause;
There, Oh! there, the ignoble youth is ruined.

Glou. This I knew before: But now I expected
Something to hear related of the first,
The noblest and most perfect of our Race.
Speak Heavens appointed King, why at the name
Of Catharine's Court do I still observe
A sigh, a pause, some sudden start of Nature,
Otherways unusual in your even temper?
It cannot be Love, for justly you are called
The Royal Rover; you wander over the Field
Of tempting Beauty, with wanton revelling Joy;
And if you crop a Flower, the rifled sweet
Is thrown neglected by; to whither in some
Forgotten shade; nor ever did you make
A business of what Nature meant a trifle,
By giving us desires so prone, so apt,
So pleased with Change.

Edw. Since the decisive day approaches near,
In which the work of many years is fated,
Glory and Conquest wait that pointed time,
Or in the Field an Honorable death:
Give orders that we are not Interrupted,
And thou shall hear the weakness of thy Brother.
[Exit Gloucester, and returns.
Glou. Silence, and Secrecy wait upon your words!

Edw. I need not tell you Friend, that I stood
The first and dearest in our Father's Love.
Too well his partial kindness was expressed,
In my most Noble, Liberal Education.
When first he brought me to that Mart the Court,
Catharine was Regent; Introduced I viewed
That Queen with ecstasy and strange amazement,
Methought she looked and moved beyond her Sex;
And something whispered to my ravished Soul,
She is a Goddess!

Glou. In those blooming years she was approved
By all a wonder, nor yet has fate or time
Exhausted the vast stock, she still appears
As one that is born to die a beauty: Pray, Sir, proceed.

Edw. I kneeled to kiss her hand; but then forgot
The Ceremony was over, and rooted there
Gazed on the pointed rays shot from those Globes
Of Beauty, her resistless Eyes, till they
Reached and pierced my heart.
Now, the Martial Horse can please no more;
The Bow unstrung neglected lay; and all
The Glorious exercises of my forward youth,
Wherewith I had with Emulation strove
To out do each Rival. To Grots and Solitudes
Retired, I hid me from the busy World:
Gave up my self to thought,
To thoughts of Love and Rapture, which perhaps
Was not in her to give, at least not ordained
For me.

Glou. How could you fear, my Lord, your Birth, your Form
And your abundant Wealth might give you hopes
To gain your Mistress, though she were a Queen.

Edw. Can thou forgive the poorness of my spirit?
When I confess, I served that haughty Queen,
With all the lowest marks of servile Courtship:
Fled at her command, trembled at her frown,
And at her anger died, at length resolved
To know my fate; beneath her feet I fell;
In dying Accents I confessed my Love:
She with an unrelenting look replied,
It is impossible! you never can be mine.
With groans and sighs I begged her change that Never;
That terror to the damned, and death to me;
And all my hopes to any other word, but she,
Deaf to my Prayers, my Vows, repeated often,
Remember Earl of March! never, never.

Glou. Foolish Woman! to resist at once her glory
And her safety: some other Love, I guess,
Gave this strong passion ease.

Edw. Yes, on her side, not mine? no Gloucester, Gloucester!
I was the constant'st Fool, that ever that Sex
With more than Necromantique Charms enchain'd;
Till at last convinced that Owen Tuder
Held the heart and person of the Queen;
Revenge despite of such a Rival cast
Forth from my breast the darling God of Love.

Glou. How could Tudor then escape your Vengeance
Or did you not believe his boasted descent
From Great Cadwalladar the British King,
So thought him a Plebeian beneath your Sword?

Edw. Let everlasting silence shroud that truth,
And to after Ages in Oblivion's Grave,
May what I tell my Brother be forgotten;
I did pursue him with my eager wrongs;
But oh! He foiled my unexperienced youth,
And in the Combat overcame the Cause:
Since that cursed moment, I and my engines have
Raised him plagues, which he could never surmount,
And made Imperious Margaret his foe,
That furious Queen, whose anger knows no end:
Now he is confined to his own barren soil,
Hunted from Katharine's eyes, those kindly rays,
That warmed his passions even to ecstasy.

Glou. But now proud Margaret descends and courts
That Tudor, whom she has despised,
To assist her cause in this extremity.
In vain their weakened Forces can oppose
My Godlike Brother, whom Fate has doomed
Her Conqueror.

Edw. No doubt he obeys the summons, and comes on
To meet us there; in the heat of all the battle
Through the ranged troops my Sword shall point him out;
Yes; by my wrongs I swear, by all the Racks
Of disappointed Love, my abler Arm
Shall for the weakness of my Youth atone.
I Will hack his beauteous body, since even rage
And envy must allow his Person lovely.
Till doting Katharine shall not distinguish
His mangled Carcass from the meanest Slave's.

Glou. You speak with so much passion, that if daily
You did not quench your flames in dear variety,
I still should think you loved the Queen.

Edw. The sweets of Love are gone, my Friend, but still
The sting remains, the sting of her denial.
Oh! what a torment it is to know another
Enjoys that Bliss, for which I sighed in vain,
But Revenge is more lasting, fiercer far,
If not so pleasing as fond Boyish Love.

Glou. His approach brings the fair Queen
To this Castle, that lies between our Camps,
Suppose I glut the angry God within your
Breast, and find a way to kill this hated Tudor
In her arms.

Edw. 'Twou'd charm me more than to revel in them now.

Glou. Mind you the pleasures that your heart is fond of,
And leave this business to your faithful Brother.
Lord Dacres and Sir James Tyrell rule the Queen,
Dacres is honest, trusty, not to be moved
By bribes or prayers; Tyrell is mine, and so is
Malavill, Clarence's Favorite, nor shall the amorous Boy
Wed the beauteous Ward of Katharine, Isabella,
Half English, half French, I like not
The mixed breed.

Edw. That be thy labored care, for if he matches
In that abandoned Family; we lose a Brother.
Come to my arms, and let me swear, my Gloucester,
Thou shar'st the Heart and Crown of thy loved Edward.

Glou. I hope, great Sir, you will never repent the trust
You have imposed upon your ready Servant.

Edw. I thank thee, Gloucester, and I believe thee too,
Who waits on Fate, will find her Laws are just,
And patience will at length our wishes Crown
I could ask no more, than this
To mount the Throne of my ungrateful Fair
And dash her back that bitter Cup, despair.
[Exeunt.
Enter Malavill to Gloucester. Mala. My Lord, are you alone.

Glou. I am, and you are safe. Haste, dear Malavill.
Quick, inform me what
More of Importance since our last Conference
Has reached thy knowledge.

Mala. I am afraid, if discovered, I can
No longer serve your Grace.

Glou. Therefore be quick in your Narration!

Mala. Fair Isabella from the Castle meets
My Lord of Clarence in the adjoining Grove.
And there I Have learnt, he means to try
The utmost eloquence of Conquering Love,
To persuade his Mistress to fly the Kingdom.

Glou. Dear Malavill, observe my orders, you shall not want Gold
But at the meeting, let not a falling syllable
Escape thee, How stands, Sir James Thyrrold?

Mala. Fixed to our Cause, as fate, fonder far
Of Isabella than he is of Life; to Hell
He Would plunge to sink his Reval.

Glou. My Lord Dacres, will he leave the Queen;
Is Tudor's coming on confirmed?

Mala. All as you could wish: hark, a noise!
I dare not stay to tell you more.
(Exit.
Glou. Work on my brain, help every faculty;
And thou invention stretch, till thou have wound me
Into the bottom of my Brothers Councils:
Then give destruction power, a Crown alone
Can safely shrou'd those foul deformities.
Those glorious rays would dazzle mocking Gazers;
Then amongst the crowd no saucy Slave,
Would dare in whispers to pronounce me monstrous.
The Lady's too, caught with unbounded sway:
The Royal Purple to this uncouth trunk
Gives form, and vigor to this sapless Limb.
By Heaven, nature sent me
Here in spite to plague her upright Race.
'Twas her design! nor shall she lose her end,
A Real Foe, and deep dissembling Friend:
Near the Crown, but not near enough allied,
Tho Seas of Blood my Title do divide,
Cruel and bold I Will wade the Kindred tide.
Exit.
ACT the Second.
SCENE Ludlow Castle.
SCENE draws, discovers Queen Catharine seated: attended by the Lord Dacres,
Sir James Tyrell, etc. Ladies. She rises. Cat. Though Margaret, Daughter only of
a titled King;
Who for her Portion brought my wanting Henry,
What he wanted least, expensive Pride:
Tho, she I say, ranks me with her Foes,
Has taken pains to est range me from the breast,
And fatal Counsels of her ruined Husband!
Yet so dear I hold my Son, that to his aid,
I would not spare my Officers of State alone;
Alas! now they are few, succouring him,
My self I Will strip of each menial Servant;
But oh, my Lord, when I Reflect on your departure,
My nature by continual injuries made bold,
Shrinks back, and all my Courage fails me.

Dacres. The only merit I can plead, is my obedience,
The Creature of your Commands.

Cat. Wisely and well did thy Great Master choose,
Who dying left me to thy Guardian care;
So perfect has my Loyal Dacres proved,
That I dare read thy very thoughts, and pronounce
They never swerved one title from my Interest.
Even preferment, that Common bait, and Ruin of a Courtiers
Honesty, could never tempt thee from me, but now!
The sad hour's arrived, that calls thee forth:
Thy prudence and thy courage must out
To save a sinking King.

Dac. O, sacred relick of the first of Heroes!
For what was Alexander, but a Name
Compared with our Immortal Henry?
It Is true, the first ravaged over effeminate Persia
And a barbarous World; but my unequalled King
Conquered his numerous neighbors, Older much
Than He, and therefore thought more skilled in Arms:
Fenced Towns, nor Armed men could bar his fury,
Which like Groves, darkn'd the expanded plain;
Through treble numbers he forced his way to victory;
Doubly blessed, subdueing France, and being by you
Subdued: Yet in this full tide of Fortune mark,
The weakness of the best of humane frames,
Either the excess of sorrow, or of Joy,
Cracks the strings of life, and we moulder
Into our first nothing; when thousand pious hands
Were lifting up to Heaven for his safety,
Even then our mighty King expired.

Cat. Well have thou choos'd this melancholy theme,
It suits our parting, Noble Dacres, well.

Dac. By Heaven! I cannot mention that Great Man,
But the vast story dwells upon my tongue;
But now I thought to look a little backwards,
And tell my beauteous Queen the many ties,
That link me her faithful Slave: when lo!
At the name of Glorious Henry; my words
Flowed to Encomiums; and left my worthless self forgot.

Cat. It needs not, Sir, O, could I but reward,
As I remember all thy Services,
How would thou shine, bedecked with Royal Favors.
Now thy advice, and then farewell: do you think
The Garrison drawn off, and then my Guard removed,
I Am safe, not that I Am mentioned in the War;
But I would not be exposed to that power, that has
No Justice for its rule.

Dac. Madam, this Castle was built by Vortigern,
See but the Keys of the Avenues in
Trusty hands; Edward may wast his Army here,
E're give you any cause for a disturbance.
Sir James Thyrrold, to your charge I leave
My Queen; if thou should prove a Traitor, ah!
How came these words upon my tongue, without
A moments thought.

Tyr. Without a cause, you should have said, what have
I done to be mistrusted?

Cat. Thyrrold hold! it was his care for me;
If yours is equal, then you must excuse it.
Adieu, Commend me to Henry and the Queen,
Tell them my endeavors and my Prayers shall still
Attend them.

Dac. O thou forgiving Virtue! Everlasting Charmer!
Whose sight alone gave thy dying Lord
Transports too great for mortal life to bear.
Here let me six my parting duty, and
Eternal Blessings Crown thee.

Cat. Victory, great as thy faith and worth, be thine.
Go, and in my Closet lay the Books I read in last.
[Exit Dacres. Where Is now the crowded Court of Paris,
Rheims, or Windsor, when scarce a passage
Could be made for gazing Princes, and for
Kneeling Subjects; when illustrious Henry
Crowned the assembly, and supported me.
Yet I again was happy, my Virgin Love,
The very pride and boast of Nature, Tudor,
My Henry's Soul cast in purer mold;
He was mine, him have they robbed me of;
And I have nothing left at my command,
But these sad Eyes, which of themselves will flow.

Enter Isabella. Isa. [kneeling.] Angels protect the Queen, may I once prove
The happy Messenger, and stamp that Clouded
Heaven with smiles. From Tudor this?
[Gives a Letter.
Cat. See, Isabella, see; forgetting his repeated wrongs,
He flies, to the assistance of the ungrateful Margaret;
Am I to blame, now in the wrack of Fate,
When rolling Tempests bear my Glory's down?
Is it a fault, I say, to feel Loves alarm,
Busy at my heart, and dawning Joy
Break on me at his approach?

Isa. Is it a fault to love the Masterpiece of Heaven,
And wonder of the Earth? such Tudor is:
Then, Madam, to you, not the first of humane Race
Was ever half so faithful or so fond; were all
Mankind like him, believing, Virgins never
Could be ruined.

Cat. He is indeed a Husband, whose unbated passion,
The fiercest new made Lover never can equal;
Here he begs, that through that Secret Vault,
Which to the Castle Leads, known but to a trusted few,
He may in private see me. You, dear Isabella,
Have the Important Keys, take the Letter,
Observe the hour, and be careful.

Isa. Madam, I will.

Cat. Why do thou sigh, my Girl; you dare not make
Your Queen your Confident, yet I have found
The secret of your Soul.
Young Plantagent, whom they call Clarence now,
In our prosperous days, with my allowance, paid his vows to thee:
Love's soft, first Impression hangs about thy heart.
I read it in thy watery eyes? But, oh! I warn thee
Of that rebelling and most treacherous Race:
If thou regardest the safety of thy Queen,
Or thy own future Peace,
Throw from thy thoughts the faithless Fugitive.
I warn thee of him; and when you are warned, beware.
[Exit. Cat.
Isa. And when you are warned, beware.
It strikes upon my Soul, and echoes back,
Like the sad voice of Fate. I Will follow straight
The Queen, give her up the Keys, confess
The frailty of my Conquered heart;
And see the Lovely, Charming youth no more.
See him no more! what has my Clarence done
So to be punished? does he not droop
In midst of Laurels, Crowns, and Victories?
Or aims he at a Bliss without his Isabella?
Are not his Vows Registered in Heaven?
And every awful power called to witness?
Shall I then forsake him? No:
Be it my ruin, it has a face so pleasing,
I Will fly to plunge into it.
[Is going.
Enter Sir James Thyrrold. Sir J. [kneeling.] Turn, ah! too Lovely, Heavenly
maid! let not
Those eyes, that light the rest of the World
To Joy, dart only on me Confusion; behold
The humble Thyrrold at your feet; hear
The sad tale my Love inspires;
Oh can that sweet form, that looks all softness,
Contain a Savage heart.

Isa. Presuming Arrogance. Can no Commands
Impose on you eternal silence? yet I Am calm:
But if again you affront me with your saucy passion,
The Queen shall know it, who, no doubt, will
Protect a Maid committed to her Royal care,
From Insolence like thine.
[Exit.
Sir J. Eternal ruin seize the Queen and thee,
And all the Confounded Siren Sex; how many Hells
Within this Bosom reign? slighted Love,
Revenge, Rage, Spite, Envy and Ambition;
Sure the damned medley must at least produce
A perfect madness. Oh! that as my will
To mischief rises, so my power might;
That I could let the Furies loose, and ravage
All the World.
It Is Clarence holds her heart, but Gloucester will
Assist, and 'spite of all their fondness blast their
Loves, rather than they should meet.
Let ruin through the face of Nature range,
And all things suffer a Destructive Change;
When in that Chaos all mankind shall lie,
There'll not be found a wretch so cursed as I.
[Exit.
SCENE, A Grove.
Enter Clarence, and Malavill. Clar. With much a-do, I Have broke from faithful
Warwick,
Who pressed me hard to know my fatal sorrows.
This the hour, and this the place,
In which I met my Heavenly Isabella:
Let my ambitious Brothers waste their time,
In climbing up the Royal precipice;
Let Casuists argue the injustice of the War,
Whilst I retiring from the bustling Crowd,
Find my sure bliss in Isabella's eyes;
See! where the brightness darts thro'yonder shades;
So Cynthia looked, when in Lathmo's Cave
She nightly met Endymion. Oh no! My
Isabella's Beauty will surmount all poets Rapture.
Enter Isabella and her Woman. O thou balm of Comfort! Soul of sweetness!
Look on me, shoot thy Beams into my bosom,
Talk to me, Charm me into Ecstasie, for
Heaven is my Witness, I never think of Joys
But in thy Presence?

Isa. O Clarence! the gloomy Stars that rule our fates
Were never sure for Conjunction made;
Distant, alas! and wide they dart their angry Rays;
And seem to threaten everlasting separation.

Clar. At such a thought I Would curse them from their Spheres.
They now are kind, Oh! may my fair one prove so too.
Then this very night they light me on
To endless Worlds of bliss.

Isa. What means my Lord?

Clar. Have I been only flattered with what alone
My youth has gloried in; or may I trust
The trembling tender accents, that have whispered
Thy heart, thy precious heart was mine?

Isa. When first the Queen bid me look on you
As my destined Lord, I thought 'twas duty
Made me regard you, more than all mankind.
But ah! too soon I found that Godlike form,
And the respect you paid; which love alone produces,
Had gained the ascendant over my Virgin wishes.
If since my eyes have strayed, or any object
Brought to my thoughts, that offered to rebel
Against the awful power already there
May Heaven, which knows the secrets of my Soul,
Punish me with loss of you and Fame.

Clar. Bend, ye Celestial Quire; bend down with me,
And bless the Angel you have lent, for breathing
Words like these, that tune and charm my Soul.
By my hopes, were all the merits of our Race,
Cramn'd into one, he durst not plead desert,
A Beam of mercy, the least regard of pity,
Pays an Age of Services. Oh! how wretched am I?

Isa. Why, my dear Clarence! why does thy bosom heave
With sighs, as the great heart within were rending?
If I have any Charms, if I can please,
Is not all the kindness of my eyes addressed to thee?

Clar. Therefore, and only therefore do I curse
My Fate, that being blessed beyond what
The most Ambitious could have hoped for,
I yet have more, much more to ask.
Ever my Request is told! Oh Isabella,
Guess what is the Consequence; how it imports
My Life, these Agonies will sure express.
I who have stood pitched Battles without one
Shock of Nature, now feel Convulsive tremblings
Seize on every Nerve; nay, thus unmann'd,
Behold me weeping at your feet.

Isa. What can you who have so much Honor
Fear to ask; or I, who have so much Love,
Refuse to grant? My Lord, as your partial kindness
Has set me nearer to your heart, than all the fairest
Of your Sex, so would I approve my faith
Above the common rate,
To justify your choice; speak thou Conqueror,
Propose the way, be it to strip me of these shining
Ornaments, the Pride of Courts, and fly with thee
To Caves, to Huts, and unfrequented shades,
Most readily I will obey.

Clar. Ha! did thou say fly with me! By Heaven
It Is on that the weight of my Petition hangs.
Can you, dare you, will you be so good,
To trust this tender work of Heaven, this
Matchless softness, never exposed to ought less gentle,
Than the breeze from flowers? Dare you with me,
Venture tempestuous blasts, regardless Seas,
And all the hazards of Incommodious flight?

Isa. Yes! my dear Clarence; Love would make me bold,
Fill all my thoughts with thee, and dangers quite forgot,
When thou art never me; But oh! I have another tie,
Duty, Friendship, Gratitude plants me here.
The mourning Queen, whose adversity has shook off
Fawning crowds, must not be left by Isabella.

Clar. I Will not complain; or urge an Argument
Against that good and all-deserving Queen.
It Is true, big with my hopes, for what will not Love
Prompt blooming youth to hope, I had prepared
A vessel for our Transportation into France;
You, as a Branch of Burgundy, must needs
Have found a noble welcome in that Court;
And I, as Brother to great England's King
Could have made my own Conditions.

Isa. England's King, my Lord, is not your Brother.

Clar. Yes, faithful charming Maid, he is,
The People's hearts are his, the sickly Forces
Of falling Henry, tomorrows setting Sun
Intombs: yet I would fly from these flowing honors,
Which must adorn our Family, and gazing
Upon thee forget Ambition.

Isa. What do you ask? to what do I incline?
These may not be faithful, the way, the method,
All like Palaces in Fairy Land,
Impracticable, and only built on fancy.

Clar. If Love's your guide, the way is very easy,
The secret door, you now have passed, you may
As well command at twelve; there I will wait,
Like the far traveled Pilgrim, who knows no Peace
Of mind, till the opening Temple shows the Saint,
To whom his vows and oraisons are paid.

Isa. Alas! I dare not tread those lonely paths,
Through hollow Vaults and most horrid Windings,
And at that dreadful hour of Midnight;

Clar. Give Malavill the outer Key, and we
Will meet you in the upper Court, nay, fear
Not, dearest, I know him well, born and bred
Amongst us, tried and faithful as a Brother.

Isa. Yet Brothers may be false! O my divided Soul,
Can I leave the dear indulgent Queen;
O draw me, Heaven, through this Labyrinth!
For Love and Friendship pull me several ways,
Like Cords upon the Rack; which ever way I yield,
No ease is granted to my troubled mind.

Clar. Return! my soft beloved, Oh return!
Hush thy anxious thoughts a sleep, and think
Of me no more? Edward is indeed inveterate;
And which way ever Victory inclines, we meet no more.
Lead me, O Malavill! Lead me to the Battle.
Fix me in the front, against the ablest Archers fix me;
And let a thousand, thousand darts at once
Pierce this fond heart, which pants in vain for Isabella.
[Sinks on Malavill.
Isa. Oh! my dear Lord! I Am not worthy half this passion,
My Fear is vanished, and my Love is strong.
Command me any thing, I will not raise
Another doubt.

Clar. Oh! thou all goodness! dearest, sweetest Creature!
Once does wretched Clarence hold thee fast.

Isa. Say, direct me how I shall proceed, for I will come.

Clar. Will Not thou indeed?
O! Charming Excellence; oh! all perfection,
The blood that guards my heart leaps to my cheeks,
Fires my eyes, which almost start with passion;
And each crowding word to express my Joys,
Grows thick upon my Tongue.

Isa. Talk not so wildly, but instruct me in my flight?

Clar. My life; give to Malavill the Key of that door, through which you past.

Isa. I cannot yet, for that way Tudor enters to the Queen,
Let him two hours hence beneath you Eastern Tower
Wait, and I will give it him: what ails me
Clarence? Why do I tremble so?

Clar. Oh! it is thy tender gentle nature, which frights
Thy little frame, and makes thee shrink at what
Thy love has promised; yet Isabella,
By all my hopes, by the blessed Saints,
It Clarence lives, you shall not repent your kindness.
Blast me with Lightning from yon Azure roof,
Rivet me with sure fulfilling bolts, if time
In all its Course
Past or to Come, can ought more faithful see.

Isa. Or any Maid, who loves, and dares, like me.
[Exeunt severally.
SCENE the Camp.
Enter King Edward, meeting Gloucester. Ed. What news, my careful Gloucester?

Glou. Victory still attends the King; the very Scouts and Forragers
Return, being flushed and redned with Success.

Edw. These are all steps to fix us on the Throne;
But still the Root of Lancaster, and Branches too,
Must be removed, least building over them
We totter, and Clarence be ours or lost.

Glou. Lost in death e're ruin us. Daring like yours
In not proceeding does backward go;
Fair Isabella consents to Clarence's Follies,
And e're morning hopes to escape.

Edw. That must be prevented.

Glou. It shall, the Hammer's lifted here, and when
It strikes, the work is finished. The night
Under her Sable Wings shall hatch such deeds,
Will fright the blushing dawn: Suppose Ludlow Castle yours,
The Queen, on a pretext, that shall seem just,
Removed, Tudor slain, either on his March, or else
Within the Walls.

Edw. Attempt both; they who would succeed, must leave
The least to Chance, and catch at every opportunity.

Glou. This way Clarence moves, as Malavill informs me,
Here I will stay and meet the fiery youth,
Dash all his quiet with the Fiend Jealousy,
Which Weed, Planted by a cunning hand,
Will quickly grow in the warm soil of his
Fierce passion, and even overshoot the love,
Which he so long has cherished.

Edw. Use him, dear Gloucester as his Folly has Deserved.

Glou. What Paper's that?

Edw. A Letter from the forsaken Eleonora.

Glou. Leave it with me: I have a sudden
Thought it may be useful.

Edw. Take it: thou art a perfect Chemist
In extracting ruin. I dare trust all
To thy management.
(Exit.
Glou. Here comes Natures other Favorite;
Enter Clarence. 'Twas base, 'twas barbarous! the choicest
Beauty of the Nation rifled, and then despised.
(Looking upon the Letter.
Clar. What means my Brother?

Glou. Your Pardon, Duke of Clarence, I saw you not,
Here Is a melancholy complaint
From the wretched Elenora.

Clar. Her fate is hard, and much my temper
Differs from the King's.

Glou. That Sacred name raises him above
Our Reprehension, though not to him, of him
Who can forbear to speak, that has a Soul
In which true honor has a Residence
Has he not, like the wanton Summer fly,
Blown upon and tainted all our Beauties?
Is there a Maid of Quality or Fortune,
Whom he has not attempted, or at least
Married to some Favorite fawning Minion;
While we the branches too of mighty York,
Only are neglected?

Clar. The Ladys Case transports you; were I disposed
To marry, the King should not choose for me.

Glou. My Lord, no choice is left, is there in all the Court,
One of an unfullied fame, whose Beauty, or
Whose Quality is fit for Princes Arms?

Clar. I Will not dispute the matter, but I think there are.

Glou. There are! you speak as if they abounded,
Name me but one, and I Will recant in Veneration
To such a rarity; forgive the rest, and touch
Their fames no more.

Clar. What think you then of beauteous Isabella?
The studied Workmanship and hand of Heaven,
Nothing can transcend her Divine person,
But the unspotted Soul, that dwells within.

Glou. What Isabella, Queen Catharine's Ward,
Thyrrold's Isabella, is it she you thus extravagantly Describe.

Clar. How Gloucester! now I have found thee subtle
In malice, all the workings of thy brain
Are like the dismal Policies of Hell;
Which still produce a mischief.
But do not mention her again!
I charge thee do not: For by the sacred blood
That fills her veins, the blood of Bedford and of Burgundy
Both Royal Stems, you shall not dare?

Glou. Not dare, Prince?

Clar. No, not dare. Lay all your plots on me;
Cover me all over with detraction, as with a Leprosy,
But touch not Isabella; I will bear it.

Glou. Go on, my Brother, and when your passion's over,
Too late consider, if I Have deserved this usage.

Clar. What have I done! how came her name in Question?
Oh! Gloucester, Gloucester! thou art deep and cunning,
I but a shallow stream, and as I stand between,
Shall be surely forded over;
Edward and Gloucester both may take my life,
But of my Love, there is neither shall deprive me.

Glou. I knew not Isabella grew so near you.
'Twas common Fame occasioned what I said,
That as the Queen, descended to Love Tudor,
So Isabella had made Thyrrold hers.
Rumor's the Child of Error, if I Have caught
A Falsehood, why should that create a Quarrel.

Clar. A Quarrel, there is none. The King and you
Possess the glories you atchieve in War,
My happiness lies in another Sphere. Farewell.
[Exit.
Glou. Happiness is a Rosy path you never shall tread;
The Hornet, I have thrown into your bosom,
It buzzes now: But it shall sting anon.
Dissimulation, thou art mine;
My rage, was high as his, and spite much more: but dear dissimulation
Covered all the fury of my Soul, and it shall be vented the safest way.

Enter Malavill. Mal. I met the Duke, my master; methought his
Looks were full of discontent.
[Drum beats.
Glou. I gave it him; hark, a distant Drum is the signal
I ordered at the approach of Tudor: what, ho! Captain,
Enter Captain. Is the detachment ready?

Capt. My Lord, it is.

Glou. Lead them toward the Castle, there as I told you you will
Meet with Tudor, when you encounter him, if his force,
Is stronger than you expected, urge not too far, at night
I shall use you, and those that you command.

Capt. With utmost care your orders shall be obeyed.
[Exit.
Glou. Will Sir James Thyrrold come to the
Appointed place?

Mala. He will, and is impatient till he
Knows your Grace's pleasure.

Glou. Clarence is even to rashness brave, that
Will make forget the nicer forms of
Different Quality; after our Conference,
See me again, if your Lord calls and seems uneasy,
Cast forth doubtful Words; if Jealousy
Appears, feed it with oil. I Have
Told the King thy merits of thy Intelligence
And Honor waits to Crown thy Service.

Mala. Thanks, noble Sir, your long tasted Bounty
Secures me still your Slave, I Will to my Lord,
And watch his every motion.
[Exit Mala.
Glou. Go thy ways, Traitor, that is thy proper name,
Oh! there is a vile Ingredient in our frames;
This Man my Brother Clarence never did injure,
But signalized him with marks of Friendship
Above the rest, who did attend him. Yet,
For a little Gold with eagerness he
Seeks his ruin, an itching Palm destroys his Faith,
Ambition conquers mine:
Interest tempts all, and where she tempts, succeeds.
My great designs, why should I blush to own,
There Is no Temptation greater than a Crown.

The End of the second Act.
ACT III.
SCENE Ludlow Castle.
Enter Tudor and a Colonel. Tud. Cousin, how are ye?

Col. Right well, my noble Friend.

Tud. I did not here expect an Engagement.

Col. You fought as if you did, your Courage
And your Conduct both were shown; they
That gave the Onset first, most shamefully Retreated.

Tud. Colonel, lead your Forces to the Camp of Henry
Or Margaret, I know not which to call it
Before the mornings dawn I will be there.

Col. Oh Tudor, thou noblest of mankind,
Remember ever I speak that your Commands
I never disobeyed.

Tud. Nor ever will, I hope, my Soldier and my Friend*

Col. No, though by this Ambush laid and your rash
Resolve of seeing the Queen alone, I read,
Oh dismal thought! your death.

Tud. Be it so, draw off your Forces, I had rather
See the Queen though my life's the forfeit, than
Be Edward or Henry or any happier King
That you can think of. If you outlive me,
Report me as a Man that Catharine smiled on;
Let some kind Pen transmit the glory to
Posterity, and I shall hold my death a prize too small for such a stock
Of fame if you Love me, answer not, nor offer to dissuade
Me, but observe my orders,
[Exit. Col. bowing. This is the path; Oh Angel Guardian be thou
Near, and lead me to my heaven.
(Exit.
Enter Queen Catharine. Cat. I hear the doors unbar; shall I not go to
Meet him; he comes, oh trembling heart
Think of thy Woes and let thy pantings now be still.

Enter Tudor and Isabella. Tud. (kneels.) My Queen?

Cat. My Love, my Husband, rise my dearest Lord.

Tud. Do I behold thy face again. Oh taste of joys
Unatterabl? Oh Banquet beyond the power of sense to bear!
Nor must I murmurnow,
If the hard conditions wherewith,
Seemed to article with providence is now fullfill'd.
For Heaven knows how often I have
Wished to see thy face, and die.

Cat. Avert it Heaven; yet we meet indeed 'midst
Wars and Tumults; Camps on either side;
Frightfull Scenes for Love.

Tud. All, all, is the milky way, when thou art near*
Oh should I but repeat the miseries I have
Endured, since banished from those fair
Eyes, you sure would pity me.

Cat. What have thou suffered? thou dear
Innocence? Persued

Tud. Upon the Barren summit of a Prodigious
Mountain whose height seemed to brave a second
Flood, I passed my tedious hours,
Stretching my longing Eyes toward the abode
Of my fair Queen, and Courting the fierce winds
That way to bear my sighs, sometimes farther urged
By my despair upon the extremest verge of ragged
Cliffts that over look the deep, I Would throw my
Wretched weight like one destracted, tell the
Ever beating Waves my Grief, and fill the ambient
Air with your dear name.
If thunder grumbl'd over my head
Or Earthquakes shook the frame beneath,
By me the Warring Element was unobserved;
My Love, my Joy, my Peace of mind was lost.
My Queen was absent, and therefore I forsook
All Comfort.

Cat. Beds of Down and gilded roofs were a like,
Uneasy, and without thee, food for desperation:
And now it is but a kind of doubtful day,
Which only glimmers, and then will part
Us with eternal night.

Tud. Be that night eternal, no morrow grant.
At least this night is ours.

Cat. Flatter not thy self with hopes now, there is
Nothing ours; yet you may remember; nay you must,
It has been otherwise, Henry the First and Noblest
Candidate for fame, once was yours and mine,
My Lover, and your Royal Friend, ye^ you have
Seen me Crowned the Queen of Nations,
Beheld my evening Pomp and morning Waiters,
For you were still the earliest of the Crowd;
At awful distance watched the motions of my eyes,
And trembled when you met a glance,
Henry knew the Holy Fire, that warmed your breast,
Yet so well he knew both you and me,
That he never frowned on either:
But encouraged the Chaste Friendship,
Which when Heaven angry with this lower World
Snatched hence its great protector grew to Love:

Tud. Blessed Hero! whom future Ages or their best
Of future Kings can only hope to faintly Copy,
Whom when I ever name without Just Veneration,
May Cankers gnaw my ungrateful Tongue;
Yet Friendship shall not rob my Love.
No mighty Queen the first minute these though,
Then hopeless eyes, viewed that unimitable frame,
They d^ew in Love, witness their divided lids
Still stretch^d with endless wakings witness the
Unbated sorrows; the returning years still found
Me (...) witness ten thousand racks.
But why look I backwards, when I can call
The Heaven mine for which I served?
Yes, it is permitted, that I may approach.
My Arms have ^icence to Circle thee, and snatch
Thee to my heart, and hold a place in thine,
A glory which I Would not exchange to be
The greatest titl'd Slave the busy Globe contains.

Cat. Oh Tudor, Tudor, sure thy Mothers blessings,
And her beauty, and her softness, hangs about thee,
The rest of humane Race all seem rugged,
Thou only art the Child of Love, the pattern
Made for Poets to form their Hero's by.

Tud. The kindness of these Words, nothing but
Ecstatick bliss, nothing but Joys this night
Will bring, can raise me higher,

Cat. My fears distract me, you are a Foe
Proclaimed, should there be Information
Given, Courts have many spies, the Castle
Is unguarded, let not thy valiant Soul and
Over eager Love, tempt thee to so imminent
A danger; though yet thy Arm well used to Conquest,
Prompts thee on, think, alas, my Tudor,
Multitudes overcome the bravest Sword.

Tud. Sha^ apprehension, the Cowards check, fright
Me, from my fair Level not a Man who has
Aspired and possessed the greatest Queen on
Earth, so low in your esteem, that imaginary
Fears, should tear me hence, the Niggard
Heavens allow us but the present hours, the
Future still are left to doubtful Fate. Oh!
Lovely Catharine, if I read in thy looks some
Beamy signs of Joy, as sure I can, for I
Understand 'em well, bless me with kindness,
Talk no more of danger, let us dream at
Least this Castle's safety ours; indulge the
Pleasing ecstasie, nor wake, till we are
Forced to wake.

Cat. She that can love and can deny must not
Have a heart like mine.

Isa. Oh!

Tud. Blessed sound!

Cat. My Isabella I heard the sad murmur of a
Stifled sigh, my ear catched the broken
Sadness. Tudor, behold your fair guide as the
Dearest object of my Friendship; nay she
Almost Rivals you. The kindest maid, the
Truest creature, Companion in all my solitudes,
Forsaking the allurements the tempting
Pleasures which her charming youth and
Vast fortunes might have commanded, still
Has she followed my retirement: and with
Her Innocence and Goodness cheated me.

Tud. For such a faithful care, may
That power to whom we pray, reward her
Equal to my wish, continue still that beauteous
Loveliness, Crown her with happiness lasting
As her self can wish.

Isa. My Noble Lord, cover me not
With blushes? Why, Royal Madam,
Did ye speak those
Balmy words, they wound my heart, your kindness
Like descending Angels on the impure,
Strikes me with death.

Tud. What means the Charmer?

Cat. My Lord, she is sick of our disease, in love,
And now by my commands I hope is
Struggling with her yielding heart, within
I Will tell ye all the unhappy Circumstances.

Tud. Peace to her mind, and may she ever
Vanquish all that would disturb her, my
Queen are the tender pledges of our love,
The beauteous little ones for beauteous they
Are, cause Images of thee, are they here.

Cat. My Cherubs, my Comforts, could they be from
Me never, I Will lead you to 'em, dear
Isabella, give Thyrrold strict charge to be
Careful in his watch, then attend me in the
Bedchamber.

Tud. Give me thy hand.
And as this touch does all my racks remove,
So may thy fears, and think of naught but Love.
(Exit Queen led by Tud.
Isa. What must I think on? doubting, and the
Dreadful expectation of what is to come,
Are terrors that create despair, and such a
State is mine. Oh fairest, best of Queens!
Can you not find in my disordered looks,
The tumults of my Soul, and Chain me
Near ye?

Enter her Woman. Wom. Madam, Malavill waits without.

Isa. Let him wait a little longer, my Esperanza,
What have we promised, do thou not fear?

Wom. For you alone, I alas, am worthless!

Isa, Oh happy! happy thou. If you consented to
Some honest mate and fled, no Court would
Be alarmed, no Pursuers, no life be lost.
Where shall I unbosom my full heart, what
Kind adviser help my youth, I have no friend,
I never had but one, the unequalled Queen,
And she I am flying from.

Wom. To meet a Faithful Friend, a Noble Husband.

Isa. So I hope, but oh I dare not look with reason's
Eye into this mad attempt; love hurries me
Along, and love they say is a blind guide; if
Margaret, if Catharine, or if Edward seize us,
Away, I will not thing so deeply, fasten that
Door, least from the Castle we are surprised,
And call Malavill in.
[Exit Wom. Now it is better in my tormented breast, the
Scene is changed, and Clarence stands in my
Minds view, all faithful, lovely, and beloved. Oh,
Haste thee to my Royal Youth, and chase these
Melancholy fears away.

Re-enter her Woman with Malavill. Mala. My Lord watches the minutes with an
impatient
Lovers haste, numbers 'em with his sighs, till the
Blessed one arrives, till I return and more confirm
His expected Joys.

Isa. Malavill, it is a dangerous path we tread, and much
Precaution must be used, if amongst those few,
Your master trusts but one, should prove a Traitor
Inevitable ruin seizes all.

Mala. I dare affirm the care the Duke has took in what
So nearly does concern him, equals his Love, which nothing
Can exceed, the rest are managed well, I only know
The bottom of the design, and should I
Be thought unfaithful, I soon would give a fatal
Proof of my Fidelity, and die at hearing I was
Once mistrusted.

Isa. No, be assured thou art not, if thou were by
Isabella, I Would stand the lash of Furies* have
Uninvented torments practiced on this tender
Body, excelling all the old, ever groan the secret
Out this night. On Dacres absence I know the Queen
Will walk her self the rounds, see every door and
Brazen gate fast barred and locked, and every Key
Brought to the Royal Chamber, this only passage
Left to trusted me, and therefore unexamined shall
I then dare? Oh horror, every limb and every
Trembling vein forbids it.

Mal. What, not for the Duke of Clarence, not for him
Who would rush through thousand pointed Swords
For you.

Isa. Take it, take the important Key. The Queens own words --
But fly this moment, fly, be gone I say, least I
Repent and yield no more.

Mala. With all my heart. (Aside.) At twelve?

Isa. I will.
[Exit Ma. Hear thou All-seeing eye of Providence, listen to (kneeling.
A distressed Virgins Prayer, if ought that is ill insues
For much my heart forbodes; as mine the guilt, be mine the punishment.
If there must be wrath, heap it all on me,
But let the guiltless Queen be safe and free.
[Exeunt.
SCENE, the Camp.
Enter Duke of Clarence, followed by the Earl of Warwick. Warw. Hold, Duke of
Clarence stop, thus have I
Followed thee heyond our utmost Guards,
Thus beheld thee, observed thy folded arms,
And down cast eyes, thy silent steps I Have traced,
Which seemed to measure out thy graves
Length, so sad they were come, dear youth,
Lean upon my bosom and tell thy griefs, if thou
Art wronged, Warwick stands forth to do thee
Justice, I serve the King thy Brother Edward,
But dare Proclaim before his face I love thee More.

Clar. Burden me not with kindness. To noble natures
It Is the hardest task, favors receiving without
Hopes of a return. Edward and Gloucester, the darlings
Both of Fate; to them apply and court not him,
Who shuns the World.

War. Do thou push me from thee, young Prince;
Boy, I was a going to have said, you will repent
It; there is something labors in thy brain
Remember you were offered Warwick's aid, which
You despised, Farewell.
(Exit War.
Clar. He Is gone, and I dare not call him back or tell
My weakness; he never will consent, his Souls wound
Up to steady Glory, past the Convulsive fit of
Loves dear Calenture, what he terms sadness
Is the expected Joy which fills my Soul with transports.
My thoughts are full of thee, dear Isabella,
And my eyes disdain to view an object that may
Divert the pleasing Image, where art thou?
Malavill, lazy Ambassador for Love, have to bring
Me the glad tidings all goes well.

Enter a Page. Page Sir, Sir?

Clar. What Is the matter, boy?

Page A grim looked fellow, gave me this, and charged
Me instantly to seek ye, nor would he leave me
Till he saw I Would found your Grace. I knew my
Gallant Master would have been angry, if I
Had trembled else indeed he frighted me.

Clar. Poor innocence! ha, lift up thy Torch sure the
Moon gives me a sickly light and make me,
Read a miss.
[Reads.] Duke of Clarence,
YOur Family is given to invade another's right. You a younger branch, follow
the Example: Witness, your designs on Isabella, my plighted Wife. (Ha, my blood
runs cold, but I will yet proceed) Since you have chose the Murderers hour, as
that perjured false one has confessed, be that the place and time, if you dare
to meet the

Injured Thyrrold.


If I dare, where am I, can this be true, or is it all
A plot too deep for me to fathom; Isabella false, I Will
Not believe it, sure it is all delusion.
Enter Malavill. Oh, art thou come, let me rush upon thee, as I
Would seize my Love, thou art arrived the very
Minute when I was plunging down I know not where,
You must awake me from a dreadful dream,
For sure it is no more?

Mal. My Lord!

Clar. Shrink not from my embrace, nor turn thy eyes
Away, I cannot bear another apprehension if thou
Bringst not comfort. Hell, all hell is here.

Mal. What should I say?

Clar. Why, have thou nothing then to say, did I not Send thee?

Mal. You did, my Lord.

Clar. Why are thy answers cold and looks distracted?
Did I not send thee to Isabella, for the Confirmation
Of her promise, and the Key?

Mal. You did, but oh!

Clar. What? speak I charge thee, speak.

Mal. After long waiting and repeated signs, the
Necessary thing her Woman appeared, and with
A scornful smile, said we were all defeated:
Sir James Thyrrold had discovered our design, and
Isabella in a careless tone, she added, was concerned,
But advised your Grace to think of her no more.

Clar. By hell it is false, she is betrayed as well as I,
Her Soul is written in her looks, and does not
Know deceit.

Mal. Take my life, if you suspect me, go the
Appointed place I Will wait upon you,
Affronted and vexed like you.

Clar. Forgive me, dear Malavill, what, no Key?
No word from her.

Mal. None, as I hope for everlasting happiness.

Clar. Then she is -- hold my breath shall not proclaim
Her, nor will I curse her, nor wish her half,
The racks that she has given me; follow to
My Tent, I have yet an Assignation left, which
Shall be this night in Blood performed: Oh Isabella,
Who would have thought, when Heaven had took
Such pains, without Hell had been employed
So deep within.
Fool! fool, too soon believing, I Am undone
Nor has the Trayt'ress by deceiving won.
For whom soever, false Saint, bows to thee,
There Is not a Worshiper will dote like me.
[Exit.
Enter Duke of Gloucester. Glou. Ha, ha, ha, this will do him good; whet his
Spleen, and make a perfect Soldier of him. Had
The Man been married, he had been spoiled.

Mal. Your Grace is pleased, but should my Lord and
Isabella meet, or the King incline to the match;
I of necessity must be crushed as an atonement,
For the reconciliation.

Glou. Hitherto thou have acted well, doubting will
Undo thee. No, Clarence and Isabella meet no more
Like Lovers, on the word of Gloucester, be directed,
And search no further, tread the way that I show
Thee, which shall lead to thy advancement.

Mal. Too far I Have ventured now to think of a return.

Glou. Where Is the Key that to the Castle gives the Wished admittance?

Mal. There it is: had you but seen with what fear,
What trembling 'twas given, heard the prayers
The piercing words, the frighted Virgin used,
'Twou'd sure have shocked ye.

Glou. No, I should have laughed at the deluded Maid.
Does your Master wear to day the Sword I gave you?

Mal. My Lord, you know he does?

Glou. It Is well that Sword is tempered, as I would ever
Wish my foes, for at the first meeting Clash
It breaks, six of my Volunteers will seize
Him; men not unused to practices like those.
In vain he will call himself Clarence, in vain
Endeavor to convince 'em for they are
Well prepared, and without my orders, will not
Release him. When this is done, leave you the
Duke, the King shall both protect and reward you.

Mal. As my diligence shall merit, I ask no more.
[Exit Mal.
Glou. Thy merit's death, and thou shall find it, fool;
Thy sting, thy venoms gone, thou have done
Thy best. And the Volunteers
That seize the Prince, have orders to stop
Thy craving mouth.
Clarence too soon will know thee,
Now therefore thou art useless:

Enter at rising Ground King Edward. Edw. Speak, Gloucester, shall haughty
Catharine Mourn this Night.

Glou. She shall, if Tudor's blood can make
Her weep. Here Is the Key, wait the
Signal, and prepare to glut your Eyes.

Edw. Oh let me hug thee close; I feel a
Warm Vengeance rise, and joys fierce
As is fruition, fill the big heart, which
That ungrateful fair despised. It Is grown
A Rambler now, and can be pleased*
On easier terms than dying.
Yet I will see again those Charming eyes,
But all their tears and menaces despise,
And laugh at Catharine, when her Tudor dies.
[Exeunt.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT the Fourth.
SCENE the Castle.
Enter Duke of Clarence, and Malavill. Clar. HEre did I expect -- oh what did I
not expect
Even all the happiness my heart is fond off*
Cruel disappointment; yet it is but just;
When man gives up his Noble Charter, his Reason,
And is passions Slave, he should be used so:
Oh, Malavill, could thou believe such falshhood
Were in Womankind,

Mal. Most easily, my Lord, it is the common practice,
Had she proved true, that had been the wonder.

Clar. Is It possible.
Isabella was my first and only Love*
Pure were my flames, and my desires unfeigned
Her returns I thought full of artless innocence,
When in her Charming eyes I first read kindness,
If I caught a dear relenting glance,
How modestly she would decline 'em;
Her lovely face covered with Virmilion blushes:
Nay, the tears would follow. Could this all be deceit?
Could she weep and vow and look, such things --
And yet dissemble still.

Mal. It Is natural to the Sex.

Clar. And is that dear false hand given to Thyrrold?
His plighted Wife! Racks, Wheels, and Gibbets,
Sword and fire, can their torments equal
That cursed thought; yet when I reflect on this
Unexampled Treachery, methinks it is strange
The story most improbable, it is but some few hours
A go that fair one gave me all the tendrest
Marks of love and kindest promises; what could
Tempt her to draw me on so far?

Mal. I like not this.
[Aside.
Clar. But then how should Thyrrold know of our
Intended flight, unless thou have proved
The smooth faced Villain, and betrayed me.

Mal. If you mistrust me, use your Sword,
Wound me not with your unkind suspicions:
Tardy Duke of Gloucester, I shall be ruined.
[Aside.
Clar. I know not what to think, but should I find
Thou have wronged me in the tendrest part,
The blessing of my Life, my Love, my Isabella,
I cannot name her but my heart will rise:
Oh, cruel Charmer think not to 'scape my Vengeance,
For though the King should Guard thee, through
His heart I Would reach at thine, seize thee
Like a loosened Fury, and shake thee into Atoms.

Thyrrold above. Thyr. What mad man's this, that raves beneath our Walls.

Clar. Traitor, come down and see.

Thyr. I would, but for commands which I have sworn to obey.

Clar. What commands shifting Coward?

Thyr. Fair Isabella has hung about my neck,
Used such prevailing arts of fondness,
Begged with such a grace, and so much power,
That I have forgiven both her and you.

Clar. Ye raging Fires, eat, eat my heart; burn inwards,
But burst not forth, I wo'not answer like a Woman,
With my Tongue alone, but Thyrrold, he assured
I shall find thee: yes, had thou Giants
For thy Guard, were thou hemmed with Devils
I Would Grapple with thee, and sink thee too:
Remember that, and tremble.

Thyr. If I tremble it must be with delight,
To Isabella's Bed I am going, the Priest
Has made us one, there the soft, the melter,
The expecting fair one lies, think you on that,
And mangle thy own flesh.
In distraction thy wretched bosom tear,
Reflect upon my joys, and then despair.
[Exit Thyrrold.
Clar. Curses, curses! Oh Malavill, in thy bosom
Hide me, for if I look that way my eyes will burst.

Enter three or four Villains. 1 Vill. Yonder he stands, we may seize his Sword
Ever he perceive us.
[Snatches his Sword from him.
Clar. Villains what mean ye?
Malavill, give me thy Sword, and get behind me.

Mal. No, I Will defend your life.

1 Vill. Fool, thou can not save thy own.
(stabs him, he falls.
Mal. Oh pardon me noble Sir you are betrayed and so
Am I, the Lady Isabella is --
[dies.
Clar. What, go on, speak but that word, that syllable either
False or True, and I Will forgive thee all; it is lost in death.

1 Vill. You must with us.

Clar. Slaves, do you know to whom you speak?

1 Vill. Our orders are to force you, if you resist.

Clar. Unhand me, Dogs, I am the Duke of Clarence.

1 Vill. No matter who you are, you are our Prisoner now.

Clar. Slaves, Villains, Murderers.
[Exit forced off.
SCENE the inside of the Castle. A Toylet.
Enter Isabella, and Esperanza. Isa. Methinks I tread these Royal Rooms, as
bodies
Summoned to the Grave, take their last melancholy
Rounds, and sadly traverse over and over the places that
They best have loved; Oh love are all that bend beneath
Thy weight, oppressed like me? no, it is impossible.
Then humane kind would throw thy bondage off,
But alas, thy crowds of Votaries are Rovers all,
Play with desire, caught at the eyes, and changed
Without a pang; it is not, my Clarence, so with us,
The link of Souls has fixed our meeting Passions,
I hope beyond the power of Fate to break;
By yon lifted tapers Show the Queen is coming,
Be gone, my Esperanza, get our disguises ready,
And wait me at the outer Court.

Esper. Madam, I will.

Isa. See where they come, Tudor and the Queen,
Arm in arm they walk; Love takes up
[Exit Es. Every thought and every wish:
Nor could those Majestic eyes of Catharine
Express more pleasure, more satisfaction,
When she beheld a Thousand ready slaves,
Who watched each motion and fled to execute
Ever she could speak her will; this proves
Possessing the dear object that is beloved,
Superior to ambition, a sublimer Joy,
And Clarence, shall not thou and I, be thus happy?
Yes, if in France they give us but an humble
Vineyard joined with a lovely Cottage, there will not
Thou meet me with such desiring eyes, there
Shall I forget the bustle of the great, and in thy
Faithful arms taste balmy slumbers, which the
Busy Statesman, and the fair false one
Never knows.
Enter Queen Catharine, Owen Tudor in a Nightgown, Ladies of Honor. She
comes! Oh let me gaze eagerly, as the
Transported Tudor, for Heaven only knows, when I
Shall behold that dear, that lovely form again.

Tud. Haste, ye officious Virgins! haste
Off with all these useless shining Ornaments, give her to
My longings: Oh, fairest Catharine, leave to thy
Wanton Sex the care of dress, let them use Art
And Skill, labor hard to make a little Conquest.
Thy eyes will do the work alone, the Indian sweets,
And Aromatic Gums be theirs, thy rosy breath,
Out vie's 'em all.

Cat. Oh, how long is it since my ears have drank such
Accents, I cannot chide thy flatteries, cause it is
Loves excess? A Chair their for my Lord.
(Sits down.
Tud. No, here at thy feet, grasping thy knees a happiness
For which I Have courted every Power, which day and
Night has heard me beg of thee; at length
Relenting Heavens --

Cat. Does Heaven relent, my Tudor! Oh no, that
Hope's too full of blessings; if Heaven were reconciled,
Then we should meet to part no more.

Tud. Why have ye damped my rising Joys with the
Detested thought of parting; ye all righteous
Powers, if we must part again, if my fond Eyes
Must be snatched from what they dote on, and
Condemned to view objects which they hate,
Grant, grant this milder doom, close 'em in the night
Of death, least returning back to my despair, I
Curse that Providence I would revere.

Cat. Hard Fate of greatness, as if it were the Foe
And opposite to love, rarely descends, but brings a train
Of mischiefs.

Tud. Yet, it is a glorious ruin thus to hover over my
Queen, to breath my Vows upon her Sacred bosom,
Though this breath were now my last, is happier far
Than to have lived a long insipid Age with some
Ignoble Fair One: taste of such Seraphick bliss; is
Worth the exchange of Nestor's years.

Cat. This is too much, my Tador, that soft maid just in the bloom
Of Beauty might excuse a Lover's talking so, I
Must not hear extravagance like this.

Isa. aside.] The dreadful hour approaches, uninterrupted time
Has measured half its minutes and oh my Coward
Heart beats faster than the warning Clocks.

Tud. Ye all are triflers,
And not consider the impaciency of my desires, nor the
Cruel Fate, which bounds my wishes and will bring my
Foe the morning ever I have whispered half the story
Of my Love.

Cat. Fie, my Lord, my Isabella help me here! ha thy
Hands are cold upon me, thou tremblest too, see*
Tudor, see, my beauteous charge looks pale?
Speak! what ails my choicest care.

Isa. Something cold and shuddering, like what
We apprehend of death has seized me, permit
Me, Madam, to retire, I shall soon recover, but if I
Do not, if I die or ought that is worse befall,
Upon my knees I beg a kind remembrace.

Cat. Alas, she is much disordered, lead her in; with richest
Cordials revive her sinking spirits, and bring me
Instant word.

Isa. Oh love! oh fate! Oh Queen beloved; which shall I
Follow? direct me, Heaven.
[Exit Isa. led off.
Cat. Her words disjoynted are, yet sure there is meaning in 'em.

Tud. No more, my Queen, than what the story
Of her love allows.

Cat. Forgive my superstition, if I say I think it ominous;
My Isabella sickens when my Joys are fullest in
Seeing you again.

Tud. I have all my heart can wish, without a further
Thought. My Heaven is here.

Cat. Ha! methinks I see a bloody hand that parts
Our meeting arms; it points toward thee, and seems to
Rain a shower of blood upon us. Turn toward me,
Thou fatal Fantom; on this devoted head, let the
Dreadful omen fall, but spare! oh spare my Tudor!

Tud. My Queen, my Love, my Life, do with me what you will,
From the highest Turret hurl me down: stab your
Adorer, rather than let me hear you talk as if
Deprived of reason.

Cat. Did you not see nothing then! Oh what was it! of what,
Was the sad Idea made! that got between my eyes and your
Loved form?

Tud. Hide thy fears within these faithful arms, which long to
Clasp thee; turn thy bright eyes into my heart:
Oh! that you could, there, would you behold your own
Loved Image, sitting Triumphant over every thought,
And ruler of each wish.

Cat. Still do I tremble and feel a terror over my spirits, to which
I cannot give a name. Prithee do not Judge unkindly
Of my weakness.

Tud. No, I must bless your tender care, but sure were your
Breast as full of Love as mine, there could not be a
Room for any other passion.

Enter Esperanza. Esp. Murder! murder! I Am pursued by Men or Monsters
Of the night, which from the Vault arise, and
Follow me with fury.

Cat. Then we are lost, this door's too weak resistance.
(Fastens the door.
Tud. Surpised, unarmed! Oh for a Sword.

Cat. Step, my dearest Lord, into this Closet, whilst I
Meet these bold Invaders, there may be power in
Injured Majesty, to stop their Insolence.

Tud. What, must I be hid like a midnight thief, or
Pale Adulterer; no, no, my Queen? rather let me plant
My naked breast against this pass, and die defending it.
(A noise.
Cat. They come. I conjure thee, Tudor,
By honor, by love, by whatever thou hold dear*
By my desires, which still were sacred, enter here.

Tud. I will obey, though I am convinced, it is not evading my
Fate, but receiving the death they bring, a baser
Way, as if I feared it.
(Exit into the Closet.
A noise without. Glou. Break down the door.
We must have entrance.

Cat. Help there! ring the alarm Bell: I am beset*
It must be Villains, some robbers of the Camp for
Plunder, who, notwithstanding the General's grant for
Peace, disturb my rest, and fright me to destraction,
Ring out the Alarm Bell: Thyrrold, where are ye?

Glou. (without.) We are your Friends,
The King is here, open the door,
Else we shall break it; if you talk of Peace, give
Not cause for Violation; Thyrrold is with us, and all
That he commands.

Cat. Then opposition is in vain?

Enter Edward, Duke of Gloucester, Sir James Thyrrold and Officers. Cat. Ha! is
this the Courage the Plantagenets pretend to,
Making War on Women, attacking a defenseless Queen
Whom their own promises, if they were binding,
Had secured?

Edw. You first broke the Articles by sending succors
To your Son, and by harboring Traitors proclaimed.

Cat. Sure till you entered, these Walls held none,
Unless 'twere he which trembles there behind. (Pointing to Thyrrold.

Edw. He has done his duty:
Catharine, in vain you dress your face in frowns,
Those imperious looks are unregarded now, there
Was a time: yes, shame to my weakness, there was
A time when half that rigor could have struck
Me grovelling to the Earth, like one felled by the
Almighty Thunderer, crawling in dust, unable to
Resist, but thanks to my kinder Stars, it is past: the
Giddy Wheel has gone its round, and terror on this
Brow alone's to be observed: Brother, proceed you
In the search,

Cat. He shall not dare, by my great Henry's Soul, whose
Little finger would have tumbled your aspirings
Down, and crushed ye into nothing, he shall not dare.

Glou. What has the Lion cast his Skin? is Tudor
Crammed shaking in some close corner, and left the Queen to
Brave us? Come, fellow Soldiers, we'll seek this
Lurking Rebel, drag him from the hole, whither
His fears have led him, and take his forfeit
Head, for coming whereall our Laws denied him.

Enter Tudor. Tud. No, be thine the fears as thine's the guilt, as
Thine's the name of Rebel, this honest loyal
Heart desies thy malice.

Cat. Away, away, my Tudor: hold, cruel Gloucester Hold?

Enter Isabella. Isa. Stand off! and let me pass, what mischief's acting
Here; has Clarence done this, and am I the cause?

Glou. Ha, another Fury! take her, Thyrrold, to thy dispose,
She Is wholly given -- you know the rest; leave not a
Rival room to hope, least this opportunity proves
Thy last.

Isa. Touch me not, Monster. What have I done? if I
Am guilty, let the injured Queen punish me, let her
Spurn me, trample on me, print me with a
Thousand wounds, I Will not complain.

Thyr. You shall have no reason, Madam, but you
Must retire, it is the command of him, who now
Is master here.

Isa. I will not, Sir; oh save me, Royal Madam, from
The cruel hands of these inhumane Men.

Glou. Force her hence, we other business have than to
Mind her foolish fears.

Isa. Help heaven, if the Queen denies, help thou my
Weakness? help! Oh help!
(Exit forced off, with Thyr.
Cat. Alas, distracted wretch, but
Why name I her, when all my life holds dear is
On the brink of ruin?

Tud. Speak, Edward, what is my doom, dauntless, I
Expect it, I would have met thee fairly in the field, body to
Body, armed with Sword and Justice, but I suppose
You liked not that, therefore now what you please.

Edw. Audacious Tudor, thou threaten! condemned for
Thy Ambition, thy haughty love is adjudged a Treason
Capital, even that Puny King Henry, whom thou
Pretendest to serve, he had courage to Sentence thee:
Seize him, Captain, Command his head be stricken
Off, and fixed upon the Castle Wall.

Cat. Through this bosom, whosoe'er comes on: am I not
Daughter of France and England's Queen? have I no
Power? where are my Guards? Alas, I had forgot, I Have None.

Tud. Disturb not thus the quiet of thy Soul, my everlasting
Charmer? Thy sorrows rack me more than all their
Rage: Come, whither am I to be led.

Cat. Oh, Tudor! glory, disdain, and pomp are mine
No more, yet thou art mine, thou art yet alive, and for
That precious life I will renounce the former; yes,
Edward, I read the fullen pride that fills thy eyes,
And gathers on thy brow. Glut thee this way, behold
That Queen, who shook thee with a nod fall thus,
Thy suppliant.
[kneels.
Edw. And at this sight, may Heaven and Earth be
Witness, oh Gloucester! well have thou fulfilled thy word.
Not all the Crowns ambition covets, England and
France, the noblest Diadems, can please like this:
Thus did I kneel, and thus was I repulsed; and oh fair
Queen, if I have lost my Soul for want of pity,
His life is poor amends.

Cat. Sure there is something in thee like the mixture
Of a God and Devil.
I cannot beg, my heart's above it:
Yet spare him Edward, for thy future fame.

Tud. Oh torture, not to be endured, my life asked
Of him, him whose life I did command.

Edw. Ha!

Cat. Oh stop, bend to hard necessity, thy words have
Given him new rage, can thou behold these
Low submissions for thy sake, and frustrate all their Power?

Glou. You do indeed submit below your Character
To save your wanton choice, the Idol of your Lust.

Tud. Villain, I Will tear out that Blasphemous tongue,
That has profaned a Chastity
Thy Mother never knew.
[Flies at Gloucester:
Glou. I always go prepared for such a hug, lie there
Presuming wretch.
(Stabs him, Tud. falls.
Cat. Wither the arm, that arm that gave the blow:
Cursed be my Female weakness too that could not save him.
Oh fatal aim, speak to me once again.
(sinks upon Tud.
Edw. Look to the Queen?
Gloucester, thou have done as men in power would wish,
A cruel necessary act without the bidding,
Yet help me, Brother, for thou I find art steady,
And tenderness struggles with revenge: Oh, the
Uncertainty of humane passion, for Catharine I
Would once have died, yet now have given her
Sorrows severer much than death.

Cat. Ha! who have we here, my Tudor bleeding,
These bubling wounds are none of thine,
If they are, give 'em to me, I feel 'em at my heart.

Tud. My paradise on earth, farewell: Have patience,
Live for their dear sakes I leave behind,
My Children? Oh farewell?
(dies.
Cat. No, we will not part so soon,
On these pale lips, I will for ever, ever lie.

Edw. The sight stupifies my senses:
Let Us to the field, there in the clank of Swords
I will forget this private murder,
For sure it cannot bear a better name*

Glou. Yes, as I shall order it, when the day is ours,
Which is now undoubted, his death breaks their Forces,
Missing their Leader, his Troops dismayed prove useless,
After Conquest it shall be given out,
That he was taken and beheaded: Victory
And Success will stop the mouth of unnecessary truth,
And leave the following Age in doubt.

Edw. Captain, let the Trumpets sound,
Wake every Soldier with the voice of Battle,
For as the Sun must rise in blood, so shall
His evening be, and he shall shine no more,
Till he beholds no Rival in the British Throne:
Gloucester, dispose of Tudor as you please,
But to the Queen offer no violence.
Oh Catharine! Oh fatal Beauty, what ruins
Thy Love has made.
(Exit Edw.
Cat. Ha, who said that if I am cursed in Love,
I Will try to thrive in hate, to thrive in curses;
Cursed be Edward? Cursed be all his Race, let 'em,
Prometheus like, have their own bowels torn,
For they have preyed upon my heart.

Glou. Have comfort, Madam.

Cat. Comfort! yes, from thy bloody hand I would
Receive it? Daggers, Sword, and Poison, are the only
Comforts thou can give or I desire. Henry
And Tudor both the rich prizes now of death,
Then why am I spared: come on thou Murderer,
Strike this swelling bosom, and let me mount to
My Immortal Heroes; see where my Tudor rises
On a Fleecy Cloud, all Crowned with
Radiant light: Oh take me with thee! he ascends
A pace, I cannot reach him, I Will tear this Clog
Of flesh off: bear me, ye Whirlwinds near him.
Vain delusive joy, cold and bleeding at my feet,
The dear one lies. Oh, my sick brain!

Glou. Sleep will give you ease: Here, Soldiers, carry
This body to the outer Court, from his dead trunk
Severe his head; think it not cruelty,
For he feels no further pain.

Cat. Ha! must he not be buried then, but mangled
More, yes he shall, I Will hide him, I Will scrape the Earth up
But I Will find a Grave; Receive him common Parent,
Receive him at my call.

Glou. Divide her from his Body.

Cat. No, never! never! hear me, Gloucester!
I will help thy invention, mend thy bloody purpose:
Cut off my living limbs, mingle 'em with his,
Throw upon us molten Lead, and Seas of liquid fires,
But divide us now no more.

Glou. Haste, ye sluggards,
[Drag Tudor out, the Queen falls at the door. Gently raise the Queen,
And in some other apartment let her be confined.
This was a shock indeed; but this overcome
Points out lost Henry's succeeding doom.

The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT the Fifth.
The Trumpets play an overture of Victory: Then Enter King Edward, Duke of
Gloucester, Warwick, and Lords; Lord Dacres, and several other Prisoners. Edw.
IT IS done, the business of the War is done.
The House of Lancaster has yielded back,
The honors unjustly they usurped in storms,
The Red Rose folds up her silken leaves,
And sinks beneath a Sea of blood; from whence
Our's the White emblem of Peace arises,
And shall bless the Land with plenty; henceforth
English Swords shall be no more sheathed
In English bosoms: in Foreign Lands we'll search
For new Acquests of Glory, for when our native
Earth is reduced with the Blood of those we
Call our Foes; we must blush to think
They should have been our Brethren.

Warw. Then after Conquest let 'em be so received,
To show the War was just, shun cruelty.

Edw. Far be it from my Nature, or if it were,
I would submit to you, the mighty Warwick;
Whose very name brought Victory, whose Sword
Has led me on to all the Honors I have won.

Warw. I am not used to flatter, yet must say,
A thousand eyes can witness that you fought
Almost beyond the power of Man,
Nor did your Brothers lag behind; thrice did I
Follow Clarence's rash inadvertency,
Which plunged him headlong midst their thickest Troops,
Yet the bold youth despised my aid,
And with deaths a round him cleared his way.

Glou. I gave that fury to his arm,
When the imprisoned Lion was let loose,
And told that Thyrrold was amongst our Foes.

Warw. Why does he shun the glory's of this day,
And having shared the danger, refuse the Triumphs,
Which are to his valor due?

Edw. That Is a melancholy story,
But time will wean him of his follies:
My Lord Dacres, I think you have long been
Chamberlain to the late Queen, Catharine I mean.

Dac. I have,
And wish more to express my Loyalty,
My blood was mingled with theirs whose brave Souls,
Now are mounted upwards, though their bodies
Lie weltring on the plain.

Edw. Only do me Justice in your Reports,
And take your Liberty, have to your afflicted Queen:
And tell her, Revenge, the insatiable Monster,
Now is gorged, and shall toward her for ever sleep^
Where ever she chooses, there uninterrupted,
And in Peace she shall remain.

Dac. I would not, King,
(For that title now thou have purchased)
Take a favor where I never mean to make returns.
Yet thus far my Age and Sorrows force me
To promise, no more to lift a Sword against thee;
I Have seen the ruin of my Royal master's Race,
And in some Cell I Will not repine at thee,
But mourn their hard fate for ever.
(Exit Da.
Edw. A truly honest man:
Nor would power or persuasion bend him;
Loyalty is like Religion, that we suck in first,
Though with the strongest Arguments assailed,
Most hardly is removed, on the Prisoners
In the List, see execution done,
The rest be guarded with effectual care,
Now let the sound of Victory fore-run us,
To every Quarter of the Camp, whilst we
Receive our well deserving Soldiers,
With Praise and Love.
[The Trumpets sound again. Exeunt.
Manent Gloucester, and a Servant. Glou. Thus far we have done well; the Clouds
are
Vanished, and the bright Sun of Glory shines, but it is
Upon my Elder Brothers, and what is all this to me?
Edward and Clarence, two goodly spreading Oaks,
If both stand fair, I must expect no growth.
This Letter, as from an unknown hand, lays all the
Odium of his Imprisonment upon the King, and
What will touch him nearer, his Mistress loss;
Who by this time is married to Thyrrold, or worse,
For he had unbounded license; the Contents of the
Paper send him thither too; I am sure the Plot's
Well laid, and must produce some mischief, which
Ever way it makes for me: Here, trusty Friend,
With your usual Caution, get this delivered to the
Duke of Clarence.

Serve. It shall, Sir?
[Exit Serve.
Glou. Were it alone to sight for
Kingdoms, a well made thick Skull'd Hero might
Excel me, but to keep the Engine of the mind
At work by a deep thought, to do the
Business, and turn the fools Swords upon each other,
There I exceed the brawny Fellows and show my
Master piece.
[Exit.
SCENE, the Castle.
Enter Thyrrold, Isabella, and a Priest. Thyr. Nay, Madam, struggle not, what
was before
Perverseness, now will become a Sin, you know you
Are my wedded Wife.

Isa. Horrid prophaner of Heavens Laws, and ruiner
Of me! did I not fly from thy detested hands;
And call the Saints to witness, I would never join
Thee? speak, Holy Father, though ancle deep, thou art
Not plunged all over in Sin, was that a Marriage,
When my Screams rent the Sacred Chapel, and
When my spirit quite exhausted, I lay in
Dreadful swounings, on the cold pavement.

Pri. You will not hear me out: I say, 'twas by
Compulsion, yet 'twas your stubbornness
Occasioned it, and since it is for the good of both,
I pronounce it valid.

Isa. Say not so; Holy Father, you should
Protect injured innocence; Oh, do not leave
Me, stay, I conjure you stay?

Pri. Madam, I cannot, pray loose your hold, business*
Of Importance calls me hence.

Thyr. Slip through the Files, and bid 'em guard the
Passage well. Look up my fair Bride.
(Exit Priest. Be nice and coy no more, for spite of all your
Coldness, ye now are mine.

Isa. It Is false, if there be Guardian Angels, if the
Just powers take note of holy vows, already
Made, they will assist my helpless cries, and keep
Me from the curse of being thine? yet hear me,
Thyrrold, since Villainy has born the mask of Love,
Thus far I forgive thee, quit me now, and leave
The reward of such a kindness to one who
Owns a generous Soul.

Thyr. Have my Rival thank me! is it not so? were your
Beauty no greater than your Politics, it had never
Come to this. What, be a Traitor to that Queen,
Who from my youth had fostered me, draw the
Noble Tudor's blood upon my head, and then give
Back the price, for which I staked my Soul.

Isa. Tudor dead? Oh I must prepare to suffer,
My Queens curse hangs justly over me.

Thyr. All you can imagine horrid, is past; but all
To come, is pleasing? Pleasing, oh the poor expression!
Transports and Ecstasies.

Isa. Agonies beyond the bearing, and visited again
On you: yes, Conscience will retort it back with
Clamours never to be hushed, and stings uncurable.
Think on that, vile man?

Thyr. Think and look on you, impossible! the kindled
Fire mounts my veins, and I have already lost the use of
Thought: Oh I will pour upon thee with desires, that
Shall melt thy frozen heart, or cool at least my Burnings*

Isa. Where am I, in what dreadful vision, transplanted
To a barbarous clime. England never brought forth
Such a Monster, there must be help. My voice shall
Wake some pitying Creature.

Thyr. Again you judge me foolish; no my joys are well
Secured, the generous Gloucester for my Treasons gave
Me thee, since nothing else could tempt me, and with
A Guard Alcides, if such a one there were, could
Hardly pass; look that way and behold from this the
Highest Lodgings of the Castle, the steps all lined
With men armed and resolute, therefore consent,
Comply, let me receive from kindness, what I
Can from power. Give me thy Charms, or let me seize
'Em; one way or other, I must be blessed.

Isa. Hold, Sir, as ever you have heard of Virtue or
Religion, for, sure you must have heard of both.
Though you never practiced the beatick rules, remember
There will come a time when these mad passions,
That buoy your blood up to Rapes and Mischiefs, must
Sink with fainting nature; when the bowl can
Cheer no more; then, Oh, reflect the horror to
Look back on a lewd dessolute life, and forward on Eternity.

Thyr. Fair preacher, I shall find out better use for
Those soft lips, than Canting thus; let me close
Their pretty railing and warm 'em to a smile.

Isa. Stand off. By all my fears and woes, I feel a strength
Celestial in my resolution, approach not, do not
Move a hairs breadth, for if thou do, I Will be revenged
On those cursed eyes, that lighted up thy Impious
Love, with these hands tear out the hated balls,
And dash 'em bleeding in thy face, when our bodies
Yield our minds swerve first, but I can stop
My breath and die, yes, Traitor, I both can and dare.

Thyr. Oh, Isabella? where is now the Dove-like sweetness,
Which first caught my Soul, I see by those furious
Beams, those angry threatened threatening eyes dart
On me, I can never be blessed, yet do not think;
Your menaces could stop me: for, know my power's
So great, that I could force upon you life and love, or the
Effects of Love, but since I see that force would
Never be forgiven, that I should never come to
Those dear arms, a welcome guest perhaps, upon
Some terms I may desist.

Isa. Ha! what said ye, at such a goodness how soon
Should I forget my terrors, and turn all my
Curses, into prayers and blessings.

Thyr. Talk not of blessing, when I lose you, I lose all
Hopes of happiness, here, or hereafter, therefore like
The Foe of human kind, fain would I sink
My Rival down to my Perdition.

Isa. What mean you?

Thyr. Only this, that if I send you untouched and safely
To the Queen, you never hold with Clarence
Interviews, Discourse, or any sort of
Correspondence more.

Isa. Oh Heavens.

Thyr. Start ye at this then, you shall straight be seized,
Dragged to yon Apartment, and the cursed happy youth,
If you survive, as no doubt you will,
Shall have but the leavings of my Fires?
What! hoa!

Isa. Stay a moment, what must I swear?

Thyr. Wish that Contagion may seize this beauteous
Body, and Furies haunt your Soul, when you consent to wed him.

Isa. Alas!

Thyr. Nay I allow no pause, resolve on one or other.

Isa. Then be witness Heaven, which unassisting sees
My sufferings here, I bid adieu to him and all mankind.

Thyr. This is not enough, kneeling repeat the Imprecation,
Diseases and Despair destract ye, when ever you
Receive him, for your Lord swear to damnation. Swear?

Isa. This is cruel usage, Thyrrold, to force upon my gentle
Nature, dreadful oaths which I have still abhorred.

Thyr. Just now you could rage at me,
Your gentle nature quite forgot. Swear, or all my rage
Returns with less Love and double Fury.

Isa. Then as I hope for rest when this tormented soul
Takes its flight, he never shall possess his Isabella?

Thyr. Ha, ha, ha, now I find you are to be Conquered.
In giving up your Love, you have given up that Resolution,
Which shockt me, and since he never shall enjoy you,
It Is but fit I should supply his room;
Come this way, no more preambles nor strugglings.

Isa. Yes, whilst I have life? Oh that as I have in
Fables read, I could in very truth be turned into a stone,
A tree, or any senseless Mass.

Thyr. Your senses shall be Banquetted. If you strive
More I must make use of ruder hands,
I would not willingly expose my Wife*

Isa. Give me to Tigers to any thing but thee.
Is no Compassion near? Help, help.

Clashing of Swords. Clar. [Within.] Give way, give way: He dies,
Whoever dares approach my fury.

Thyr. Quitting Isa.] Ha betrayed! [drawing his sword.

Isa. Oh, I will meet that voice through
All the glittering dangers that my Eyes behold.

Thyr. Stand back, you run on pointed Swords.

Isa. No matter, I shall not now be forced.
[As Clarence with his followers fights his way in, Isabella is stabbed.
Isa. Ah me, it was unkind, but I shall soon find ease.
[Falls.
Thy. Oh rash adventurer, let them come, all the Prize is lost.
[kneels to help her.
Enter Clarence, Thyrrold's men fly. Clar. Thanks worthy men, who have ventured
thus
Your lives for my revenge.
[Sees Thyr. and Isa. Ha! an Angel coupling with a Fiend!
Rise Villain and meet my Sword.
Or thus I Will send thee to thy native Hell.

Thyr. I wo'n't fight, you are the Brother of my King
If you kill me you know your Pardon's sure,
Should I but draw the blood of you I stand Condemned.

Clar. Poor and Precarious will ye not fight for Isabellassa?

Thyr. She is not worth it now, your honor will not
Let you strike a naked Bosom, and I Will make no defense.

Clar. Oh most detested baseness, live, drag on
That shameful life, but fly lest I am tempted
With thy loathed sight to an unmanly deed.

Thyr. Yes, I will live to act more mischiefs, if I
Judge my Master right, that set me on to this:
It may fall on thee.
Torturing Love shall fill my Breast no more,
But rage and enmity possess my mind,
To vex and ruin the race of human kind.
(Exit Thyr.
Clar. Oh guilty, guilty Isabella?
Well may thou fall on Earth, and hide thy eyes,
Which dare not sure look up to Heaven, after all
These Perjuries, yet rise, follow with haste the choice,
Which thou prefer'st to doting Clarence, and let me
No more behold thy fatal Beauties: it is true,
I did come mad with a resolve to kill thy Husband,
His Cowardice has prevented me? Oh ye cruel powers,
Could he find no other bosom to blush away
His shame in, but my Isabella's, mine adored,
Thou do not stir nor answer me, and oh,
I dare not raise thee, but to touch thy hand,
Would fire my soul, and set me into wild distraction,
And therefore away, yet will thou not move,
And oh, I feel a Mothers earning on me
Toward an erring Child:
I must gaze upon thee, though it gives me death:
Ha! death indeed?
Who has done this, my love is pale and bleeding.

1 Foll. Alas, how came she wounded?

Clar. And I cursed Villain, worse than Thyrrold,
Instead of help have wasted time in my reproaches,
Assist, Oh! softly, softly, touch my dying Love. (rasing her.

Isa. reviving.) Where am I; I Will none of Thyrrold:
Let me go, let me go?

Clar. What means all this, O look and speak to thy Clarence,
What wicked practices have been acted here:
How came this streaming Wound; fly for some help.

Isa. It Is he, it is he!
Oh I will throw my Virgin arms about thy neck,
Unused to such embraces,
But I Have been frighted, Clarence, and here I will
Recover Peace.

Clar. Oh my Souls Comfort, my hearts Joy,
Whom I Will suspect no more, this ardor does
Convince me of thy truth, but Oh Almighty love!
Now cannot save us,
Whilst thus you bless me with your kindness,
Your Life, your precious Life expires.

Isa. No matter, let it go, alas I am weary on it:
Stand back, I had forgot, I have sworn never
To see thee more, but that is no matter neither;
I am going where there is no oppression,
No injustice, there I shall be forgiven,
This last pleasure dying in my Clarence arms.

Clar. To all my Countries happiness
I must for ever bid adieu, it has
No longer date than this poor breath of thine,
Which pants and heaves thy laboring Breast,
And grows each moment shorter: Oh Isabella,
Must we part for ever, wretch that I am
Bankrupt in Love, can I speak that and live?

Isa. Still so kind; then prithee tell me,
Whilst I have sense to ask it, why when half dead
With fears, I to Malavill delivered up the Key,
You sent your cruel Brothers, to the ruin of
The Queen and me.

Clar. Did thou then see Malavill?

Isa. I did.

Clar. Cursed be his memory; it is enough to
Say that we both have been betrayed,
Which, when I forgive ye Brothers,
Dogs gnaw the flesh of Clarence,
Some death horrid and unusual seize me --
And send me quick into Perdition.

Isa. Oh my Plantagenet, oh my lovely dear?
Whose form my dying eyes pursue, tho now
They dance in mists give me not greater pangs,
Than what death brings, when I am dead, as soon
I shall be, for I feel the cold Tyrant creep
Over all my limbs, my heart holds out
A little longer to charge thee not to Quarrel
With the King for me;
I cannot die in Peace to leave my love in danger.

Clar. Excellent goodness, unexampled patience,
Oh thou art going and I behold it.

Isa. I am indeed, yet I have one thing more to ask*
Let me be born to the Queen, I Have wronged
And lay my dead body at her feet,
Too poor the expiation of her sorrows, the fatal
Ruins which my headlong passion caused.

Clar. And I, cursed I, the black occasion.

Isa. Oh no, thou ever were my hearts desire,
And may thou still remain blessed as thou have been,
By me bel^ved, have mercy Heaven on my Youth,
Forgive my errors and receive me.
(Dies.
Clar. My Isabella, my Love, still there is, life,
Her lips have still a lively warmth, I Will have her body
Thus Embalmed, and kneel for ever by her side;
Where is thy rosy breath retired, thou morning
Sweetness, thus early snatched long before thou had
Reached the noon of life, but hold, I had forgot my
Friends: I pray retire I have some unmanly mournings
Which the gust of grief for this fair Saint requires,
That will admit of no Spectators, wait without:
Anon I Will call ye?

Foll. I fear, what he intends yet dare not
Contradict him, but will send one
That has more power.

Clar. Oh my Isabella! we will part no more,
Let the Bugbear death, fright guilty men,
Fright those wretches, that brought thy Beauties
To this untimely paleness*
One kiss, cold as Winters Frost
On the first peeping Flowers,
Thou perfect sweetness hover a little, or if thou have arrived
The blissfull seats, make intercession there for me,
And for this death which violent passion
Plunges me upon.
(Goes to fall upon his Sword.
Warwick enters, and strikes it away. Warw. Are you a man?

Clar. A man, my Lord; yes, that is my Curse! that is
My Misfortune: but were I a nobler being,
At such a loss, at such a sight,
'Twou'd break the temper of an Angelick frame,
And set the Immortal on eternal ravings.

Warw. Leave your Romantic Style, and desperate
Thoughts, I find there was foul play; had you trusted
Me, it might have been prevented; but since it is past,
Be calm: I would not have the world say,
I chose to my Friend a Lunatic, and that is the
Kindest name we give self-murderers.

Clar. I am so, and surely the soonest mad men
Are destroyed, it is best: nay, should you persuade me
To be reconciled to life, you would but preserve it for
The Hangmans hands; if I live the King's not safe:
Treason and Parricide will be my practice.
That dead lovely Image will dwell upon my memory,
And still excite me to revenge; no, she can
Never be forgot, unless I plunge my self in Riots;
Renounce my reason and remembrance,
And leave to Fame a blotted story.

War. Is all your Mothers piety and careful Lessons
Quite forgot? Oh Clarence, it would prove a dreadful
Case, to play the Hero here, and find the Christians
Punishment beneath.

Clar. It Is worse to live on in black despair, and sin
Beyond forgiveness: Return my Sword, for I
Will hear no more.

Warw. Do not provoke me to expose your Follies:
Your extravagancy is yet unknown,
Think of revenge, live to accomplish that,
In that I will assist ye, rather than
See you fall.

Clar. Ay now thou speak indeed, and charmest me
Into life; will not thou help me in the Just work;
Pull the aspirers down, who, without cause,
Plotted the destruction of me and all my Joys?

War. Carry this fair Maid to the Queens apartment
And of her death give there a just account.

Clar. Must she then go? Is that necessary
To our contract of revenge?

War. Draw off your Friends, and to my Castle
Bend your way: into this business strict enquiry
Shall be made; yes, you shall have Justice!

Clar. Nay, by Heaven I will, by Warwick (another
Oath) I will; but can Astrea, can Justice restore
Her back again? No, it is impossible:
Therefore to Wilds and Seas I will remove,
And taste no comfort since I Have lost my love.
[Ex.
The Curtain falls: Enter Lord Dacres and Esperanza. Esp. My Lord, you're come
to meet news as sad
As what you bring; to see a wretched Court,
The very Epitome of sorrow, and the lovely Queen,
Chief Mourner? who for her Tudor slain,
In destraction raves away the hours she hates,
And from her kneeling Servants refuses either
Counsel or Support, the fair Isabella too,
Is forced we know not where or to what Fate.

Dac. It Is from examples like to these, we ought
To learn there is no stability below,
For if these who did command vast Empires,
Whose eyes could see no limits to their
Extended sway, yet when the mouldring earth
Was theirs, could not secure a lasting happiness:
What Emet, what Mole, but Man, would heave,
And work on in darkness, still living on fates decoy,
Deluding hope; yet never reach the expected day,
That brings us Joy Sincere;
Show me this Royal sadness,
The torrent of whose griefs I Will strive to calm,
Though it is impossible to dry the source.

Curtain rising, discovers Queen Catharine sitting on a Couch, with Herbs and
Flowers by her, attended. Cat. Here, give me more, more of the Cypress, and
That grave shading yew, let the Carnutions lose their color,
And display the blooming Rose in some black die,
Till I Have made my Garland
Dark as my Woes, and Dismal as my Despair?

Dac. Ha! 'is worse than I expected, Oh Henry! it
Is not given sure for those above to view their
Friends beneath, if 'twere this sight would interrupt
Thy Peace, and turn thee a Sympathizing mourner
'Midst the blessed.

Cat. Who Is there, my Lord Dacres?

Dac. Your ready Servant, who weeps to see the
Majesty of France and England thus employed?

Cat. You think me mad! alas, Sir, I am not so happy:
Indeed I Am trying, 'fast as ever I can to obtain
The blessing; but yet, I remember that Tudor
Was, that he was, faithful, lovely, good, and
Murdered for all that, yes, at my feet he fell --
Come all ye Bedlam wretches, shake your horrid
Chains, grin and scream around me, 'till my
Brains are quite o'erturn'd; let me feel all your
Stripes, and wants, and straw, so I am rid of the
Racks my mind indures: the Trumpets when
They sounded Edward's Victorious entrance, here
Were such Music -- yet that will not do!

Dac. What shall I say, words but augment the wounds,
They cannot cure; to tell this Royal fair, that
She once had temper, that she bore my great
Masters loss with Saint-like patience, to urge
That now, alas, is vain!

Cat. True, Dacres; for that was the work of Heaven,
And Heaven gave me patience: but this is Hell;
All Hell, and it is from thence I rave.

Dac. Fain I would enjoin you hear me, I dare not
Give my self so bold a name as Friend.

Cat. Friends, I Have none, if thou pretend 'st to ought,
Be gone, and leave me: Leave me to earth and
Deep despair; death and destruction are the
Only Friends I choose. Here will I fall; strew me
With herbs and flowers, then weep
About me as if I were dead: perhaps I may
Grow senseless.

Dac. Oh deep excess of mourning: to which I have
But one Argument in answer: come forth ye
Charming little ones, and raise your drooping Mother.
[He leads in the Queens Children in Mourning.
Cat. rising.] Ha!

Dac. Kneel, sweet Images of lovely Catharine! kneel!
Speak not, but heave your little hands for
Mercy, it is the Queen alone can save you; whilst
She lives France is potent, and must be feared
If violence is offered; but your Protectress gone
You may be swallowed in the Whirpool of
Ambition, and the crime forgot: See how their
Infant eyes are wet with tears, they are frighted,
Though they do not know for what.

Cat. Oh, Dacres! Dacres! why have thou done this?
Now I do remember, Tudor's words, his last
Desire, that I should live for them, raise 'em
From Earth, their tender knees will ache; no,
Let 'em kneel on, they are born slaves, and
Must, perhaps, be much longer compelled to
Do their duty.

Dac. Now by the Soul of my great master, by Royal
Henry, I read in these small lines Majestic glory!
Methinks I am inspired to say, from these branches,
Shall come a noble stock of Princes, which must Bless,
And Wed, and intermixing, heal the distracted Land,
Behold the Queen and Tudor's blooming grace,
Nature her self can scarce make such another face.

Cat. Oh bring 'em near me, thou Oracle, thou soul
Of goodness, do what thou will not with me and them.

Dac. Upon the banks of Silver Thames, there is a
Monastery which seems as built for retiring Princes, so
Quiet, and so neatly formed, near the Metropolis it
Stands, there you may live in peace, my self will quit
All further thoughts of Business, or of State, and if I
Once inquire into the World, it shall be only for
Your safety, and the good of these!

Cat. I thank thee, Dacres, and, I thank Heaven I am Composed.

Enter Esperanza. Esp. Oh horror! accumulated sorrows, like rolling
Billows, heap upon us still.

Dac. Peace, the Queen but now is calm, disturb her
With no new affliction?

Cat. I stand prepared, there is nothing now can shock
Me; Speak!

Esp. The lovely Isabella is brought dead, the bearers
Say, her last request was your Forgiveness, that
She might be laid at your Royal feet, and your
Majesty would pardon her unwilling fault.

Cat. Oh Esperanza! too late you told me of her
Intended flight, Love was her only crime, yet she proved
Fates cruel Instrument of my undoing, why
This was, why so ordained is beyond mortal inquiry,
And I should submit.
Where is the poor unhappy Maid? alas!
But she is past it all, and
Now finds rest; for if soft Innocence can reach
The bright Ethereal seats; she is surely there
Give order for our instant March; let her Corpse
Precede the dismal journey, and let us follow as
Those sad Friends their best beloved to the last
Stage, the Grave.
My Dacres, that is the sure reception of us all,
But they sleep best who do with honor fall.
[Exeunt Omnes.
Enter Edward, Duke of Gloucester, and Officers. Edw She Is gone, and with her
go all that ever
Discomposed my Soul, now to Glory and his Country's
Good, Edward wholly will devote himself: let us
toward London take our triumphant way;
That City in whose favor we are blessed.

Glou. You, I suppose, have heard that Clarence
Proclaims his wrongs a loud, that Warwick owns his
Cause, and with a Guard has sent him to his Castle.

Edw. Toward that rash Prince, my Lords, we doubt
Not to approve our self a Friend and Brother; if
Warwick sides with him, though he stands high
In our esteem, yet we wo'n't fear the Warrior,
Nor call the work of Heaven his alone.
Kingdoms are given by the powers above,
And the chief blessing is our peoples love:
Whilst we are just, they ought and must be kind,
No Cement does so fast as Justice bind.

FINIS.

