Appello Evangelium FOR THE TRUE DOCTRINE OF THE Divine Predestination,
Concorded with the Orthodox Doctrine of Gods Free Grace, AND Man's Free Will.

By John Plaifere, B. D. Sometime Fellow of Sidney-Sussex Col. in Cambridge,
and late Rector of Debden in Suffolk.

(...) ad Amicum. Amice, Evangelium appellasti? Ad Evangeliu^ ibis. Bern. in
Cant. Ser. 65.

Responsio.

Nullus reprehensor formidandus est amatori Veritatis. Aug. de Trin. in Prooem.

Hereunto is added Dr. Chr. Potter his own Vindication in a Letter to Mr. V.
touching the same Points.

LONDON, Printed by I. G. for John Clark, and are to be sold at his shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1651.

The Several Heads handled in this Treatise.
CHAP. The First Part. Page THe Introduction or Preface, p. 1 1. The first
opinion of M. Perkns, etc. p. 9 2. The 2d opinion of the Synod of Dort, etc. p.
16 3. The third Opinien of Dr. Overald* etc. p. 22 4. The fourth opinion of
Hemingius, etc. p. 34 5. The fifth opinion of the Fathers, etc. p. 38 6. An
(...) of the fifth opinion, p. 42 The Transition to the Second Part, p. 52
CHAP. The Second Part. 1. Of Gods Knowledge, p. 54 2. Of Gods Will, p. 67 3. Of
Providence and Predestination, p. 71 4. Of Election and Reprobation, p. 73 5.
The Transition to the Third Part, p. 76 CHAP. The Third Part. 1. Of the
Creation, p. 79 2. Of the Covenant of works, p. 80 3. Of the Fall of Man, p. 81
4. Of the effects of the Fall, p. 84 5. Of the Covenant of Grace, p. 86 6. Of
Calling, the Dspensation of the Covenant of Grace, p. 91 7. Of the concurrence
of the Word and Spirit in Calling, p. 97 8. Of Conversion, p. 110 9. Of Grace,
113 The Distinctions, p. 115 The Necessity, p. 117 The Power, p. 119 The
Amplitude, p. 122 10. Of Freewill, to Good Evil p. 128 11. Of Grace and
Freewill, conjunctim, p. 235 12. Of two equally called, p. 251 13. Of
Conversion under the terms of Regeneration, a new Creation, etc. p. 273 14.
The Article of Freewill as taught in a book published, 35. Hen. 8. p. 278. 15.
Of Perseverance, p. 287 16. Of the Faith of such as persevere not; together
with an Exposition of the 16 Article of our Confession, p. 291 17. Of the
persevering faith of the Elect, p. 230 18. Of the Certainty of Perserverance.
Election. Salvation. p. 318 19. Of the last Judgment, p. 325 20. An
Abridgement of the whole Book, p. 334 21. An Analysis to the 17 Article
Confessionis Anglicanae, p. 350

Courteous Reader, these books following are Printed for John Clark, and are
to be sold at his shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill.
THe Stewards last account, in five Sermons, by Master Robert Bagnall.
Evangelicall Spices, or the Incense of the Gospel, in a Sermon, by Doctor
Wall. Search the Scriptures, or an enquiry after Verity, by Master George
Langford. Manasses miraculous Metamorphosis, in a Sermon at Saint Mary's in
Cambridge, by Master George Langford. Gods Smiting to amendment or revengement,
in a Sermon, by Master Hanniball Gamon. A Plea for Peace, in a Sermon, by
Master Henry Virtue. Evodius and Syntiche, in a Sermon, by Mr. John Elborow.
The Sharpness of the Sword, or Abners Plea for accomolation, in a Sermon, by
Master John Pigot. The Descent of Authority, or the Magistrates Patent from
Heaven, by Doctor Hurst. The Soldiers Triumph, and the preachers Glory, in a
Sermon, by Master Milward. A thanksgiving Sermon, by Master John Squire. A
Visitation Sermon, by Doctor Read. Ten Sermons upon several Sundays and
Saints days, ^y Master Peter Hawsteed. A divine prospective representing the
Just man's Peaceful end, in a funeral Sermon, by Master Nathaniel Hardy.
Christ's Love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in sundry Sermons by
Master Richard Maden. A discourse of the Sabbath and the Lords day, by Doctor
Dow. Innovations unjustly charged upon the present Church and State, by Doctor
Dow. Antidotum Lincolniense, or an answer to a book entitled. The Holy Table
Name and Thing, etc. by Doctor Heylin. The Equal ways of God tending to the
rectifying the unequal ways of man, by Master Thomas Haines. The
Weapon-salves malady, translated out of Senartu^ his works. A ready way to
remember the Scriptures, or a Table of the Old and New Testament, by Master
Ezekiell Culverwell. Want of Charity justly charged on all such Romanists a
dare (without truth or modesty) affirm that Protestancie de destroys
Salvation, by Doctor Potter. A Sermon preached at Ely-House in Holborne, by
Doctor Potter. A Commentary of the whole book of Ecclesiastes, by Doctor
Jeremin. The Religion of Protestants a safe way to Salvation, by Master William
Chillingworth. The Souls misery and recovery, or the grievings of the Spirit,
by Master Samuel Hoard. The Churches Authority asserted in a Visitation Sermor
preached at Chelms ford, by Master Samuel Hoard. Gods love to mankind
manifested by disproving his absolute decree for their damnation. The new Art
of Lying covered by Jesuits under the veil of Equivocation discovered and
disproved, by Master Henry Mason. Christian Humiliation, or the Christians
Fast, by Maste^ Henry Mason. The Epicures Fast, by Mr. Henry Mason. The
Tribunal of the Conscience, or a Treatise of Examination, showing why and how
a Christian should examine his Conscience, and take an account of his life, by
Mr. Henry Mason. The Cure of Cares, or a short discourse declaring the
condition of worldly Cares, with some remedies appropriated unto them, by Mr.
Henry Mason. Hearing and Doing, the ready way to blessedness, with an appendix
containing Rules of right hearing Gods Word, by Mr. Henry Mason. Contentment in
Gods Gifts, or some Sermon Notes leading to equanimity, and contentation, by
Mr. Henry Mason. Justifying Faith, or the Faith by which the Just do live, by
Dr. Jackson. A Treatise containing the original of Unbelief, Misbeliefe, or
Misperswasions concerning the Verity, Unity and Attributes of the Deity, with
directions for rectifying our belief or knowledge in the forementioned Points,
by Doctor Jackson. A Treatise of the Divine Essence and Attributes, First Part,
by Dr. Jackson. A Treatise of the Divine Essence and Attributes, the Second
Part, containing the Attributes of Omnipotency, of Creation and Providence,
etc. by Dr. Jackson. The knowledge of Christ Jesus, containing the first and
general Principles of Christian Theology, with the more immediate Principles
concerning the true knowledge of Christ, by Dr. Jackson. The Humiliation of the
Son of God by his becoming the Son of man, by taking the form of a
servant, and by his Sufferings under Pontius Pilate, etc. by Doctor Jackson. A
Treatise of the Consecration of the Son of God to his everlasting Priesthood,
and the accomplishment of his glorious Resurrection and Ascension, by Dr.
Jackson. Christ's Answer to John's question, or an Introduction to the knowledge
of Christ, and him Crucified, in sundry Sermons, by Dr. Jackson. The name
Altar, or (...), anciently given to the Holy Table, by Mr. Joseph Mede.
Churches, that is, appropriate places for Christian worship, both in, and ever
since, the Apostles times, by Mr. Jo. Mede. The Reverence of Gods House, a
Sermon at St. Mary's in Cambridge, by Mr. Joseph Mede. Daniels weeks, an
interpretation of part of the prophecy of Daniel, by Mr. Joseph Mede. Diatribae
first part, discourses on diverse Texts of Scripture, by Mr. Joseph Mede.
Diatribae second part, or a continuation of certain discourses on sundry Texts
of Scripture, delivered upon several occasions, by Mr. Joseph Mede. Diatribae
third part, or a Continuation of certain Discourses on sundry Texts of
Scripture, by Mr. Joseph Mede. Remains on some passages in the Revelation,
whereunto are added several Discourses, concerning the holiness of Churches,
by Mr. Joseph Mede. The undeceiving of the People in the Point of Tithes, by
Ph: Treleinie Gent. Sacred Principles, Services and Soliloquies, or a Manual,
of Devotions made up of three parts, 1. The grounds of Christian Religion, etc.
2. Daily and Weekly forms of Prayers, etc. 3. Seven Charges to Conscience,
etc. by Philo-Christianus.

Appello Evangelium, FOR The true Doctrine of the Divine Predestination,
concorded with the Orthodox Doctrine of Gods Free Grace, and Man's Free Will.
PART 1. The Introduction or Preface.
THe principal end of that labor which brought forth this work was, by the
help of God and through his blessing, to get some satisfaction to my self in
the great Question of this Age, De ordine and modo praedestinationis in mente
divina secundum nostrum intelligendi modum; concerning the order and manner of
Divine predestination, conceived in the mind of the only wise God, after the
manner of our understanding, as the holy Scriptures have revealed it unto us.

Therefore about this Order, I have searched out, and here set down the
several opinions of note and estimation, which are five in number; these I
have examined and compared together.

In four of the five I do find and acknowledge some parts and pieces of
truth, (for no probable Doctrine can subsist all of falsehoods) but mingled
with such defects, as they seem to me to lead both into error in Faith, and
into corruption of manners, if men should live after them, and that not by
abuse only (as may be pretended,) but by just and necessary consequence, and by
the nature of the very Principles.

But in the fifth opinion, (I will not say there shines forth the perfection
of the full and naked truth, for since we see now per speculum, in aenigmate,
if I should say Nudam veritatem videmus, nihil esset coecius ista arrogantia
visionis) yet this I say, there seems Aug. Epist. 150.
to appear a certain way of apprehending, and of teaching this high mystery,
such as is far more free from occasion of error, either in faith, or in life,
that may arise as from it self, than in any other form of the four formerly
delivered.

In the Explication whereof, to make it intelligible, it being (though not new
in it self,) but little opened or touched in English or popular Books or
Sermons, (unless it be to carpe at the leaves of some boughs or branches
thereof) And in the confirmation thereof to make it demonstrable by the holy
Scripture, and to show it consonant to other heads of Divinity declared, I have
here taken much more pains, and am far more large, than in the demolishing and
confuting of the different, and (as I take them) defective Opinions; partly,
because that is already done to my hand, in the domestic conflicts of the
defenders of the four Opinions in their books written in the elentique, and
the invective vein, more to the breach of the peace of the Church, than to the
edifying of the truth in love: And partly because as it is an harder, so it is
a nobler thing to build than to destroy, to abet, and to maintain a lovely
truth tending to peace, both inward in the conscience, and outward in the
Church, rather than to labor to hew down those falsehoods which fall of
themselves, the more curiously they are polished and wrought upon by their
zealous Lovers.

Yet because our great Master of Methods Ethic. 7. c. 14.
teaches us, that it is not enough, (...), to deliver the truth, unless we do
show also (...), the cause why that is false which is false, and that this does
much avail (...), to win credit to our own Opinion; therefore I give in brief
some reasons for my dislike of any opinion which I reject, in their several
and proper places; and then proceed to my chiefest care and hardest task.

In which weighty work (quoniam conamur tenues grandia) I still do most
humbly pray the Spirit of truth to lead me into all Truth, that is according
unto Godliness; Sadolet. in Romans 8.
Cupimus enim investigare quid verum sit, neque id solum, sed quod cum veritate
pietatem quoque praeterea erga Deum habeat conjunctam: not approving their
saying, that tell us, one doctrine is for Schools, where Truth is tried, and
another for Pulpit, where Piety is persuaded; never am I persuaded where
Exhortations sound contrary to Doctrine forelayd, nor where the Pulpit differs
from the Chair.

Now if this work had been intended for the public, it had been best to have
suppressed and concealed all names of the Authors of Opinions. Ut nullus
emulatione aliqua a veritatis Cajetan. Summula.
sequela retrahatur, knowing it is as true in our Age, as it was in S.
Hilary's, Quanto plures sunt in Ecclesia qui authoritate Epist. ad Aug.
nominum in sententia teneantur, aut ad sententiam transferantur? But this was
not written ad plures, (...) Acts 17. 11.
(...), Who will themselves, and allow me also to search the Scriptures,
whether things be so as Doctors say; and will not be offended Si authorem
neminem Plin. proaem. l. 3.
unum sequar, sed ut quemque verissimum in quaque part arbitrabor: and from
any of them to appeal to the Gospel.

For the second end and purpose of this writing, especially in this book
form, was to give satisfaction to some of my learned and loving friends, to
whom I might communicate it: who having heard either of my studies in these
Controversies, or of my Opinions, and happily not thoroughly apprehending them,
may have conceived worse of me and them, than either there is cause, or than I
ought to suffer them long to bear in their minds.

For as concerning my studies, I may be deemed to have walked in magnis and in
mirabilibus super me, seeing it is true that Saint Jerome says, Grandes
materias ingenia parva non sustinent: and that I have approch'd too near to
Majesty, in searching into mysteries above humane capacity, as de ordine and
modo praedestination is in mente divina and concordia gratiae and liberi
arbitrii cum praedestinatione. But these Papers I hope shall make it manifest,
first that I leave things unsearchable unsearchd, and stand with the Apostle in
the self same place that he did admiring and adoring (...), Romans 11. 33. I
say, in the selfsame place, or the like, not to cloak iniquity or absurdity
imputed to the divine Majesty, by O the depth, etc.

Secondly, that I search not at all into any thing by mere natural light, and
humane reason, which to do in these things were a presumption deserving
precipitation, but by the light of divine revelation in Gods holy word; and
therefore I have set for my title Appello Evangelium, which is the opening of
Gods Counsel so far as he is pleased to communicate to us.

And thirdly, this I do, not only by appealing to those Texts, that directly
and immediately speak of our Predestination and Election, which may seem hard
and obscure, but also to the openest and commonest places that are fundamental
principles of Christianity, and the grounds of Catechism, which ordinary
capacities (and not great wits alone) are able to understand, and by which the
fewer and harder Texts are to be enlightened and interpreted, and not
contrarily; Irenaeus has a right saying; Multa male interpretari coguntur,
Lib. 5.
qui Unum recte intelligere non volunt, which has happened to many in our Age.

That unum which they will not rightly understand is promissum Evangelicum
universale, in Christo redemptore universally: which our Church professes in
her Articles, and in her Catechism; which unum is the ground of all the
Conclusions here maintained: So that my studies have not been about some
curious and superfluous questions, separable from the body of Divinity, and
which might well have been spared, but about the most essential parts, and
articles of that body, and of their mutual coherence and connection: the
industrious search and examination whereof is so necessary and worthy a thing,
as I can hardly hold him worthy the name of a Divine, that has not labored
therein.

And as to my Opinions which unexamined may be presumed to be nothing else but
either ancient or late condemned Heresies, (which imputation or very
supposition no good man ought to bear with silence) these leaves do undertake
to show, that the apprehensions expressed in them, are none of those old
condemned Heresies, nor of those late rejected Heterodoxes, but the very
Doctrine of the ancient Fathers of the Church, builded upon the sense and
letter of the holy Scriptures, and consonant to the public established
Doctrine of the Church of England, contained in the books of Articles, Common
Prayer, and Homilies, which if I shall make good by clear and undeniable
evidence, then I hope my good friends will hold me excused, and cleared of any
such crime as Heresy, or semi-heresie, or novelty, and will take me for a true
and sound member of the Church of England, both in Doctrine and in Discipline:
from both which I fear there has been made by many in this Church too great a
defection and departure, since the days of King Edw. the 6. when they were
first established; and since the primitive years of the happy reign of Queen
Elizabeth, wherein they were ratifyed and strengthened, with a second, and
oft-renewed judgment. But the examination and trial of all this, I commit and
submit to my ingenuous and loving friends, and them and their studies to the
goodness and grace of God our Father.

CHAP. I. The first Opinion.
THe first Opinion concerning the order of Divine Predestination, and having
these defenders, Beza, Piscator, Whitaker, Perkins, and other holy and learned
men, is this:

1. That God from all eternity decreed to create a certain number of Men.

2. That of this number he Predestined some to everlasting life, and other
some he Reprobated to eternal death.

3. That in this act he respected nothing more than his own dominion, and the
pleasure of his own will.

4. That to bring men to these ends, he decreed to permit Sin to enter in upon
all men, that the Reprobate might be condemned for sin; and that he decreed
to send his Son to recover out of sin his Elect, fallen together with the
Reprobate.

This Opinion is rejected by many protestant Divines, as by the reverend
Divines of our Church that were at the Synod at Dort, by Peter Moulin, by
Robert Bishop of Salisbury, and others: It is detested by the Papists and
Lutherans; it was it tha^ Arminius and his followers chiefly opposed in the low
Countries.

It is charged, To make God the Author of Sin. To Reprobate men before they
were evil. To Elect men not in Christ, who is sent, after this Opinion, to
recover out of sin those that were elected, before they were considered as
sinners.

This is that irrespective decree which Mr. Mountague disliketh, because in it
there is no respect had to any thing fore-known, not so much as the fall of
man, much less Christ, or Faith, giving to God no foreknowledge, or no use of
it at all, in this act of his which the Scripture calls predestination.

Yet this Opinion does well admonish us to remember the Dominion and Sovereign
power and will of God which must be seen and acknowledged in his predestinating
of men, according to that of the Apostle, Romans 9. 21. Has not the Potter power
over the clay? and verse. 15. He has mercy on whom he will: which we will be
mindful of in the fifth Opinion.

Under this Opinion are to be placed the nine Assertions, concluded at Lambeth,
Nov. 20. 1595. which have been often required to be put into our Book of
Articles, but yet could it never be obtained. It is requisite therefore to set
them down, because they are not vulgarly known, and to examine them what they
mean, and see how far they are Orthodoxall, or agreeing to our Articles. And
for their sakes that understand not the Latin tongue, I will render them in
English.

Consule Articulos Lambethanos ab F. G. Ecclesiae Ministro nuper editos.
Articles approved by the right Reverend Lords, John Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and Richard Lord Bishop of London, and other Divines at Lambeth,
the 20. of November. in the year, 1595.
1. God from Eternity Predestined some Men to life, and some he Reprobated
unto Death.

2. The Moving or Efficient cause of Predestination to life is not the
foresight of Faith, or of perseverance, or of good works, or of any thing
which may be in the persons predestined, but only the Will of Gods good
pleasure.

3. Of the predestinate there is a predefined and certain number, which can
neither be increased nor diminished.

4. They which are not predestined to salvation shall necessarily be condemned
for their sins.

5. True, lively, justifying Faith, and the sanctifying Spirit of God, is not
extinguished, does not fall out, does not vanish in the Elect, either finally,
or totally.

6. A man truly believing, that is, endued with justifying Faith, is certain,
by or with full persuasion of Faith, of the forgiveness of his sins, and of
his everlasting salvation by Christ.

7. Saving Grace is not given, is not communicated, is not granted to all men,
whereby they may be saved if they will.

8. No man can come to Christ, unless it be given unto him, and unless the
Father draw him, and all men are not drawn of the Father, that they come unto
the Son.

9. It is not put in the free choice and power of every man to be saved.

These be the nine Assertions concluded at Lambeth at the instance of Doctor
Whitakers, against three Propositions delivered at Cambridge by Peter Baro the
Frenchman, Professor of Divinity in the Chair erected by the Lady Margaret.

1. De Praedestinatione and Reprobatione. 2. De Amissione Gratiae. 3. De
certitudine and securitate salutis.
Whit. cont. ult. p. 4.

Four of these nine which concern the Doctrine of Predestination, are here
only considered; the other five we shall speak of in their proper place, in
the third part of this book.

For the words of these four, they are so composed as they comprehend most
certain Truths, but appliable as well to the fifth Opinion (to be propounded
yet) as to any other: But because all men will fetch the interpretation of them
from Doctor Whitakers the chief composer, his understanding of them must be
taken for their meaning. And how he understood the Doctrine of Predestination
does appear in his last Conc. ad clerum, October. 9. before this 20. of
November, wherein he argues against St. Austine, That original sin was not
the cause of Reprobation, seeing it is remitted to many Reprobates, (according
to St. Augustines Doctrine) page 7. He expounds Romans 9. 21. de massa
incorrupta, page 8. and names Bucer as concurring with him, page 8. and iterum
page 15. He appealeth to our Confession in the 17. Article, which he is
persuaded delivers the same doctrine that he did, not only because those
Articles were composed by the Disciples of Martyr and Bucer as he says, but
by the words themselves. How other Bishops and Professors since have understood
that Article, and what hand Martyr and Bucer had in our Articles, shall be seen
in the next Opinion.

For, these nine Assertions, we know, Doctor Whitakers dying at his return
from his journey, were not received with such accord, but that two the
following Professors dissented from them, and when the life of Doctor Whitakers
was written by a learned friend of his, who would have inserted these nine
Assertions, they were by authority suppressed; a sign that though much were
imputed and yielded to the excellent judgment of Doctor Whitakers of worthy
memory, yet all in authority then were not of his mind in this matter; whom
yet they would not offend or lose, as the times then were. Neither in the first
of King James in the Conference at Hampton Court, when these nine Assertions,
orthodoxall, as Doctor Reynolds termed them, were sued for to be inserted into
the Book of Articles, was this request obtained; but that motion quenched by
the speeches, first, of the Bishop of London, who had been at the concluding
of those Assertions at Lambeth; and secondly of the Deane of Paul's Doctor
Overald, who had been a party in these controversies, page 29. and page 41.
And for the Orthodoxie of these Assertions in Doctor Whitakers sense, Doctor
Barlow the Relater of this Conference puts it upon Doctor Reynolds terming them
so, not upon his own or his Masters Opinion, he having been well acquainted
with the ^^riage of that business at Lambeth, as then Chaplain to the
Archbishop in his house; and his Relation tells us, The nine Assertions were
sent to the University for the appeasing of those quarrels that were risen in
Cambridge about certain points of Divinity: If for the appeasing of quarrels,
it was wisdom so to pen them, as they might satisfy and unite all sides with
common and general truth. As the first Assertion does, saying;

1. That God has predestined, etc. which is most true, but it says nothing
de ordine and modo, etc. which is now the question, and was then.

2. The second speaks true of the moving and efficient cause, both (...), but
de causa, non est quaestio; sed de objecto; whether it be Homo, or homo
peccator, or homo peccator paenitens, aut contumax; Nothing in man is the cause
of his Election.

3. The third, of the number, is very true but founded on the Infalibility of
God^ foreknowledge, as on the Immutability of his will.

4. The fourth is the most ambiguou^ assertion, for if it suppose
Non-predestination to be the Cause of the Necessity of Condemnation for Sin;
it puts no^ causam pro causa: but if it suppose Non predestination as a
mere negative of suc^ an Act of God, and suppose sin committed, and not
repented of, there is caus^ enough for the Justice of God to condem^ him that
has sinned, and used no remedy.

CHAP. II. The second Opinion.
THe second Opinion, of the Order o^ Predestination, having these Defe^ders,
The Synod at Dort, P. Mouli^ Doctor Abbot B. of Sarisbury, Docto^ Carleton B.
of Chichester; many Papists, (...) Bellarmine, Cajetan, and the Dominican^ and
of which many do say that Saint A^^^stine was the first Author, is this;

1. That God from all Eternity decreed to create mankind holy, and good.

2. That he foresaw man being tempted by Satan, would fall into sin, if God did
not hinder it; he decreed not to hinder.

3. That out of Mankind seen fallen into sin and misery, he chose a certain
number to raise to righteousness, and to eternal life, and rejected the rest
leaving them in their sins.

4. That for these his chosen, he decreed to send his Son to redeem them, and
HIS SPIRIT TO CALL THEM, and sanctify them, the rest he decreed to forsake,
leaving them to Satan and themselves, and to punish them for their sins.

This Opinion is misliked by the defenders of the former, and of the following
Opinions also.

1. Because to defend the justice of God, it supposes mankind corrupted
before any Election or Reprobation was made, which seems needless, because
there be Elect and Reprobate Angels, without or before any corruption or fall:
Cacodaemones non fuere in Massa, and tamen Reprobati; Christus non fuit in
Massa, and tamen ut homo Eligitur. Prideaux 1. Lectione.

2. Because it supposes Original sin the cause of Reprobation, which sin
yet is remitted in Baptism to many Reprobates. Whitaker. Cygnea Cant. p. 7.

3. Because with the former Opinion it teaches Christ to be sent only to the
Elect, and the Word and Spirit only to call them, whereby the Reprobate is but
more oppressed, being called to embrace salvation offered, which they cannot
do, and yet for refusal thereof they are more deeply condemned.

So these two Opinions offend much against Gods Goodness and Truth: yet this
second well acknowledges, that God decreed something upon his foreknowledge
what man would do being permitted; That this foreknowledge is so certain, that
upon it God builded his greatest Counsels of the mystery of the Gospel, as
upon the foreknowledge of Adams fall, the decree to send Christ.

Secondly, It provideth well for the justice of God on Infants dying, who have
no other desert of death but Original sin, from which as to the pain of
eternal death, Gods mercy delivers whom he pleases by Baptism, or the vow
thereof in the holy Church; Parvuloru^ autem causam ad exemplum Majorum non
patiuntur afferri; says Hilary of the Massilienses in which they were right:
for the Election or Reprobation which is of Infants that live not to years of
discretion, is no necessary pattern for the Election or Reprobation of them
that live into a further Age.

The Defenders of this Opinion claim our 17. Article as for them, and surely
better may they do it than they of the former; for those words, To deliver
from curse and damnation, those whom he has chosen, import a curse and
damnation fallen into, by those who are delivered. But how those words chosen
in Christ, and the godly consideration of Predestination and our Election in
Christ, and those words, We must receive Gods Promises in such wise, as they
be generally set forth unto us in holy Scriptures; How these will stand with a
decree of Election, made before Christ be thought on, otherwise than as the
Means to bring the Elect to salvation, (for the Article makes these two
things, To choose some in Christ out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ
unto everlasting salvation;) or how a general promise will stand with a
particular purpose, meaning or intending the promise but to some few; let them
consider how they can make it good by their Doctrine, and I will consider how I
can make it good which the Article says, by the Doctrine of the fifth Opinion.

As to the appeal to Bucer and P* Martyr, for the sense of our Articles, used
by Doctor Whitakers in his time, and of late by the Bishop of Chichester
Carleton, the answer is full;

1. That Bucer is not of the same Opinion with Martyr, nor Carleton with
Whitakers, in the apprehension of the order of Predestination.

2. That it is not true, that the Disciples of P. Martyr and Bucer composed our
Articles; for these Articles on which there is now question, were the same
under King Edward the 6. and Queen Elizabeth; but the Bishops and Divines
under King Edw. 6. had composed the Articles and Liturgy before P. Martyr and
Martin Bucer came hither; as does appear in Mr. Fox his story. To Bellarmine
objecting that England had Bucer and Martyr Seminatores fidei, the renowned
Doctor Andrews answers, p. 31. Non tamen (Si verum volumus,) seminarunt duo
illi viri fidem in Anglia, etc. Nevertheless, if we will speak truth, those
two men did not plant the (reformed) faith in England; but sought to weed out
some Tares (of superstition) long since oversow'd by you (Papists.) Although
even those Tares themselves before their coming hither, were for the most part
condemnd and rooted out: But these men entered upon others labors, and bestowed
their pains also here, that they might be helpful to them in University
matters.

3. Whosoever were the chief Composers of our Articles (of whom it is certain
Archbishop Cranmer was one) they had more respect to the Augustan Confession,
than to any other, as appears by the very Identity of many of the Articles,
and more familiarity with Melanchton and Erasmus, than any other Divines,
singularly approving their Expositions of the sacred Scriptures, and of the
principal Articles of the Christian Faith: insomuch that they caused to be
translated into English Erasmus paraphrase on the Gospels, and enjoined them to
be studied by Priests, and to lie ready in Churches for all men to read, and
as it were to drink in the Doctrine of Scriptures according to Erasmus his
interpretation, whose writings which way they go in those controversies all
men well know that have read them.

CHAP. 3. The Third Opinion.
THe third Opinion seems to be defended by the reverend and learned late
Bishop of Norwich, Doctor Overald, and Richard Thompson his diligent Audiditor,
and familiar; as may be gathered out of the Bishops judgment de quinque
Articulis in Belgia controversis, and out of the Conference at Hampton Court,
and out of Thompsons Diatribe de intercisione justitiae, c. 4. And it is,

1. That God decreed to create mankind good, etc. as the second Opinion said.

2. That he foresaw the fall of man etc. as in the same second Opinion was said.

3. That he decreed to send his Son to dye for the World, and his Word to
call, and to offer salvation unto all men, with a common and sufficient grace
in the means to work faith in Men, if they be not wanting to themselves.

4. That out of Gods fore knowledge of man's infirmity. and that none would
believe by this common grace, he decreed to add a special grace more
effectual, and abundant, to whomsoever he pleased, chosen according to his own
Purpose and Grace, by which they shall not only be able to believe, but also
actually believe.

This Opinion, if I understand it aright, I have not found expressly or strictly
examined by any Divine: Doctor Abbot in his animadversion upon Thompsons
Diatribe suspecteth c. 4. Insuavis quidam and gravis halitus Arminiani dogmatis.
Arminianisme in it and rejected it. But Doctor Overald does clearly sever it
from the Remonstrants Tenet, as you shall see by and by: I object it thus.

1. That common Grace by which no man is saved, which is inferior to the
infirmity of man, is not the Grace of the Gospel, nay deserves not the name of
Grace, which never brought forth the effect, Salvation.

2. That superabundant, special, effectual Grace, seems not to be the Grace
of the Gospel, being rejected of none to whom it is offered: for the Grace of
the Gospel is such as is received by some, and the self same rejected by
other some; to some it is in vain, to others, not in vain.

3. This Opinion (with the two former) seems to bring in a certain
desperation into the minds of men, (as was of old objected to St. Augustine)
seeing none can be saved but by that special and abundant Grace, which is
given but to a few, out of the secret purpose of God; which whether God does
intend to give or no, the general promises in the Gospel do not assure,
seeing they sound no more than a common grace, which is ineffectuall, by this
Opinion.

But before I censure it farther, be it presented unto you, in the words of
one of the most illuminate Doctors of our Age.

There were five Articles controverted in Holland.
1. Of Gods Predestination. 2. Of Christ's Consule Articulos Lambethanos boc
Anno 1651 Editos.
Death. 3. Of Freewill and Grace. 4. Of the manner of working of Gods Grace. 5.
Of the Perseverance of Believers. Touching which the Remonstrants or Arminians,
and the Contra-remonstrants or Puritans, do maintain contrary Opinions; the
middle way between which our Church (as I conceive) does much more rightly hold.

Article 1. of Gods Predestination.
First, the Remonstrants make the general and conditional Decree of
Predestination to be upon condition of believing according to the general
Gospell-promise of saving all men through Christ dying for them, if with a
lively and persevering faith they shall believe in him by the Word and holy
Ghost assisting it: Secondly, the special and absolute Decree to be out of the
foreknowledge of Faith touching the saving all such particular men, whom God
foresaw would believe through grace, and on the other side condemning of those
whom he foresaw would continue impenitent in sin, and unbelievers. And this
is the Opinion of the ancient Fathers before S. Augustine, and of many after
him, and of many Papists, Lutherans, and many others.

Secondly, The Contra-Remonstrants, excluding the general and conditional
Decree, make one only particular and absolute Decree touching the saving, and
enduing with Faith and preseverance, some certain particular men chosen out of
mankind through Christ dying for them alone, by the effectual, or
irresistible grace of the Holy Ghost, peculiar only to them; All others by an
absolute Decree being rejected and condemned. And this is the Opinion of
Zuinglius, Calvin and the Puritans; but is rejected by all Papists, Lutherans,
and many others.

Thirdly, our Church taking the middle way, joins the particular absolute
Decree (not out of foreknowledge of man's Faith, or Free Will, but out of the
purpose of Gods Will and Grace) touching the freeing and saving those whom God
has elected in Christ, with the general and conditional Will, or the
general promise of the Gospel; Teaching Gods Promises are so to be embraced
as they are proposed to us in the holy Scriptures, and that Will of God is to
be followed of us, which we have expressly revealed in his Word; as namely,
that God gave his Son for the World, or for all mankind; That Christ offered
himself a Sacrifice for all the sins of the whole World; That Christ
redeemed all mankind; That Christ commanded the Gospel to be preached unto
all; that God Wills and Commands all men to hear Christ, and to believe in him;
and in him to offer grace and salvation unto all men. That this is the
infallible truth, in which there can be no falsehood, otherwise the Apostles and
other Ministers of the Gospel, preaching the same, should be false witnesses
of God, and should make him a Liar; And this Opinion agrees with the judgment
of St. Augustine, as he is expounded by Prosper and Fulgentius; It is the more
common Doctrine of the Church after St. Augustine: And these two things do well
stand together; God in the first place, to offer salvation to all, if they will
believe, and common grace and sufficient in the means ordained by God, if men
will not be wanting to the Word of God and his holy Spirit. And then in the
second place God that he might be helpful to humane frailty, and man's
salvation might be more certain, would add his special, more effectual and
abundant grace to be communicated to whom he please, by which not only they
are able to believe, or obey, if they please, but also actually do will,
believe, obey and persevere, according to the sentence of St. Augustine, Sic
Deus ordinavit omnium Angeloru hominumque vitam, etc. So God ordained the life
of all Angels and Men, that therein he might first manifest how far
Freewill could go; and then what the benefit of his grace, and the judgment
of righteousness could do. De correp. and great. cap. 10.

Article 2. Of Christ's Death.
In like manner of the Death of Christ for all, there are three Opinions.

The first, that Christ dyed for all men, and by his Death did redeem all
mankind in Gods general and conditional purpose of giving salvation for
Christ's sake that dyed, to all upon condition of Faith depending on the free
cooperation of men under Grace.

The Second contrary to the first, that Christ did not dye for all, etc. nor
did redeem all mankind, etc. nor that God by any manner of means, or upon
any condition, did will, or intend to give salvation or Grace for Christ's sake
to any other save only the Elect, etc.

The Third, supposing Christ's Death for all men, and Gods purpose conditioned
with the general grace of the Gospell-promises, adds the special intention
of Faith, touching the applying the benefit of Christ's death, by grace more
abounding, and effectual, absolutely, certainly and infallibly only to the
Elect, without any prejudice, or any diminution of the Will and Grace common
and sufficient.

Article 3. Of Freewill and Grace.
All agree that Freewill is not able to do any thing that is good, without
Grace preventing, present and subsequent, so as it holds the beginning, middle
and end in conversion, and Faith, and every good work: yet they dissent in
this, that the first Opinion makes exciting Grace so to be joined with the
word heard, and understood, and meditated upon, that in some degree it is
common to all who are willing to obey it.

The Second strives to make grace proper and peculiar only to the Elect, and
will not confess it to be in any manner of way common to all.

The Third conjoynes both sides, acknowledging Grace so to be common and
sufficient being joined with the word, as withal to profess it is special and
effectual to produce certainly salvation, being prop^r to those, whom God out
of his good pleasure has graciously elected in Christ.

Article 4. Of the manner of working of Gods Grace.
The first Opinion makes Grace so to work in man, that it takes not away the
liberty of his Will, but preserves it; so that a man may by Grace so believe
and obey, as that he may also by his Freewill resist Grace. The second makes
the works of Grace to be irresistible, so as wherever it comes, it does
immutably incline and draw the mind to assent and obey. The third Opinion
teaches, men may be so stirred up and moved by Grace, that they may both obey
that Grace calling and moving, if they attend thereto, and also may through
their Freewils resist Gods Call and Motion: but it adds further, that God,
when he will, and to whom he will, does give Grace so abundant, or powerful,
or congruent, or some other way effectual, so that although the Will in
respect of its liberty may resist, yet it does not resist, but certainly and
infallibly obey: and thus God to deal with those whom he has elected in
Christ, so far forth as is necessary to their salvation.

Article 5. Of the Perseverance of Believers.
The first Opinion makes all Believers to be so furnished with Gods Grace,
that they are able to persevere, if they will be as careful as they should be;
that the same men also may possibly fall away from Faith and Grace, through
negligence and security.

The Second denies Believers to be able so to fall away from Faith and Gods
Grace, as to become in the state of damnation, or perish; but such as shall
once truly believe, shall always so persevere in Faith and Grace, that at
length they may all attain salvation.

The Third, with St. Augustine, makes Believers, through the infirmities of the
flesh, and temptations, to be able to depart from Faith and Grace, or likewise
to fall away; but it adds, those Believers who are called according to
purpose, and who are firmly rooted in a lively Faith, cannot either totally or
finally fall away, or perish, but by special and effectual grace, so to
persevere in a true and lively Faith, that at length they may be brought to
eternal life.

By this we may understand what Doctor Overalds mind was in the Conference at
Hampton Court, p. 41. 42. Richard Thompson has the like cap. 4. De
intercisione Justitiae. For after he had spoken of Christ, given to redeem
and reconcile all unto God; and of aides and means given whereby men may be
actually reconciled, he adds page 17. Sed miserum genus humanum si vel sic a
Deo relictum fuisset, etc. But miserable had been Mankind, if even so they had
been left of God; for great is the wickedness of Man, and every imagination of
his heart is evil continually. Therefore it must needs come to pass, that
either all of themselves should despise those riches of Gods goodness, or if
any should make use of them, yet a while after they would loath them again,
except the superabundant mercy of God had separated some to himself, to whom
he had decreed from all eternity, to afford an effectual calling, and final
perseverance in Grace taken according to his purpose; others being passed by,
and left to the counsels of common providence, whom in the end he would condemn
for their impenitence and unbelief.

You know now this Opinion, and the Author is to be commended for his integrity
in opening the state of these questions, and for coming on thus far nearer to
the Truth than the former did; in acknowledging,

1. That Christ dyed for the sins of the whole World.

2. That the promise of the Gospel is Universal.

3. That a Grace sufficient is given, common to all that hear the Gospel, to
believe and obey it.

4. That Gods foreknowledge is extended not only to the fall of the first man,
but the infirmity of all men in particular; Whereupon for some men there was
prepared by God a more superabundant and effectual grace than for others.

5. In that it endeavoreth to accord the first part of our 17 Article,
concerning an absolute Predestination, with the latter part, concerning the
Universal promises: The like good desire appears in the Divines that were at
Dort in their joint Suffrage, de Articulo 20 These. 3. 4, 5.

But how congruous and happy this conjunction can be, of two extremes into a
third, or how possible it is to accord those two parts of the Article without
some other supposition than has yet been mentioned here, I cannot hope ever
to see it demonstrated. Nay I am persuaded that these manifest Truths sounding
in every part of the new Testament; That Christ is given a Redeemer Universal;
That the Promises of the Gospel are general; That the Spirit of Truth and
Power goes with them, in the Preaching of them; are able, being rightly
weighed, utterly to overthrow all manner of frames whatsoever may be imagined,
of the order of the Divine Predestination, which shall exclude the Divine
Prescience, proper, prime and Universal, such as the fifth Opinion will
discover: for since the Gospel presupposes, and acknowledges the fall of
mankind, and all to be sinners, and takes its occasion therefrom; since it
calls all men to reconciliation with God, commands Repentance and Faith to
all, promises forgiveness and life to all that believe in the Redeemer,
threatens wrath and death to abide upon all that believe not, Marc. 15. 15,
16. and declares that God will judge the World by Jesus Christ, and by the
Word of the Gospel, Acts 17. 31. Joh. 12. 48. And since God will judge in
righteousness, man as a reasonable Creature of a Freewill; The Gospel, I say
cannot admit a decree of predestination to life or death, that shall be made
upon contemplation of the fall and sin of man antecedent to the Gospel, or
before contemplation of the (...) or issues of the Gospel preached to the
World; which contemplation can be had before all time by no other power, but
the Divine foreknowledge.

CHAP. IV. The fourth Opinion.
THe Fourth Opinion is of Melanchton, Hemingius and the Lutherans that follow
the Augustan Confession, and formulam concordiae; The Remonstrants, or
Arminians and many Papists, etc.

1. That God decreed to create Man, to permit him to fall, and to send Christ
to redeem the World, etc. as in the third Opinion was said.

2. That he made a general conditional decree of Predestination, under the
condition of Faith, and Perseverance; And a special absolute decree of
electing those to life, whom he foreknew would believe and persevere under the
means and aides of Grace, Faith and Perseverance, and a special absolute
decree of condemning them, whom he foresaw to abide impenitent in their sins.

This Opinion was condemned in the late Synod at Dort. I mislike it for these
reasons:

1. Because a general conditional Predestination is none at all.

2. Because the decree of special Election of such as believe (no better
declared than thus) seems to make men choose God first, rather than God to
choose men.

3. Because it makes the decrees of justification and condemnation to be the
same with the decree of Election and Reprobation, which must be distinguished,
as they are Romans 8. 29.

4. Because it presents no more Grace given by God to the Elect, than to the
reprobate, neither greater cause of thankfulness.

Yet this Opinion does well to enlarge the objects of Gods foreknowledge, and
to extend it, not only to the fall of the first man, but even to Christ to be
manifested in the flesh, and believed on in the World, yea even to the last end
of all men, persevering either in Faith or Unbelief. Agreeing with the
Scriptures that builds Election upon foreknowledge at large, simply and
properly taken, Romans 8. 29. and 11. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 1, 2. and promises salvation
to the believer, but, persevering to the end.

Thus have we seen four Opinions:

The Transition to the fifth.
Seeing then none of these four give full satisfaction, though some pieces of
Truth be found in every one of them, yet joined with some inconvenience: It
were a work worth the labor to gather that truth out of them all, that might
avoid all inconveniences, the thing which I desire to do, by the light of Gods
Holy Spirit and Word.

1. So conceiving the order of Divine Predestination, as that we set not forth
only some one or two of the Divine attributes and properties, but preserve and
present them all:

His Dominion and Power, as the first Opinion would. His Mercy and Justice, as
the second Opinion would. His Truth and special Grace, as the third Opinion
would. His Wisdom and foreknowledge, as the fourth Opinion would.
And yet to acknowledge his judgments unsearchable, etc. as the Apostle would,
Romans 11. 33.

2. So conceiving it as may agree with the holy Scripture expounded literally
and without Tropes, in the greatest Propriety, and by the light of the most,
the plainest, the most fundamental places and principles therein.

3. So conceiving it as that the order in Grace does not subvert the order in
nature, but that we confess the Wisdom of God so to work his Will, as yet
he preserves the nature, freedom and properties of the Creature, in which
he works.

4. Lastly, conceiving it so, as that God may both save the World, in mercy,
and judge the World in righteousness.

CHAP. V. The fifth Opinion.
THe Fifth Opinion may be less acceptable to some for the Teachers, and the
defenders sake, (but (...) accepts no persons:) These are Arminius himself, if
he be interpreted according to his own principles in his Theses de natura Dei,
and Vorstius in his Tractate De Deo, and the Jesuits Molina, Vasquez, Zuarez,
Becanus, and others: Besides that this is the Opinion of the Fathers Greek and
Latin before St. Augustine, if their Doctrine concerning Prescience be rightly
examined and declared, namely,

1. That God by his infinite understanding from all Eternity knew all things
possible to be, seeing them in his own Omnipotency.

2. That among other infinite things possible, in his understanding he
conceived all this one frame of the World that now is, and in it all the Race
of Mankind from the first man to the last, every one in his several order,
government and event, only as possible to be, if he will say the Word.

Wherein he understood there might be things necessary, things contingent,
some things causes, some effects, some as ends, some as means to ends, some
Acts of God, some acts of a free Creature, some good, some evil, some things
as rewards, some as punishments.

3. That he knows how to vary or alter the ordering either of all, or of any
part, or person in the race of men, so as other effects, and other ends than
those (that now are) might be brought forth, if he would otherwise order them.

4. But considering this frame of the world, and order of mankind (as now it
is, but then only as possible) that he judged it was exceeding good for the
manifestation of the glory of his Wisdom, Power, Goodness, Mercy, Justice,
Dominion, and Lordship, if he should will, or decree to put it into execution,
and into being.

5. That God infallibly foreknew that if he should decree to put it into
execution, that then these and these particular persons would certainly by this
order of means and government, be transmitted, and brought to eternal life;
and that those other particular persons, under their order of means and
government, through their own fault would go into perdition, if Justice
should be done them.

6. That though he knew what these would be, yet he determined and decreed
out of his own absolute Will and pleasure to say, Fiat, Be it so: and to put
into execution, and into being, all this which he had in his understanding; and
in so doing, he predestined all men either to life or death Eternal.

For he predestined to life those particular men, to whom out of his own
good pleasure he decreed to give those happy means, whereby he foreknew they
would be Vessels fit for honor, being given unto them: He rejected those,
letting them to perish, to whom he decreed to give no other means than such
under which he foreknew that through their own ingratitude they would be fit
for wrath, if no other were given them, and out of his own just Will, when as
he could have ordered them otherwise to the producing of another event, he
would not do it, but make them vessels of his wrath.

With reference to this order, the Elect are styled by St. Luke Acts 13. 48.
(...) Such as were ordained to eternal life.
(...); and the reprobate, by St. Jude, verse. 4. (...) Such as were before of
old ordained to this condemnation.
(...); and for Providence in general, see Acts 17. 27. (...), determining the
foreappointed times.
(...); and for Predestination in special, see Romans 8. 28. And Ephesians. 1. 11.
There is (...).
(...), the setting and placing of things by the counsel of his own will, in
that order of Causes, and of means, which he infallibly understands will bring
forth such ends and such effects, if he please to do his part, as is laid out
by himself in this order, and please to permit the creature to do its part,
as is observed in the same Order. By this Order, means, government, benefits,
aides, etc. I understand, the creation of man righteous, the permission of his
fall, the corrections of his sin, the means of his restoration by the Son
of God made man, the calling, the converting of a Sinner, his faith,
repentance, perseverance, his blessings, chastisements, trials, and whatsoever
else is now found in the order of any man's salvation, or in the aberrations
from that order whereby men come to destruction. And to this agrees the ancient
definition of Predestination, that it is, Praeparatio beneficiorum Dei, quibus
liberantur quicunque liberantur. The preparation of Gods benefits, whereby all
are delivered that are set free.
And Fulgentius his definition, lib. 2. ad Monimum, Praedestinatio Dei nihil
est aliud, quam praeparatio operum ejus, quae in aeterna sua dispositione, aut
misericorditer se facturum praescivit, aut just: that is, Divine
Predestination is nothing else but the preparation of Gods works, Which in his
eternal providence he foreknew he would do, either mercifully, Vid. infra. 3.
part. cap. 20.
or justly.

CHAP. 6. An (...) of the fifth Opinion.
THis Opinion in the decree of Predestination observes,

1. An Act of Gods understanding, and an Act of his will.

2. The Act of his Understanding is his knowledge; in respect of things not yet
in being, called foreknowledg; which foreknowledge is put by this Opinion
before the act of Predestinating, according to the Scriptures, Romans 8. 28. 1
Pet. 1. 1. 2. Whom he foreknew he Predestined.

3. It takes knowledge here properly, and without any trope, for that within
Schools is called Scientia simplicis intelligentiae; and that extended even to
things future, contingent, and sub hypothesi: God knowing by his infinite
understanding infallibly what things will follow if this or that be done by
himself, or by a Creature.

4. This knowledge is the highest that we can conceive in an intelligent
Nature, and necessary to any that works with wisdom; and therefore most
worthy to be attributed to the first, highest and most wise Agent, especially
in the first contriving, disposing and ordering of all things.

5. A knowledge most necessary for him that must govern contingent Events, and
Acts of a free Creature, if he will have any such to be under his government.

6. A knowledge confessed and supposed by the defenders of the second third and
fourth Opinions, who teach that by his knowledge God did foreknow the fall of
Adam, before he decreed to create him, and before he decreed to send his Son to
redeem him; for with them, and with truth, God did not first decree to create
man, and to permit him to fall, and then was to seek a remedy how to relieve
him, but foreknew the remedy that he could use if he should fall, before he
decreed to permit him to fall, or to create him; yea so infallibly did God
foreknow the sinful fall of man, (which yet was not Gods Act, but man's, and a
contingent Act of a free creature) that upon this foreknowledge he contrived
the whole mystery of Christ, and of our Redemption.

Now if this knowledge were used in one contingent thing, it might have been
used in a Million; if in one free Act of the first man, then in all the free
Acts of all men; and if in that which was the occasion of Gods mercy in our
Redemption, then in all occasions of Gods Acts, that are consequent Acts, even
of the General Judgment, which shall be at the last day: For Gods knowledge
is infinite.

7. This knowledge of God, being previall to his predestinating, did not look
therefore to the Mass of mankind as created and uncorrupted, nor to the Mass
fallen and corrupted, nor to Christ believed on only, but to these, and beyond
all these, to the first, middle and final state of every particular man, and
the Universal state of all men.

This here for the Act of Gods Understanding, (whereof more anon) the Act of
his will follows.

1. To predestinate is the proper Act of the will of God; His knowledge is his
Counselor: but his will is King, and they are both himself, Ephess. 1. 11.
Who works all things according to the counsel of his will. And to
predestinate is the part and office (...), which most properly is Gods, that
supremely orders all things, choosing and allowing what shall be, and in what
manner, and to what end: Thus Saint Paul, Romans 9. 18. 19. speaks of the will
of God, but as of the prime, and highest, and most universal cause of things,
approving or permitting all other inferior causes, which because they might
have been restrained, or changed by the supreme cause, and were not, they are
said all at last to be resolved into the will of God, as the prime Cause.

2. This will of God is absolute, Independent, having no other cause but his
own good pleasure: for, when as, until God make his decrees, all things are
known but as possible, and are yet under the pleasure of God, whether they
shall be or no, how can they possibly be the Causes of his will? He
understands them indeed, as he has contrived them, fit to be willed, because
they are fit to show forth all his glory, and therefore in the end he wills
them: but he could contrive other things than these, or set these some other
way as fit to show forth his glory, if he would; Therefore that he wills
these, it is his own most free pleasure. Hinc autem nullam esse
Praedestinationis causam in praedestinato patet, quia cum homo praedestinandus
nullo modo censeatur proprie existere, sed conditionaliter tantum, nihil potest
esse in eo quod Deus moveat ad illu^ Predestinandum. That is, Hence it plainly
appears there can be no cause of Predestination in him that is Predestined,
because when as the man that is to be predestined, can be thought no manner
of way properly to be, but only conditionally, there can be nothing in him
which may move God to predestinate him. P. Ferrius Spec. Schol. c. 24. p. 253.

Furthermore this opinion avoideth all the Inconveniences, that any of the
former four do fall into; for

1. It exalts and magnifieth all the attributes of God and not some only;

As His wisdom and knowledge,
In foreknowing not only his own works, but also all the works of every free
creature, and that to every circumstance of every particular in this
numberless number, and how to govern them to his glory. P. 139.

In using the reasonable creature according to its nature, in the permission of
Sin, in the obedience or disobedience to grace, that he may judge the world
in Righteousness.

His Power,
In creating and governing all things, bringing light out of darkness, and
happiness out of misery.

His goodness,
In making all good at the first, and overcomming evil with goodness.

His Universal Grace and Mercy,
In preparing Redemption for all men, that had made themselves bond slaves to
Satan; and in providing means to apply, and to communicate this Redemption.

His Truth,
In that his promises are meant to all to whom they are sent, and performed to
all that keep his conditions: Ideo veracem Tert. in Praxeam.
Deum credens, scio illum non aliter quam disposuit pronunciasse, nec aliter
disposuisse quam prenunciavit.

His Justice,
In punishing all such as use not either the Rectitude of their nature, or the
benefit of their Redemption offered, sincerely and constantly.

His special grace and singular Love,

In them whom he foreknew would use his benefits (if they were granted them) in
whose Salvation and glory he was so well pleased, that he confirmed to them by
his decree that course and calling which he saw would infallibly bring them
unto it.

Less grace being showed unto them, whom he foreknew would fail of Salvation
(through their own infidelity, ingratitude or security) in the good way
wherein they were set, or under the sufficient calling which they had: which
fail of theirs he could have mended, by bettering his benefits, if he would,
but rather decreed to make them deserved Vessels of his wrath, and subjects for
his Justice.

His Dominion and sovereign Lordship,
In that he being the highest and supreme cause of all things, ordered them
after his own pleasure, making happy whom he will, and forsaking whom he will,
finding them in cause worthy to be forsaken, after they so often have forsaken
him. Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 43. Sapientia praecellet Pater, etc. In wisdom the
Father excels all humane and Angelical wisdom, because he is Lord, and a
just Judge, and Ruler over all: For he is both good, and merciful, and
patient, and saves whom he ought; nor is here wanting to him the good effect of
a just Judge, nor is his wisdom diminished: for he saves whom he ought to
save, and judges those that are worthy of Judgment; yet is not his justice to
be counted cruelty, considering his foregoing and preventing goodness.

2. This Opinion avoideth the imputation of Stoicall Fate, which the 3. first
cannot possibly avoid, though they put it from them; for they make man's
salvation or damnation necessary, by an external, and an antecedent necessity
of a Decree of God. But this Opinion placing Gods Decree after his
foreknowledge, makes man's salvation or damnation only infallible to Gods
knowledge, but free and contingent to man, Gods knowledge (as knowledge)
causing nothing, and his Decree not altering or crossing, but ratifying that
which he knew would be the work of Man, working out his own salvation by
co-working with the Grace of God, or working his own damnation by forsaking
his own mercy.

3. It avoideth the accusations laid against the fourth Opinion, for it makes
the Election of God absolute, definite, inconditionall, complete, irrevocable
and immutable. It makes God to choose man, and not man first to choose God. It
has no affinity with Pelagianisme in the matter of Predestination at all, nor
in the matter of Grace, unless this be Pelagianisme, to hold that under the
aids of Grace the will is yet free to evil, of which we shall dispute in the
third part. It makes Predestination the root and cause of Calling, justifying,
glorifying: of faith, repentance, perseverance, and of all the good that is in
us, which are the effects of Predestination, and effect of the love of God
predestinating them unto us.

4. It ministers no matter of despair, nor of Presumption, but cherishes
both hope and fear.

Not of Despair, For
1. No man is decreed against, but upon the foreknowledge of his own refusal
of life offered him.

2. The Promises are general, and he may truly think them to belong to him.

3. There is sufficient Grace in the means of Conversion, to remedy all the
weakness or perverseness that is in man's depraved nature; He may hope
therefore.

Not of Presumption, For
1. No man is decreed for, but with the foreknowledge of his own acceptance of
life offered him.

2. The Promises of God are general, but they have conditions, which he must
be careful to observe that will inherit the things promised.

3. The Grace that is in the means of Conversion is not tied unto them by any
physical connection, but is dispensed by the good pleasure of God, who may
offer and unite it to the World, when and how long he will, or may withhold
the influence of it, and so harden or forsake the careless or the proud; He
may fear therefore.

5. It ministers as much sweet comfort to all godly persons that find
themselves walking in the ways that lead to life, and confirms their Faith
of eternal salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, and as fervently kindles
their love to God, as any way or order of our Election conceived otherwise.

6. Lastly, it acknowledges the deepnesse of Gods judgments and the
unsearchablenesse of his Counsels; for who can tell why God by his Decree
settled upon Peter, rather than upon Judas, why he loved Esau less than
Jacob, why he suffered one man to perish, and not another, when he was able
out of the treasures of his wisdom and knowledge to have disposed their
course, calling, and government to quite contrary ends? who can tell a reason,
why he distributed the gifts of Nature, and of Grace so diversely? why he
bears some with so long patience, and cuts off others in so great severity?
why some have so much, some so little both of temporal and spiritual
blessings? Quis novit sensum Domini? or who has been his Counselor? Or who
has first given unto him? for of him, and through him, and to him are all
things. To whom be glory for ever.

The end of the first Part.
The Transition to the second Part.
NOw having propounded that which I conceive to be the Truth, and commended it
by comparison with other Opinions that seem defective, I have yet one thing
more to do, necessary for the confirming and testifying of this truth, against
all exceptions either of haeresie in general, or of schism at home in this
Church of England. I am therefore to show how all the Articles, or heads of
Divinity, that necessarily run into this question, being rightly declared,
do cohere and consent to this Doctrine, that we may make it good which the
Philosopher says, Ethic. 1. c. 8. (...) (...): I am to declare then the
Orthodox Doctrine both of the ancient Church, and of the Church of England:
First, of these things, as Eternal,

Of Gods Knowledge, Will, Providence,

Predestination, Election, Reprobation;

These shall make a second Part.

2. Of these things, as done in Time: Of the Creation, of the fall of Man, the
effects of the Fall, the Restoration of Man, his Vocation, Conversion: Of
Grace, Freewill, Perseverance, and of the last judgment; which is commonly
neglected and left out by them that dispute of these matters: And these shall
make a third part of this work, through God Goodness and assistance.

CHAP. I. Of Gods Knowledge.
ST. James says Acts 15. 18. (...); Known from everlasting are unto God all
his Works.

S. Paul says, Romans 8. 29. (...); whom he foreknew he Predestined. S. Peter
says, 1 Pet. 1. 2. (...); to the strangers, Elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father.

There be that interpret these two places rather by the Word Precognition, than
by the Word Prescience, and tropically, as to signify approbation, and love,
rather than Knowledge properly taken; and they complain of the ignorance of
the Latins that understood not the Greek, and of the ignorance of the Greeks
that understood not the Hebrew phrase in this word; and that by the Word
Prescience they occasioned the Pelagian Heresy of election upon prescience of
works; So Pareus: yet Origin is he to whom they are beholden for this their
interpretation, one neither ignorant of Greek, nor Hebrew, nor thought
guiltless by them, of giving occasion to Pelagius his Heresy. But if it be
their minds by the word (...), so to include approbation, as they would exclude

1. Foreknowledge properly taken, I will fetch a poor Almanake to wipe away
this Gloss by the common use of the word Prognostication.

2. Next, I will say that an Hebraism, or Grammatical quillet, is too weak a
thing to sway a cause of this weight and value.

3. I say, that it is very improbable that S. Paul and S. Peter being not in
any poetical or popular vein, but in a sad and grave discourse, do use any
figurative, or improper term, where most propriety, and perspicuity, and
certainty was needful to be used.

4. I demand a proof that the use of the Verb simple, shall draw the compound
to follow it in the like signification, That because God knows the way of the
righteous, Psalm. 1. ult.
is well interpreted, God approves it: Therefore that the Lord foreknoweth the
way of the righteous, it is well interpreted, God foreapproveth the way of the
righteous; which though it is true, yet it does not follow by any necessity of
the connection.

5. Lastly, if this interpretation make the whole, and the only sense of this
word foreknowledge here, then I say the difference is quite taken away that
Paul and Peter make between these two, to foreknow, and to predestinate; To
foreknow, and to elect; nay worse, that is put into foreknowledge which more
properly belongs to Predestination, and to Election; for approbation and love
is more discovered by the Act of the Will which is to Predestinate and to
Elect, than it is by the Act of the Understanding, which is to foreknow.

Yet if their desire be to have it only admitted and granted, (which was
Origens mind,) that there goes with the foreknowledge of God, a good liking
and a well-pleasing, and approving of the subject foreknowne, as fit to be
loved, and capable of choosing, I shall not only allow but maintain their
desire: for this is the reason why in Scripture (not in Schools) the good and
the Elect are called only Praesciti, or foreknowne, and not the Reprobate;
(though simply they also were foreknowne, as God being not ignorant of them)
but there was not that in them, which he might approve or think well of: yet
this does neither hinder the acceptions of foreknowledge properly as remaining
in the Understanding, nor infer an argument that the Persons chosen, were
chosen for the good that was approved in them; or that they could not but be
chosen, because they were good in Gods knowledge: for many worlds of men God
might see in that infinite knowledge which now I speak of, as eligible as
these whom he has chosen; all which notwithstanding he has covered in the
eternal darkness of never-being: for to be eligible, and to be Elect, I
trow, are two things, that need not ever follow one another.

For the clearing whereof, and of this whole question, The distinction of Gods
Knowledge is all sufficient, which says, It is either scientia Simplicis
Intelligentiae, or scientia Visionis; The Knowledge of Pure Understanding, or
the knowledge of Vision; the first is of all things possible, understood in the
omnipotency of God himself; The second is of things that shall be, upon the
Decree made that they shall be; for then they are seen as present; the first is
Scientia naturalis, the second is libera; the first is natural in God, the
second is free; namely, following some free act of the Will of God.

Aquinas part 1a. Q. 14. Art. 9. Deus scit omnia quaecunque sunt quocunque
modo, etc. God knows all things whatsoever after what manner soever they are:
some things although they are not now in being, yet either they were, or shall
be; and all those things God is said to know, by the knowledge of Vision, etc.
But somethings there are which are in the power of God or the Creature, which
yet neither are, nor were, nor ever shall be; and in respect of these God is
not said to know by the knowledge of Vision, but by the knowledge of pure
Understanding.

Fra. Junius, These. Theolog. Disp. 8. These. 32. 33. Scientiae Dei duplicem
statuimus modum, etc. To supply the defect of our weak apprehensions, we fancy
a twofold manner of Gods knowledge; One is, whereby God knows himself by
himself, 1 Cor. 2. 11. Another, whereby in one act, not successively;
eternally, not in time; by his Essence, not by reception of species; immutably,
not contingently, he knows all things that are, or that are not as yet, but
shall be, by the knowledge of Vision; that is, he sees them as if they were
present before him: Those things also which are not, nor ever shall be, he
knows, so far forth as he knows whatever he himself is able to do, and
what by his Permission may be done of every Creature.

Zanchius de natura Dei lib. 3. c. 2. q. 8. Novit Deus etiam quae non sunt,
etc. God knows also the things which are not, no less than those things which
are, namely in his powerful Essence: This is called, The knowledge of pure
Understanding. He knows those things which are not as yet, but shall be
hereafter, in himself as in one that is able and willing to make them be; and
this is is called, The knowledge of Vision; For God sees those things as
present, because they shall all come to pass.

1. This distinction to be allowed is out of question: yet two things may be
doubted about it; 1. Whether the meaning of it be, so to separate the objects
of these 2. Knowledges, possibilia, from futura: and so unite possibilia to
scientiae simplicis Intelligentiae, and futura to scientiae Visionis, that its
not possible the same things should first be known as possibilia, and after as
futura; and first be the objects simplicis Intelligentiae, and then (a decree
of the will coming to them to make them futura) be objects scientiae Visionis.

This is of so much importance to me, that if all these things that are now in
the World, have been, or shall be, (by the force of Gods Decree that has
settled them) were not before that Decree, known only as possible, by the
natural and necessary Knowledge of God, only conditionally if he please to
give them being and way; If (I say) this be not true in God after our manner
of understanding. I am quite beside the cushion, and this is the (...) that
leads me into this long error: But I need not fear, since it is undeniable
that the knowledge of God is not the cause of things, but voluntate adjuncta,
when his will comes to his knowledge and his power; whence it follows, Non
esse in scientia Dei ut res sint, sed quod esse possint, so long as they are
but in the understanding, they are there but as possibilia: and if this were
not so, there were no speculative knowledge in God of things which he works,
but practical only; contrary to Thomas. Q. 14. art. 16. Zanchius, Deus omnia
creavit, and creat, etc. God created all things, and does create; Therefore the
Idea, form, and copy of all things, must needs be in Gods Mind and
Understanding: For what Artisan does any thing, who has not the Idea and form
of those things which he makes, preconceiv'd in his mind? And St. Augustine
notably, Deus non aliquid nesciens fecit, etc. God made nothing ignorantly,
which also cannot be rightly spoke of any Artificer. -- whence we meet with a
kind of Miracle, but yet a Truth; that this World could not be known to us,
unless it had been; but unless it had been known to God before it was, it
had never been; De civitate, lib. 11. c. 10. Prideaux also, de scientia media,
page 54. Before these Times every Divine held for most certain these things
which follow.

1. That God was the Cause of Things.

2. That he framed them not in himself only, but with his Will adjoined. 3.
A twofold knowledge to be distinguished; one, of Pure understanding; the other
of Vision; and that to respect things Possible, this, Future things. 4. That to
be understood before the act of Gods Will; this to comprehend that. 5. Not
that, but this to be the Cause of things.

See, Scientia simplicis Intelligentiae praeintelligitur actui divinae
voluntatis, whereby the same things that were respected as possible, are now
respected as future; for, actus divinae voluntatis accedens facit ut sint
futura: So my first doubt is cleared.

2. The second doubt is, whether future, contingent, conditional things,
especially the free acts of a created will, under supposition if such an one
were created, or placed in this or that order, be a subject knowable by the
understanding of God, which is, Simplicis intelligentiae; the reason of the
doubt is, because they that dispute contra scientiam mediam Jesuitarum, say,
Objectum hujus scientiae mediae perit, and per consequens ipsa scientia
tollitur e medio: quia omnes actus voluntatis liberae juxta decretum divinum
determinentur; sic ut Deus non aliter ipsos praesciat futuros, nisi quia
futuros esse decreverit. (Sic perspicacissimus Prideaux.) Again, about the
name of Scientia media, they will not strive, veru^ res substrata displicet,
quatenus actus liberos voluntatis creatae effingit, qui decretum divinum non
praesupponerent, sed ordine saltem pracederent. This that displeases, might
indeed displease, if Scientia Media did apprehend liberos actus voluntatis
creatae, as simply futuros; for it is, Modus scientiae simplicis
Intelligentiae, and scientia media partakes more of simplicis Intelligentiae,
than of liberae, never to see more than the possibility of things, and sees the
futurition of them only upon supposition, if God make them to come into being
by his decree of Fiant. Neither can this contradicting here stand good with the
grants and concessions before and after: Before, convenit inter omnes Deum
saltem aliqua scientia, non conjecturali, sed certissima and absoluta, non
tantum res ipsas, sed uitiles ipsaru^ combinationes, sive connexiones,
praesentes, praeteritas vel futuras, necessarias vel contingentes, ab aeterno
scire; and that the Dominicans are slandered, when it is said they deny
absolutely that God does foreknow such future conditionate things: Paulus
Ferrius, consenting that God does know such things, cap. 23. After, there be
six ways by which God is said to know conditionata futura; Quaestio non est,
an omnino cognoscantur, sed utro horum modorum cognoscantur? But I strive not
for the manner how; but if they be known any way, certainly by Gods Simple
Understanding, which runs before any Decree of his Will (only a Will to supply
them, and to imagine them, being granted,) that they shall absolutely be, I
have enough to conclude, That all things whatsoever acts of God, or acts of the
Creature, necessary, free, contingent, future, good, evil, that are (after the
Decree of God) certainly known scientia Visionis, were (before the Decree,
when they were suspended under the pleasure of God, whether they should
absolutely be or no) known as certainly, Scientia simplicis intelligentiae:
for posito objecto qualicunque necessario illud cognoscit intellectus divinus,
propter infinitatem essentiae ipsius: posito itidem ex hypothesi objecto
qualicunque necessario intelligit Deus quid ex illo sit extiturum.

I will determine both these doubts in the words of Bellarmine, lib. 2. de
amissione gratiae, cap. 17. Deus cognitione simplicis intelligentiae, etc. God
by his knowledge of simple Understanding knew man would fall if he were made,
not only before his Creation, but before he had decreed to make him. Therefore
(according to our mean capacity)* that knowledge of this conditional
Proposition, namely, if Man be created, he will sin, does precede Gods absolute
decree of making Man: for those things are first in God which are Necessary
then those which are Voluntary; seeing those things may not be in God, these
cannot: but it is necessary for God to know all things, which may be possibly
known, whether they be absolutely future, or Conditionally; otherwise he
should not be of an infinite knowledge: But it was not necessary, but
Voluntary, that God should decree to make man.

For more ample proof of this foreknowledge of God futuroru^ contingentiu^,
etc. I refer you to Suarez his second book, in his Opuscula, and to Vasquez,
disp. de scientia Dei, 64, and deinceps.

It being confessed then that there is in God such a manner of Knowledge, which
we call simplicis intelligentiae; the next consideration is where we shall
find him using it: questionless, no place is so fit to seek it in, as in the
Divine act of Predestinating: for as to Predestinate is the first and highest
act of the Will, so to know intelligentia simplici, is the first and highest
act of the Understanding, and the most wise Agent wills not that, but which
he has first most perfectly understood, as before was said.

In the first Opinion of the five set down before, there was no place at all
given to Gods foreknowledge, whence the defenders thereof have a hard task to
clear themselves from making God the Author of Sin, Sin being a futurum in the
World, and to be ordered and governed by God.

In the second Opinion it was confessed that God did use this his foreknowledge
simplicis intelligentiae, in understanding the fall of man to come, if he were
created, before he decreed to create him, which is right well done: But what
reason is there to stop this knowledge at this Object, or at one free act of
the first Man, and not to extend it to all the free acts of all Men in all
times? God did understand by the same knowledge that if Christ were sent to the
Jews, they would not receive him, that if Peter were tempted, he would deny
his Master, before he decreed either to send Christ, or to create Peter.

If this question then be how far the knowledge of God extended it self,
before he decreed any thing concerning Men, whether unto the Creation of the
Mass of mankind in one, or to the Fall of mankind in the first man, or to
Christ to be sent into the World, or to the Faith of men beginning, or to their
End and Perseverance, to the beginning of the World, or to the end thereof; ^t
is most agreeable to the infinite and glorious Wisdom and Knowledge of God to
have extended it self unto all and over all, the whole, the parts, universa
and singula, genus and species, individua demum ipsa, and individuorum ortus,
progressus, successiones, facta, dicta, cogitata, sua, aliena and even to the
last ends and events of things, which will be manifested at the last judgment.

This they mean that would have Christ and Faith in him, foreknowne by this
science of simple Understanding, before the Act of God Electing or
Predestinating, not staying at the foreknowledge of the fall: not that they
would make the Faith of the believers, or Christ himself, the causes of Gods
Predestination, but the Objects in Gods Knowledge when he Predestined both
Christ and us. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. out of no cause, but the good
pleasure of his own Will. Now after the view of the whole World, God finding
this frame both possible to his Power, and Good in his Wisdom, to declare
thereby his Justice and Mercy, and all other his excellent attributes of
perfection, decreed to put it into being, and into execution: which was the
first act of his practical Knowledge, calling up his Will to allow, and
approve, and decree this goodly and glorious (...), the mirror of his eternal
Arist. lib. de Mundo.
Power and Godhead, (...), and this order of all things, specially of humane
kind, that great Mass out of which his Mercy and Justice, and sovereign
Power, draws forth vessels to honor, and vessels to dishonor.

CHAP. II. Of the Will of God, and the distinctions thereof.
IT is the proper work of the Will to Predestinate, or to Decree, what of
those infinite things which the understanding presented, shall be, and come
into light: for unless the Will of God, with his Power, come to them, their
being known makes them not to be.

Praedestinatio est propositum, propositum est actus practicus, and ultimus
voluntatis; ergo Praedestinatio magis importat voluntate^, quam scientiam, P
Ferrius p. 232. He says, Vltimus because there is an act of the Will even in
knowing, Primo enim volumus aliquid scire, quam sciamus, vel intelligamus,
deinde intelligimus, and tunc quod intelleximus voluntate probamus: as it is a
little above in the same Author.

Here then is the first Act of Gods Will choosing, and refusing: choosing these
things (that now are) to be, refusing all the rest which he knew notitia
simplicis intelligentiae, of infinite variety, but he cast them into
perpetual darkness, and silence; so according to the Psalm. 115. 3. Quaecunque
voluit fecit.

The Will of God being in it self one, and simple, may be considered with
diversity, only as conversant about things that are diverse, his Will allowing
them to be diverse.

1. There be some things therefore which God wills, as to be done by
himself, by his own Power: as the World to be created of nothing: his Son
to be sent into the World, made of a Woman, and such like: This first Will of
God never fails, because he works it himself alone by his Almighty power.
2. There be some things which God wills, as to be done by the Creature,
either as a natural Agent, as flowers to be drawn out of the Earth by the
Sun in the Spring; or as by a voluntary Agent, as righteous and good works
to be done by man: yet God himself concurring and coworking with the Creature,
a natural and voluntary Agent, according to its kind. This second will
oftentimes fails, by the Creatures failing, by whom God would have the work
wrought; God permitting, and not hindering the fail as he could.

3. Some things God wills and does himself, or with others, as leading,
(...), antecedent, out of himself, his own goodness and mercy; as all the
good we have in Nature, or in Grace, our Creation, our Calling, our glory; God
beginning, following, perfecting all our good, out of his abundant and
never-failing bounty: Some things he wills and does, as following, (...),
led, or urged thereunto, upon occasion of some evil of the Creature; as to
forsake, to punish, or to destroy it: and this is the Will of his Justice, the
maker of all the evil of pain, which we suffer. This Distinction Damascen
took out of Chrysostom on the first to the Ephesians; and Anselme calls it
voluntatem Misericordiae, and voluntatem Justitiae; wherewith why some Divines
should find such fault I know not, nor why it should not be called the
primary and chief Will of God, (and not a Velleity, or a simple complacentia)
and the second a secondary and less desirable: for these two may well stand,
and remain together; as in a tempest, the will of the Merchant to save his
goods abides in him as his chief desire, though now as the case stands, he
by another will casts them into the Sea; neither are they contrary one to the
other, seeing they have two objects diversely qualifyed; a man as he is Gods
Creature, and as he is an impenitent Sinner, him God would have saved, and yet
this God wills to perish.

There be many other distinctions of the Will of God, which do not avail to
the opening of the Doctrine of Predestination; and some of them avail not to
the clearing of any Doctrine, but rather to the obscuring of truth, which we
will omit. I will shut up this head with this sentence: There is nothing in the
World that did not pass under the censure of the Will of God, of some sort or
kind, or other, before it was, as it passed under the view of his knowledge.
Voluntas Dei est prima and summa causa, etc. The Will of God is the prime and
highest cause of all spiritual and corporal motions: for there is nothing
visibly or sensibly, which is not from the invisible and intelligible Court of
the King of Kings, either commanded, or permitted, according to the ineffable
justice of Rewards and Punishments, of thanks and retributions, in that most
ample and immense Republike of the whole Creation. Prosper Epigram: 58. Aug. de
Trin. l. 3. c. 4.

CHAP. III. Of Providence and Predestination.
THe Decree of the Will of God determining all other things, besides those
about man, is called by the general name of Providence.

The Decree of God whereby he determined concerning Man, as a special and
principal part of his Providence, is called by a peculiar name Predestination.

Predestination is an Act of Gods Will (from all eternity) decreeing the Ends
of all Men, and the means which he foreknows will bring them to those ends.
The ends be, Life, or Death eternal; the means be, the government of every
particular Man in this life under more or less of the goodness, or of the
severity of God: The Predestinating to some Men those means, which God does
foreknow will bring them unto life, is the Electing of them to life.

Deus praedestinatos non alia ratione in vitam aeternam elegit, quam
complacendo sibi in mediis, ac fine ipso beatorum praevisis. Molina. q. 23.
Art. 1. Desp. 2. page 305.

The predestinating to some Men, but those means, which God foreknowes
(through their own fault) will not bring them to life, is the Reprobating of
them, namely, with that Reprobation which is Negative.

That those means bring them not to life, is not ever from the insufficiency
of the means, (for by the same means in the Church of God others come to
life,) but from the personal fault, and disobedience of them that use not the
means, or their fault that have charge of them.

That no better means are given them, (which Gods knowledge understood would
save them if they were given) arises only from the just Will and Pleasure of
God.

Neither can this be disgraced, by a nickname of Post-destination, because it
is after the knowledge of Gods simple understanding, for that knowledge is not
of things absolutely to be, but only conditionally, if God please to say, They
shall be; seeing these things are not known scientia Visionis, it is
Praedestination properly that gives them being.

CHAP. IV. Of Election and Reprobation.
BEcause in these acts God uses both his Knowledge, and his Will, therefore
the holy Scriptures name the Elect sometimes from one head, sometimes from the
other; sometimes those whom God foreknew, as Romans 11. 2. Sometimes those Whom
he did Praedestinate according to purpose, Romans 8. 28. whence Election and
Reprobation may be defined either of these ways:

1. Election is the foreknowledge of those benefits of God, whereby a man will
be saved, if they be given him, and the Will to give them unto him. Or thus:

2. Election is the purpose (or Will of God) to give to one man those benefits,
whereby he knows the man will be saved, if they be given him.

These agree with the old definition, Praedestinatio est praescientia, and
praeparatio beneficiorum dei quibus certissme liberantur quicunque liberantur.

1. Reprobation is the foreknowledge of those benefits of God, under which a
man through his own ingratitude will perish, if no other be given unto him;
and the will to give him no other. Or thus,

2. Reprobation is the Decree of God to give to a man no other benefits, than
those under which he does foreknow the man through his own ingratitude will
perish, if no other be given him.

Here foreknowledge looks directly upon the ingratitude of the man neglecting
benefits, and the Will denies to give any new, or more benefits than these,
ineffectuall to Salvation only by the abuse or neglect of the ungrateful.

Thus God has mercy, on whom he will, and whom he will he hardneth; not
always taken immediately (for I except Infants not surviving,) out of the
Mass of Original sin, giving to one man the Grace of most certain
repentance, and leaving another in his corruption without relief able to save
him: But thus, in the dispensation of his benefits, and means of Grace
outward, and inward, granting unto one those benefits which he infallibly
knows will save him, and denying another those Graces which he likewise knows
would save him, if they were granted. Not that he gave him no grace at all
sufficient unto life, for he gave him much, which the man received in vain
through his own fault, but more God pleased not to give. For to harden is not
to deny all Grace sufficient to Salvation, but to deny that high, secret Grace,
hidden in the Treasury of Gods power, which God knows would speed, convert,
and save, if it were given.

Thus does man first harden his own heart, disobeying the Grace which God does
offer, Ps. 95. 8. and God does harden man's heart, in not adding or increasing a
stronger grace to the former, which would overcome all the hardness and
disobedience of man, if it were the pleasure of God to give it: which if it
were so to all, he should permit no man to perish: rather it is his pleasure to
exercise his justice upon the despisers of his sufficient Grace, and to make
them Vessels of his wrath: to teach the Creature what it is to tempt the
Creator, to put forth the uttermost of his wisdom and power to save the
sloathfull and ungrateful.

CHAP. V. The Transition to the third part.
THus have I spoken sparingly and with reverence of these high things conceived
by us as eternal, and before all time: Next I am to declare the things done in
time, opening and revealing of those Eternal Counsels: which two parts I think
good to unite as it were, by a strong joint set between them, taken and
transcribed out of that judicious Divine, M. Richard Hooker, lib. 5. par. 56.

Wherein let the Ingenuous Reader tell me, whether I do not show him fair
prints of my fifth Opinion.

That which moves God to work is Goodness, R. H.
and that which orders his work is Wisdom, and that which perfecteth his
work is Power. All things which God in their times and seasons has brought
forth, were Eternally and before all times in God, as a work unbegun is in the
Artificer, which afterward brings it unto effect. Therefore whatsoever we do
behold now in this present world, it was inwrapped within the bowels of divine
Mercy, written in the book of Eternal wisdom, and held in the hands of
omnipotent Power, the first foundation of the world being yet unlaid, so that
all things which God has made are in that respect the offspring of God, they
are in Act. 17. 28, 29.
him as effects in their highest cause; he likewise actually is in them, the
assistance and influence of his Deity, is their life. Let hereunto saving grace
be added, and it brings forth a special off spring amongst men, containing
them, to whom God himself has given the gracious and amiable name of Sons: We
are by Nature the Sons of Adam; when God created Adam, he created us, and as
many as are descended from Adam have in themselves the root out of which they
spring: The Sons of God we neither are all, nor any one of us otherwise than
only by Grace and favor. The Sons of God have Gods own natural Son as a
second Adam from heaven, whose care and Progeny they are by Spiritual and
heavenly birth; God therefore loving eternally his Son, he must needs
eternally in him, have loved and preferred before all others, them which are
spiritually sithence descended and sprung Ephesians. 1. 3.
out of him: These were in God as in their Savior, and not as in their Creator
only: It was the purpose of his saving goodness, his saving wisdom, and his
saving power, which inclines it self toward them. They which thus were in
God eternally by their intended admission to life, have by vocation or adoption
God actually now in them, as the Artificer is in the work, which his hand does
presently frame. -- We are therefore in God through Christ eternally, according
to that intent and purpose whereby we were chosen to be made his in this
present world, before the world it self was made; we are in God through the
knowledge which is had of us, and the love which is borne toward us from
everlasting: But in God we are actually no longer than only from the time of
our natural adoption into the body of his true Church, into the fellowship of
his children: For his Church he knows and loves, so that they which are in
the Church are thereby known to be in him: our being in Christ by eternal
foreknowledge saves us not without our actual and real adoption into the
fellowship of his Saints in this present world, for in him we actually are, by
our actual incorporation into that society which has him for their head, etc.

By the change of the letter are marked out the things which I would wish the
Reader to mark with his attentive mind.

THE THIRD PART.
CHAP. I. Of the Creation.
THe Creation of the World was the first act of Gods Power, beginning to
execute in time his Counsel, and Decree, which was from everlasting.

The World is that whole frame of Gods building, set up, perfected and
furnished according to the plot or model in the mind and purpose of God, who
has built all things, Heb. 3. 4.

In it God made manifest the invisible things of his Wisdom and Goodness to
his own glory, Romans 1. 20.

Therein he has made Creatures of sundry Natures, Motions, and Perfections, to
sundry ends.

Above others he created Man in more excellent perfections, to a more excellent
end.

For he created Man an Image of God, as far as was meet for a Creature to
partake of the Divine Nature, that was, to be Good, but Mutable.

This Image or likeness to God was to be seen in three things; the first and
second as Man's perfections; the third as his End.

1. In Understanding and Will. 2. In Holiness and Righteousness. 3. In
Immortality and Blessedness.
These three were subalternate one to the other: Understanding and Will to
Righteousness; Righteousness to Blessedness: Blessedness to be the reward
of Righteousness, and Righteousness to be the work of Willingness: for
virtue is not necessitatis, sed voluntatis.

CPAP. II. Of Gods Government of Man, under the Covenant of Works.
THe second Act of Execution in time of Gods eternal Counsel, was the
Government of Man, created: so as he might use his perfections, and attain his
end.

In this government, God as the supreme Lord was to command, and Man as his
Creature and Vassal was to obey: yet God being a free and gracious Lord, and
Man not a brute, but a reasonable and free servant, it pleased his Lord to
descend, and come into a Covenant with him, as is used between party and party.

The sum of this Covenant was, Do this and thou shall live; called therefore
the Covenant of Works.

The Law Natural or Moral, written in the heart of Man, comprehended all
Works to be done by him.

The Law positive; namely, that one of abstaining from the fruit of the Tree in
the midst of the Garden of Eden, was a trial and experiment of his Obedience;
and the exercise of the duties of the Law Moral, in a particular.

To Man appertained the observing of these Laws.

To God appertained the performance of the Promise of life to Man observing
them, as being faithful in the Covenant.

CHAP. III. Of the fall of Man.
ADam Dei manu, nec non deliciis Paradisi, and legislatione prima factus est
dignus, sed ne quid blasphemum contra primaevum proferam parentem, reverentia
dictum sit, Mandatum non servavit, quoth Nazianz. orat. 8. Adam being tempted
by Satan did transgress that one easy Commandment, and so became guilty of
all, and losing his righteousness, he forefeited his happiness, by Sin, the
breach of Gods Commandment and Covenant.

This Sin of Man was voluntary, not necessary, though he sinned being tempted
by another, for he had strength enough given him of God, and more was ready to
have been supplied unto him, if he had craved it, whereby he might have
vanquished the Tempter, and have stood firm in his obedience, but he
willingly consented, and yielded to the deceiver.

Neither was this fall caused by God (though foreknowne) but only permitted,
when God, if he would, could have hindered it.

And God permitted it,
1. Because he would not impeach the freedom of will that he had given unto
Man, Continuit in ipso and praescientiam, and praepotentiam suam, per quas
intercessisse potuisset, quo minus homo male liberate sua frui aggressus, in
periculum laberetur: si enim interc^ssisset, rescidisset arbitrii libertatem
quam ratione and bonitate permiserat. Tert. in Marcian. 2. (where note, that is
called libertas Arbitrii, which is ad malum, and was in Adam before he sinned.)

2. Because he saw it would offer him a fair occasion to manifest his Wisdom
and Goodness, yet more graciously than he had done in the Creation: which he
had forethought on, and foreknew how to restore man fallen, before he decreed
to permit the fall, namely, by the most admirable and glorious works of the
Incarnation, Sufferings, Resurrection, and Assension of the Son of God,
intending by the obedience of one Man to make many righteous, as by the
disobedience of one many were made sinners.

3. Because God knew it would off^r unto man a just occasion (if he were dealt
withal again in the second Covenant) both to be more thankful, and more
wary, and careful, and so many more possible to be saved by a second Covenant
made with man fallen, then would have been by the first, if Adam had stood,
and the Covenant of works had been held on with all his posterity: for
natural perfections easily beget Pride, and Confidence in our selves, which is
the first degree of aversion from God, and the beginning of ruin: but wants
and weaknesses do humble us, and make us fly to God, and cleave more close unto
him.

That the fall of man was known before the Decree of Creation, the Creation it
self does show, where there are infinite things prepared for man's use only as
fallen, as all medicinal Herbs prepared for Physic; Physic presumes
sickness, and sickness presumes sin.

CHAP. IV. Of the Effects of the Fall.
THe Effects of the Fall of Man are twofold: Within him, Without him.

Within him, that which is called original Sin, comprehending both the loss
of his original righteousness, and of his supernatural perfections, and also
the decay of his very natural faculties: whence flows a continual lusting
after that which is evil, and a repugnance to that which is good; A man's heart
being a root and a fountain of bitter water, and sower fruit, which before was
right sweet and good.

The effects of the fall without man, are comprised under the curse of the
ground, the subject of man's labor, comprehending all the miseries of this
life, and under the sentence of death comprehending both deaths Temporal
Eternal. and all the miseries of both.

The Effects of the fall of Adam took place not only in himself, but in all
his posterity: because God held him not as one person, but as the whole nature
of mankind, until such time as he was come into that state, in which God
thought it best to govern the race of mankind to the end of the World
(whereto he foreknew that he would soon come) namely, the state of sin and
misery, needing grace and mercy.

No doubt God in justice might have here rejected, and condemned for ever, not
only the greater part, but the whole of mankind for this Apostasy from him,
as he did the Angels that fell; But the Scripture testifies greater grace,
Romans 5. 12. 16. and deinceps: Jeremy 3. 1. Tu autem fornicata es cum amatoribus
multis, and tamen revertere ad me, dicit Dominus, and ego suscipia^te: verba
Domini sunt. Non est fas suspendere fidem, says Bern. 84. in Cantic. applying
that to every sinful soul, which Jeremy applies to Israel: and I may well to
all mankind in Adam, after whom God called Adam ubi es?

And to the same purpose hear what the confession of the Church of England
says in the tenth Article, The condition of man after the fall of Adam, is
such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own natural strength
and good worth to Faith and calling upon God: wherefore we have no power to do
good works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ
preventing us, that he may have a good will, and working with us when we have
that good will.

CHAP. V. Of Gods Government of Man under the Covenant of Grace.
THe third act of Execution of Gods Eternal Counsel was the Restoration of
man fallen: For the most Wise and Mighty God having created the World for Man,
and Man for happiness in the fruition of himself, would not suffer either the
whole destruction of his Creature, or the frustrating of his end; though he
pleased to permit the depraving of his Creature, and to forsake one ill
succeeding way, to take a better for the attainment of this end. Irenaeus lib.
3. c. 33. Omnis dispositio salutis quae circa hominem fuit, etc. The whole
ordering of Salvation touching Man was wrought according to the good Pleasure
of the Father, so as God should not be overcome, nor his skill impaired: for
if that man, who was made of God to live, here losing life, being wounded by
the Serpent which had depraved him, should not again return to life, but be
wholly swallowed up of death, God had been overcome, and the Serpents craft
had conquered the Will of God.

Hence God that foreknew before all time the fall of Man, he D^creed in mercy
to spare and preserve some degrees of his Im^ge in Man, (and so did;) and to
suspend the Ex^cution of some effects of his fall (else he had dyed presently,
or lived a mad or brutish creature) that he might be a subject possible to be
repaired, and capable of healing: God in wisdom and goodness chose rather so
to do than to destroy him, and wholly make him anew.

Moreover out of the same Wisdom and Goodness, he had Decreed to supply
another way that which was lost, and so bring Man back from the gates of Hell,
and to set him in a new and fair way to Heaven.

This his thought (magnum cogitatum Patris, as Tertul* calls it) from
everlasting, was now in due time, the time of Man's misery, revealed, namely
soon after the fall; For this Gospel in effect was preached unto him, That
God would send his own Son made of a woman, that should dissolve the works
of the Devil, and by See the Homily of the Nativity.
death overcoming him that had the power of death, should deliver man from
bondage, and restore unto him righteousness and life, Genesis 3. 15. Gal. 3. 16.
Heb. 2. 14.

Now what by the remains of Gods Image left in man, what by the supply that
God would make by his gracious help; miserable man fallen was reputed by God a
fit person once again to be a party in a Covenant; A Covenant of new
Conditions suiting to the state of a sinner, but tending to the same Ends,
righteousness and life.

This new Covenant is called the Covenant of Grace; 1. because it was freely
made with man a sinner, utterly unworthy to have any more communion with God.
Secondly, Because in it the righteousness and salvation of man is wrought in
him rather by God than by himself, being more in receiving than in giving, in
beleeing than in doing: Yet has it the nature of a true Covenant, both parties
having something for either to perform; God, to send his Son and his spirit
to releeve the miseries and wants of man, and to forgive sins, to impute
righteousness, and to give life to such as obey his Son and his Spirit: This
part of God in the Covenant the Prophet Jeremiah speaks of, cap. 31. ver. 33.
and it is repeated Heb. 8. 8. Man, to humble himself for his sins to God his
Creator, to believe in Christ his Redeemer, and to yield himself to be led by
the holy spirit his Sanctifyer; This part of Man in the Covenant the whole
Gospel speaks of, requiring Repentance, and faith, and new obedience, Act.
20. 21.

Here are 2. things affirmed which may seem to require proof,

1. That the Covenant of grace was made with all mankind:

2. That God supplyeth by his spirit whatsoever is needful to the keeping of
this Covenant, on the behalf of Man, who is confessed impotent in himself
through his former fall.

These 2. shall by Gods assistance be sufficiently proved hereafter, under the
heads of Calling, Commission, Grace and Free Will.

Now let these suffice as prescriptions for the Truth,

1. That we find here, in the day of the first publishing of the Covenant, all
mankind in Adam and Eve, receiving the promise of the Gospel, at the same time
that they received their penances, which we see to be universal to all their
Seed; it is therefore probable that promises should be taken as universal,
since the wise do say, Ampliandi favores.

2. That we find left after the fall, Remains of some part of the Image of
God, as life, understanding of good and evil, liberty of Will in natural and
civil things, conscience accusing or excusing, etc. which though they were
given at first by Creation, and so belong to nature; yet the staying of them to
remain in man after his fall was of Grace, both to make him capab^e to
contract and covenant withal, and also to be some beginnings and principles in
order to his Restoration: but since these alone are not sufficient to make him
able to rise again, or to recover righteousness, or keep the new Covenant of
the Gospel, of himself and these remains; it is decent to think of God, who
does nothing imperfectly, and who in Covenanting is no hard Master, That he
would supply by his spirit, whatsoever was needful more to the keeping of that
new Covenant, whereupon depends the Eternal woe, or the Eternal happiness of
the party covenanted with, seeing it would be found a true Maxim, Quod nemo
teneatur ad impossible.

CHAP. VI. Of the dispensation of the Covenant of Grace by calling.
THe Covenant of Grace being once made with mankind, (in the root of all men
Adam and Eve,) it pleased the same goodness of God that made it, to preserve
it, continue it, and keep it a foot, and so will do to the end of the world:
by proclaiming it from time to time, by renewing it often, calling men to the
knowledge and participation thereof, else it would long since have been
forsaken, forgotten, extinct and utterly lost.

This is that Act of God which is termed Vocatio Divina, the heavenly Calling,
Heb. 3. 1. wherein his divine power gives us all things that pertain to life
and godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 3. that is, wherein he does execute his Predestined
order of means and benefits, by the right use whereof men are brought to the
high End, Happiness: Or by the neglect and abuse whereof they fail and come
short of it, and fall into endless misery.

Hence Saint Paul speaking of the Saints, Romans 8. 30. as he had joined those
two together, Quos praescivit, and Praedestinavit; so he joyneth these two
together, quos praedestinavit, Hos and vocavit, by calling putting that into
Act, which he had seen and allowed in Predestinating, as a successful course
bringing them to glory. And Saint Jude v. 4. speaking of ungodly men, says,
They were of old written to condemnation, being such as turned the grace of God
into Wantonness, and deny God the only Lord, and our Lord Jesus Christ;
whence the Author to the Hebrews gives a good caveat, Let us therefore fear
lest a promise being left us, of entering into his rest, any of us should seem
to come short of it. Heb. 4. 1.

This point having more connection with the Doctrine of Predestination, has
more controversy, and therefore I must of necessity be in it more large,
craving the patience of some contrary minded, who in their writings use a
certain censorious, and magisterial Severity, which I rather pray God to
forgive, then I purpose to return upon them.

Calling defined, Distributed.
Calling is the Revelation and Proclamation of the Gospel, the Covenant of
Grace, (Romans 16. 25.) commanding repentance toward God, and faith toward the
Lord Jesus Christ, (Act. 20. 21.) and promising forgiveness of sins and life
everlasting to all that obey. Act. 2. 38. 39.

Calling consists of two essential parts, or two divine acts, requisite to
make up one whole perfect work of calling, The outward preaching of the word,
sent by God, (whereto belong the Sacraments, outward blessings, and
corrections) The inward operation of the holy spirit accompanying the outward
means.

Calling has been dispensed by the wisdom and good pleasure of God diversely,
according to the diversity of times.

1. Before Christ's coming under the old Testament.

2. Since Christ's coming under the new Testament.

This diversity has been seen,

In the manner of the outward Means.

In the measure of the inward operations of the Spirit.

In the effects suitable to both.

Under the old Testament The bounds more narrow, than under the new Testament
The word more obscure, The Sacraments more mysterious, The Spirit more sparing,
The Obedience more slender

From Adam to the Confusion of tongues, while the whole Earth was of one
lanuage, it does not appear but the Calling was Universal, all men being
within the hearing of the Preachers of Righteousness: After the division of
Tongues, men forsaking the religious Fathers, God permitted them to walk in
their own ways, and renewed his Calling and Covenant with Abraham and his
seed, Psalm. 147. 19. and so narrowed the bounds of his Church, that is, of the
Called.

Of the Gentiles before Christ.
Far be it from me the lover of truth to maintain, that the Gentiles without
Christ were under grace, or had any power to recover out of the Kingdom of
Satan. They were under wrath rather, and not under mercy, without God in the
World, strangers from the Covenant of Promise, Ephesians. 2. 12. for as the Church
excommunicateth unworthy persons, so God excommunicates unworthy Nations. And
howsoever the Covenant of Grace were made at first with all men, and calling
was Universal to all the World; yet in the dispensation of Calling for after
times, it may be just with God to exclude whole Nations out of Communion in his
Covenant, them and theirs for many generations; either for to punish their
ingratitude and contempt of his Word; or to humble the heart of man, to teach
Ages to come to cleave unto God, by the vanity of Ages past left unto
themselves; or for other causes known to God, who judges them that are
without, the mystery of whose unsearchable judgments we are to admire with the
Apostle Paul, Romans 11. 25. and 33. That one while the Gentiles should be shut
out, and the Jews admitted; and another while the Gentiles admitted and the
Jews excluded from the Mercy of Gods gracious Calling: of which St. Paul, Romans
9. 10. 11.

Now in the division and dispersion of Nations, why God did leave the rest, and
called out Abraham and his seed to make Covenant with, no reason can be given
of merit, or demerit, more in one than in the other, but it must be ascribed to
the Freegrace and pleasure of God alone, as it is by Moses, Deuteronomy. 7. 8. and 10.
15. by Josua cap. 24. 2, 3. by Nehem. cap. 9. 7. by S. Paul, Romans 9. 11. Not of
works but of him that Calls.

Let them therefore fall for me, that defend any other Universal Grace, than
within the Church, where the Word of grace is Preaced; where I maintain, that
God calls not some secret ones only, but all that can hear, although but some
obey, and some disobey the gracious Calling of God. Thus the seventh, and ninth
Assertions of Lambeth are true, speaking of all men even extra Ecclesiam, but
if they speak of men within the Church, where the word of grace sounds; I
doubt.

Of Calling under the new Testament.
Calling, under the new Testament, has for the outward part, the Word and
Sacraments more clearly revealing and exhibiting Christ and his benefits; for
the inward part, a more abundant measure of the power of the holy Ghost,
extends further to multitudes of Nations, has greater fruit and success in
Men's conversion, than under the old Testament, Acts 17. 30. 31.

This Calling, because it is of those Nations which were before excluded when
the Jews were admitted, the Jews being now excluded is not unfitly termed
vocatio Gentium, until it please God to call the Jews also.

Here the same depth of Gods Judgment is to be admired in the dispensation of
Calling, that was under the old Testament. 1. That God should now withhold from
the Jews that inward illuminating Spirit and softning Grace, which he grants
to the Gentiles called: 2. That even yet he should withhold from many Nations
the very word and outward calling, as the new-discover'd Indians do show,
being found as far from the knowledge of Christ, as ever the Heathen were,
before the Apostles preached to them.

But we being under this grace of Gods Calling, it behooves us to look that
it be not in vain unto us.

CHAP. VII. Of the Concurrence of the Word and Spirit in Calling.
SOme great Divines do distinguish Calling into two kinds; one outward of the
Word only; another inward of the Spirit joined with the Word: That, they say,
is Ineffectuall; This, Effectual: That, common to the Reprobate; This special
and peculiar to the Elect: That, never obeyed with truth of heart; This, never
disobeyed.

This Doctrine is to be examined.
I distinguish not two Callings, but compound one Calling of the Word and
Spirit, as it were of a Body and a Soul, supposing it to have in it self
power to bring forth Effect in all that are under it; and if it do not so, the
cause not to arise from the Calling, but from the Called that obey not.

1. For declaration of this Point, it must not be thought, that the Spirit
goes with the Word, to make the hearer perform that which he can do by
natural strength (for the Spirit is given to help where nature fails) as to
keep waking, and to be attentive; for that which Men can bring of their own
strength, God expects to find and to meet. One case then where to many the
Spirit is not present to the Word, is, when they are not present to the very
Word, through their sottish carelessness.

2. Again, it must not be thought that the concurrence of the Word and Spirit
is as it were natural, necessary and inseparable, but voluntary and arbitrary,
in the Will and good Pleasure of God; and as grace is annexed to the
Sacraments, so is it to the Word, only by Divine Institution and Ordination.
Hence the Church prays before Sermons, for the illumination and power of the
Spirit to come with the Word; God expecting to have this asked of him by them
that can pray, both for themselves and others: Another case then where the
Spirit is not co-working with the word many times, is, when it was not duly and
diligently asked.

3. There are men that are past grace, to whom the Spirit is not present with
the Word, such as for their former neglect and contempt of the time of their
visitation, when God did call them, are now given up to blindness and
hardness; and have the light of the Spirit, and the dew of grace held back
from that Word which is Preached in their hearing by accident, not for their
sakes (though we know them not in particular, and so admit all.)

4. It must not be thought, that the Spirit goes with the Word, to work any
grace in any person whatsoever, but according to the order of Divine
Providence, which dispenses his grace wisely: which is thus to be declared.

We are to distinguish the Word that calls; the Persons that are called; and
operations of the Spirit by the Word in those persons.

The Word is either the Law, or the Gospel.
1. The Law has two parts, (as the Preacher of the Covenant of Grace uses the
Law,) 1 The Precepts: 2. The Curse to the transgressors of the Precepts: So the
Law has a double use, to accuse, and convince, with the Precepts; to wound,
and to kill, with the Curse: and to these the Law is effectual and of force
after the fall of Man.

2. The Persons called by the Minister of God using the Law, are all natural,
unregenerate, sinful men; or the regenerate, relapsed and fallen into grievous
Sin: who are of two sorts; either ignorant of their evil Estate, to whom the
Precepts of the Law are to be Preached, to bring them to the knowledge of
Sin. Romans 3. 20. Or they are such as know sin, bu^ are s^cure, benumbed,
senseless of the^^ miserable estate; to these the Curse is to be denounced,
until they begin to fear, to be cast down, and perplexed, Act. 24. 25.

3. The Operations of the spirit upon these Men by the Ministry of the Law, are
two; First, to open their eyes to see their sins: Second, to prick their
hearts with fear of the Curse, Acts 2. 37. Romans 8. 15.

For these effects ordinarily the Spirit goes with the Word of the Law,
calling Men out of the pit of sin: and they are more easily admitted and
wrought into the heart upon those remains of light in the mind discerning
good and evil, and of Conscience accusing, it self consenting to the Law,
Romans 2. 15.

But that these works of the Spirit by the Law, are wrought in many
Reprobates, our adversaries deny not, that grant some initiall parts of grace
to be begotten even in castawayes: The Ministry of John Baptist figured this,
of which S. Ambrose in 1. Lucae, Hoc mysterium in hac vita nostra, hodieque
celebratur, praecurrit enim animae nostrae quaedam virtus Johannis, cum credere
paramur in Christum, ut paret ad fidem animae nostrae vias.

Thus much of the word of the Law, with its persons and operations.

1. The Gospel has two parts, A Commandment. A Promise.

The Commandment. To repent of Sin, showed by the Laws Precepts. To believe
in Christ, to give life to him, whom the curse of the Law has killed.

The Promise is of forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting to him that
repents and believes in the Lord Jesus Christ, Act. 2. 38, 39.

2. The Persons called by God in the word of the Gospel, are all manner of
sinners, but convict, terrifyed, wounded, full of compunction and
selfe-condemning, wrought in them by the Spirit in the preaching of the Law,
Mat. 11. 28.

3. The Operations of the Spirit upon these Men by the Ministry of the Gospel,
are,

1. To open their eyes to see the marvelous light of Gods Mercy to Sinners, of
the infinite love of Christ in dying for sinners, and the inestimable Merits of
his Death; of the powerful graces, gifts, and aides of the holy Ghost, to
help and relieve the impotency and misery of sinners, to the end, that by this
light this Opinion may be begotten in them, that it is possible for them to be
recovered.

2. To pour into their hearts hope, or to stay them from desperate sinning, or
sorrowing.

3. To inspire the grace of Prayer, at least to wish or desire, Oh that they
might be so happy as to escape the wrath to come, and recover the favor and
love of God!

4. To give them repentance: that is, to sorrow for sin past with a godly
sorrow, and to purpose to break off sin, and to cease from any further
offending God, or endangering the Soul.

5. To work in them Faith; that is, To run to Christ, and to cast themselves
into the Arms of his goodness and power to be saved by him.

These Graces in this Order the holy Ghost is present and ready to work by the
Gospel upon a sinner convict, humbled and prepared by the Law. And look what
proportion of power the Spirit had in the Law, upon an unregenerate Man to
humble him; the same has it in the Gospel, upon the humbled, to work in him
Hope; him Hoping, to win to Wish and Pray; to him Praying, Wishing, Willing,
to give Repentance; unto him Repenting, to instill Faith, and so to justify
him; being justified by Faith, again by the Law and the Gospel together, to
mortify corruptions, to quicken in him a new life, and to strengthen him to
new obedience.

Now think not that the Spirit is present in the preaching of the Law to an
unregenerate Man, to give him strength to new obedience, because it is present
to convince, and condemn his wickedness; or because it is so present to a
justified Man to give him strength to new obedience; Think not that the Spirit
is present in the preaching of the Gospel to a Man yet not penitent, nor
believing, to work in him Peace, Joy, Love, because it is present to work
these in the Believer: Degrees here are not given per saltum. The sum is, The
Spirit of God is annexed to his Word for such gifts and operations as to which
the hearer is a fit disposed subject: There is an order in the Divine working,
wherein there are things antecedent, preparatives to things subsequent, which
antecedents if they found no place, and were not admitted, the subsequent are
suspended: Hence is there so frequent and just separations of the Spirit from
the Word by the great Pastor of Souls, who walks in the midst of the
Churches, and scarcheth the hearts and reins.

Hear what says our Homily of declining from God; When God withdrawes from us
his Word, the right Doctrine of Christ, his gracious assistance and aid, which
is ever joined to his Word, and leaves us to our own wit, our own will, and
strength, he declares then that he begins to forsake us.

And again hear; The words of the holy Scripture be called words of eternal
life, for they be Gods Instrument ordained for the same purpose; they have
power to convert through Gods Promise, and they be effectual through Gods
assistance; So our Church in the first exhortation to the reading of the
Scriptures, and the first Book of Homilies.

Thus much for Declaration of this point: For Confirmation of it I allege all
the Elogia of the Word of God, as Psalm. 19. The Law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the Soul, etc. Heb. 4. 12. The Word of God is quick and powerful,
etc. Joh. 17. 17. Sanctify them by this Truth; Thy word is truth, Joh. 20. 21.
When Christ ordained his Apostles he breathed on them and said, Receive the
holy Ghost; to testify that the power of the holy Ghost should go with them:
Hence is the Gospel called the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 8. and
the Ministers of the new Testament, Ministers of the Spirit, not of the Letter,
verse. 6. because the Gospel dat quod jubet, whereas the law jubet, sed non
juvat; but without the Spirit the Word of the Gospel it self is but a dead
letter, whence it is said Joh. 1. 17. That the Law was given by Moses; (but we
had no hearts to receive it;) The Gospel, Grace and Truth was not only given,
but (...). But why should I multiply places? The learned Divines in suffr^gio
Collegiali de 20. Articulo, Thesi 5a. do allege some of these, and other more
places to prove, aliquam mensuram gratiae ordinary in Ministerio Evangelii
administrari, quae sufficiat ad convincendos omnes impoenitentes and incredulos
contemptus, vel saltem neglectus ob non impletam conditionem: though by their
favor, the places prove a great deal more than Eam mensuram gratiae
supernaturalis administrari, quae sufficiat ad convincendos, etc. namely, quae
sufficiat ad convertendos. The sentence of Prosper which they allege speaks
more home: Non omnes vocari ad gratiam, quibus omnibus Evangelium praedicatur,
non recte dicitur, etiamsi sint, qui Evangelio non obed^ant. But that Calling
is the same to them that obey not, as to them that obey, I shall urge only
these two places more, Mat. 22. 14. Many are called, but few chosen. Here Many
are distributed into two sorts, some that are called and not chosen; some that
are called and also chosen; for these few chosen, are a part of the many
called; so that the whole many are put under one and the same Calling; which
Calling is not by the outward Word alone, for from that Calling arise none
chosen: therefore the Calling was by the Word and Spirit common to both; and
the few chosen excelled not in Calling, but in some thing else, viz. in obeying
the Calling, to come when others refused, or in coming worthily in a wedding
garment, according to the Parable.

Mat. 12. 41. The Men of Nineveh shall rise up in judgment with this
Generation, and shall condemn it, etc. If Jonas preached to the Ninevites
without the Spirit, how did they repent? If Jesus Preached without the same
Spirit, how is he greater than Jonas, nay how is he equal, in the power of
Preaching? If they that disobey, be not equally called with them that obey, how
can these rise up in judgment against them? when their answer is ready, we
had not the same Calling with you, ours differed toto genere, you were
partakers of an Heavenly calling, we but of an Earthly; you were called by the
Voice of God speaking to your hearts, we but by the bare voice of Men speaking
to the ear: If God had moved and excited us as much as he did you, we would
have done as well as you: For, vocatio refertur ad auxilium Dei interius
moventis and excitantis mentem ad deserendum peccatum. Thomas 12ae. 113. 1. ad
3m. The example of the Jews at this day confirms this, for they are said to
be yet uncalled, not because they live without the sound of the Gospel (as the
Indians have done) for they may hear our Sermons, and read our Scriptures,
living in Rome, Italy, and Spain, but because the veil is not taken from
their hearts, because the Spirit of illumination and softning is as yet
withheld from them which is granted graciously to us Gentiles.

To conclude; That Distinction of Calling propounded in the beginning of this
Chapter into Outward Inward Effectual Ineffectual, seems to be vain.

1. Because it gives unworthily the name of Calling to the bare outward
Preaching of the Word, which may be a Commanding, but not a Calling; a
Commanding as of the Law, not a Calling as of the Gospel: (for God may still
require to be obeyed in whatsoever new thing he shall command, because it is
our duty natural, whether we be now able to do it or no* being, we were
able.) But seeing the word of the new Covenant comes to call Men to Repentance
and Faith, for their recovery after notice taken of their impotency to rise
again of themselves, it seems an insulting mock, and not a Call, to say to
sinners, Turn, repent, believe and live; unless there be some grace prepared
for them, whereby they may be able to repent and believe.

2. Because it attributes the Effect of obeying the Calling to the kind of
Calling it self, and only to one cause, the operation of the Spirit: as if
many causes did not concur to produce an Effect, and if any one fail the
Effect fails: As if obedience to the Calling of God were not an Act of the
will of Man, (under the aid of the Spirit of God;) as if the aid of the
Spirit were never refused, nor the Grace of God never received in vain: For
though God be almighty and able to draw all second Causes unto his part and
side, yet he does not use to disturb or cross the Nature of Causes, nor the
order of things which himself has established.

3. Because it makes Gods Covenant to differ from all Covenants in humane
affairs, even in that which is essential to a Covenant, (yet this term and
title is borrowed from men, the better to conceive of the Grace of God, and the
duty of man.) In our Covenants each party has something to perform, and no
one party does all in a Covenant: but by this distinction God is supposed both
to provide infallibly to have the conditions fulfilled, and also to fulfill his
own promises, whereas all that he undertaketh for us, is to make the
conditions possible, and not to be wanting in his help, so far as is needful
for us; Esaias 59. ult. And check me not that I am afraid to give too much to
God, lest I check you again that you look to be so much favored, as to be
tied to nothing.

Truth flattereth neither God nor Man. Non est bonae and solidae fidei, etc.
It Is not the part of a good and sound faith, so to refer all things to Gods
will, and so to flatter every one by saying, Nothing can come to pass without
Gods permission; that so we may imagine, our selves are to do nothing, Tert.
de Exhort. Castitatis; (not far from the beginning.)

CHAP. VIII. Of Conversion.
THe Conversion of a sinner is the End which God seeks in sending his Word,
and in Calling men, Act. 3. 26. The Effect of Calling when it speedeth.

It may shortly be defined, The Obedience of him that is called, for it his
part, Vocantem audire and obedire.

In Conversion there be two Terms A quo Ad quem. From the power of Satan unto
God, Act. 26. 18.

It is in all parts of Man; In his Understanding, he is turned from darkness
to light; In his Will, from Idols (of all sorts) to serve the living God, 1
These. 1. 9. In his whole life, from unrighteousness to Holiness, Rom, 6.

The Conversion of a sinner is also to be considered as Prima, or Posterior.

The first is, when a man of a natural man is made a regenerate man, and a
member of Gods Church, as the Gentiles called by the Apostles, Act. 15. 3. Such
were we all that are converted unto God, having been first averted, foolish,
disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts, Tit. 3. 3.

The latter Conversion is, when a regenerate man having committed iniquity, and
fallen into sin, returns unto God by repentance of that sin: Thus Peter
that was foretold of denying Christ, and that yet his faith should not finally
fail, was willed, that he being converted should strengthen his Brethren, Luke
22. 32. See Bilson of supremacy page 278. 279. in 4.

Next the Causes of our Conversion are to be considered; without question Gods
holy spirit working upon the heart of a sinner, is the prime, principal,
efficient, powerful Cause of his Conversion; Turn us and we shall be turned,
Lam. 5. 21. in the beginning, in the middle, and in the end of it.

The word preached is the ordinary, Isntrumental Cause, Psalm. 19. 7. Adjuvant
Causes, are the Cross that chastneth, Jer. 31. 18. Blessings that draw and
allure the prayers of others; the holy example of others already converted, etc.

But it is in question, what part the Sinner himself, who is the subject to be
converted, bears in his own Conversion, being a living and reasonable
Subject: Whether he be active or passive in it; when and how far; whether he
can further it, or hinder it; or whether it be possible for two supposed
equally called, one to be converted and not the other? If so, then whence this
difference shall arise, whether from God, or from Man?

The determination of these questions cannot be clear, nor the manner of our
conversion opened, until we have declared what is to be holden according to
the Scriptures, touching Gods free Grace, and Man's freewill, which we will
endeavor to bring into more manifest light, after so vehement Conflicts of the
learned in all Ages, which have raised clouds of obscurity to the loss of
Truth amongst the strivers for it.

CHAP. IX. Of Grace.
OF Grace and Freewill I will speak by Gods grace, first severally, then
jointly: that so we may return to the point of our Conversion, to behold what
be the parts of God therein, and what of Man.

Of Grace I shall endeavor to declare the Thing, the Distinctions, the
Necessity, the Amplitude, the Power and force thereof.

By Grace may be understood all that proceeds from God out of free favor to
an unworthy sinner, tending to his Salvation: yet here by Grace I will not
understand the remains of Nature, as some light of Reason, some sense of
Conscience, and the like; though it was of Grace that these were spared and
left to remain in Man fallen.

Neither will I by Grace understand the Law, describing the righteousness of
works, though the preacher of Grace does use the Law to show a sinner his
Estate, and to prepare him to Christ.

Nor will I understand the bare outward word of the Gospel, though it be called
Verbum gratiae, Act. 20. 32. if not rather it be so called, because the
internal Grace of God goes with it.

But by Grace I understand the internal Illuminations, Teachings, Motions,
Tractions, Inspirations, Operations, Gifts of the holy Ghost, merited by Christ
to be given to the sinful Sons of Adam, in their fit time and order, to the
end to raise them fallen, and to save them lost; whence I shall call it with
Saint August. Gratiam Christi; There is in man no merit of Grace, for then
grace were no grace, there is only an occasion, namely, the woeful misery of
Man, which yet was in Gods pleasure to take as an occasion, or to refuse it.

Even the good use of former Graces is no merit or cause of the giving of
following Graces; but the second are as freely given as the first; for Gods
good pleasure alone is the Author and Cause of that order and succession that
is in graces, in which he has appointed to do one thing in order after
another, and not one thing for the sake of another.

If any thing be named Grace, and tend not to man's recovery and Salvation, or
be not in some degree fit, sufficient, potent, and available to further this
work, it is not to be esteemed worthy of the Noble and blessed name, Grace.

The Distinctions of Grace.
The same Grace and power of Gods Spirit which in essence is no way diverse,
yet has diverse denominations, according to the diversities of relations, and
effects; as the same Sun first warmeth the Earth, and then makes it
fruitful, and beautifies it with flowers. Quae enim in verbo pro ejus
singulari divinae naturae simplicitate unum sunt, unu^ tamen effectu^ in anima
non habent, sed ad ejus varias and diversas necessitates, veluti diversa sese
participanda accommodant, Bern. in Cant. Ser. 85.

The most ancient and useful distinction of Grace, is that which we have in
the tenth Article of our Church, and in diverse Collects of the book of
Common Prayer,

Into preventing following working coworking exciting helping.

Again, Grace is in Scripture set forth, as standing without, calling,
knocking, Prove. 1. 20. Rev. 3. 20. Entered in, inhabiting, as in a Temple and
house, 1 Cor. 3. 16.

Again, God does work in us these three things, after these manners, Bonum
Cogitare, sine nobis. Velle, nobiscum. Perficere, per nos. Bern. de gratia, and
libero Arbitrio. Cornelius Muss. 4. Ciner.

The Distinction of Grace into Sufficient and Effectual is a frivolous
distinction, one member having too little, the other too much to be found in
rerum natura: for how can that be a Grace, or sufficient, that never, as such,
produces any Effect, but must have something more put to it in the entity of
Grace to bring forth an Effect, and then it loses the name of Sufficient, and
wins the title of Effectual? 2. What effect flows (except it be in
miracles) from one sole cause which is certain and infallible, and despising
all other causes, claims to it self the title of Effectual. All Grace is in
it self sufficient, and efficient, no less, no more; (See Paulum Bennium de
efficaci Dei auxilio, purposely written to explode this distinction.) If there
be a defect in the Effect, it proceeds from a defect in some other cause, or
the Subject, or some other thing, than from the defect of Grace. Yet I will not
stick to acknowledge Grace Effectual to be well so called from the Event, and
as proceeding from Gods special mercy guided by his foreknowledge, if that
will satisfy their desires which affect this distinction.

Prevent us O Lord, in all our doings, with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued,
and ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy
obtain everlasting life, etc.

Almighty God, we humbly beseech thee, that as by thy special grace preventing
us, thou do put in our minds good desires, so by thy continual help we may
bring the same to good effect, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Collect on Easter
day.

The Necessity of Grace.
In the defense hereof Saint August. deserves highly of the Church of God
against Pelagius, who denied the Necessity of Grace: For Pelagius denying
Original Sin, and not acknowledging any loss to Adams posterity by Adams
transgression; but holding mankind to be now as sound as the Creator made it,
he must needs by consequence hold Grace to be superfluous, which the Church
held was prepared to supply that loss, and has its whole occasion out of the
Fall.

He then that confesses the effects of Adams sin, as fully as any man,
cannot be counted of Kindred to Pelagius in sleighting the necessity of Grace.
I subscribe to S. Augustine, pressing home that Text, Joh. 15. 5. Without me
you can do nothing: Lib. 2. cont. duas Epistolas Pelagii, c. 8. and alibi.

Author operis imperfecti in Matthew. c. 7. Hom. 18. in illud, Petite and dabitur
vobis, etc. Because the Commandments were greater than to be fulfilled by man's
strength, he directs us to God, to whose grace nothing is impossible: -- and
that rightly, because it is exceeding just the Creature should stand in need of
its Creators help. Se Saint Augustine de Genesi ad literam lib. 8. cap. 12.
M^^i autem adhaerere Deo bonum est, etc. It is good for me to stick close to
God: for neither is the Creature any such thing, as that without his Maker, he
should be able of himself to do any good thing: But his chief good work is,
to be converted to his Maker, and by him continually to be made Just, Godly,
Wise and Blessed, etc. As the Air, light being present, is not made a lucid
Body (like the Sun, which gives light) but only becomes light, because if it
were made such, it could not possibly be but that even in the absence of light,
it should continue lucid: Even so man, God being present with him, is
illightned, but being absent, is immediately darkened, from whom we depart, not
so much in distance of place, as in forsaking him wilfully.

This is even like Gods own, a glorious power; such as wrought in Christ when
God raised him from the dead, Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. and 3. 20. Whence our Conversion
is called a new birth, a new creation, the first Resurrection.

1. For first, the power to will that which is good, is created in us again as
it was at the first.

2. When this power is as it were in actu primo, by that gift or Creation, it
is not brought forth in actum secundum by our selves alone using that power,
but by the helping and cooperating of the divine power here again; as Bernard
says, Conatus nostri nulli sunt, nisi excitentur, and cassi sunt, nisi
adjuventur.

3. Be we never so willing, The habits of faith or love are no more in our
power, than it is in the power of a blind man to give himself sight, though he
be most willing to see, and say, Lord, that I may receive my sight, or no more
than it is in him that has present within himself to will, but to do that
which the law commands he finds not, Romans 7. 18. except the Spirit help
him, Romans 8. 3. So that after we are willing, and ready to receive, the mighty
power of God works and gives that which we desire: For our prayers
implythree things, First, That we want something, and feel our want; Second,
That we cannot help our selves to supply our want, but therefore go to
another; Third, That he alone, to whom we go as supplyants, we confess to be
able and ready to help us, and therefore we go to him.

This is that which Saint Paul teaches Phil. 2. 13. exhorting them that
received and obeyed the Gospel, to work out their Salvation; having received
the power to work; yet because they might fear their own weakness and
infirmity even in using the power in this working out their own Salvation, he
does Comfort and encourage them, that they shall not work alone, a stronger
than they shall join with them, God, who it is that ever works in them both
to will and to do. Where we have full proof for the power and presence of the
helpful grace of God; but for Gratia discriminatrix (...).

4. The weakness of many in temptations and persecutions, that shows it
self, testifies, that they who in those are more than Conquerors over Satan,
the flesh and the world, are defended and fought for by the mighty power of God
when they cry unto him: So prays the Church on the fifth Sunday after
Epiphany.

Lord, we beseech thee to keep thy Church and household continually in the true
religion, that they which do lean only upon hope of thy heavenly grace, may
evermore be defended by thy mighty power, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Against whom then do these accusations lie? To say, that the Will of man
resists the power of God, as if it were stronger than it.

That man does more to the work of his Faith, than the Grace of God.

That God does no more in us for good, than Satan does for evil, incline,
persuade, solicit, etc.

I am no way guilty of these crimes: If Gods power be resisted or frustrated,
it yields not out of weakness but out of will, God not pleasing to put forth
his power, where he feels himself resisted or neglected. The best that we do
in the bringing forth of any good is, To yield, and to permit God to work upon
us, to follow him leading or drawing of us, to accept of that he gives us, to
fence that which he sows or planteth in us, not to mar that which he
makes, not to harden the heart when his voice is to be heard: In sum, to be
passively obedient, more than actively.

For this is that only which the Power of Grace will not extend it self unto,
To necessitate, and to hold us up to an undeclinable obedience; The reason is,
because that power of God which builds up supernatural things, does not
destroy natural: but the possiblity in the Will to decline to evil, and the
liberty to disobey, is not evil, but natural, being found in Adam before his
fall, and as it was not impeached then by the supernatural grace which Adam
had, no more is it now in us. by the grace of God that works in us

To this agrees the learned Doctor Ward in his Clerum on Phil. 2. 13. page 6.
and 7. of the last Edition.

Of the Amplitude, or Universality of Grace.
From this Title there are to be excluded three things, as Heterodoxa; and
three other things to be referred to it as Orthodoxa.

1. Exclude from hence the opinion of Origin, and of those that Saint Aug.
calls Misericordes, that thought all men and Angels at the last should be
received to Mercy, against whom Saint Aug. disputes 21. lib. de Civitate, cap.
17. and deinceps.

2. Exclude from hence the opinion of Samuel Huber, against whom Hunnius and
other Lutherans dispute, who taught an Universal Election, etc. and that all
men by the death of Christ, were brought into the state of Grace and salvation:
which proposition is worthily rejected by our Divines at Dort in their Suffrage
de 2 Articulo, Thesi ult. Heterodoxa.

3. Exclude from hence the opinion of Andradius and other Papists, and
whosoever else that hold the Gentiles and Heathens without the Church, to have
sufficient grace to Salvation by the light of Nature, or to have that whereupon
well used the Grace of the Gospel shall be reveiled unto them: With these I
will have no fellowship. But under the Universality of Grace I comprehend but
these three things:

1. That as Christ our Lord took the nature of Mankind, (and not the Nature of
Angels,) So by his death he paid the price of Redemption for the Sins of the
whole world; this agrees with the third Thesis suffragii de art. secundo, and
with our Catechism; I believe in God the Father who has made me and all the
world; and in God the Son who has redeemed me and all Mankind, and in God
the holy Ghost who sanctifies me and all the Elect people of God: Where, note
the order and degrees.

2. That the promise of the Gospel is Universal to all that are within the
hearing of it, and that it might be truly and seriously proffered to any man
alive whatsoever: This agrees with the latter part of our seventeenth Article,
That we must receive Gods promises in such wise as they be generally set forth
unto us in the holy Scripture.

3. That with the promise and word of the Gospel there goes ordinarily such
Grace of the holy Spirit, as is sufficient to all under the Gospel, to work in
them to believe and to obey the Gospel; and that all do not obey, proceeds
not from the want of Grace on Gods part, but from men's being wanting to the
Grace of God, to whom it is in vain, as is evident by 2 Cor. 6. 1. 2. Heb. 4.
1. 2. 12. 15.

Now whereas it is as clearly said in the Holy Scripture, that Christ laid
down his life for his Sheep, John 10. 15. for the Children of God, John 11.
52. and that he loved his Church, and gave himself for it, Ephesians. 5. 25. as it
is said, He dyed for all men; These two must be so construed that they may both
stand together; Thus, that out of Gods goodness, mercy, and love to mankind,
he sent his Son to die for all men, as willing by his primary and antecedent
will the salvation of all men. But because Omniscience is in God as one of his
Divine perfections, he could not be ignorant or incertaine, what would be the
fruit and success of the Death of his Son; that such would not receive him,
that others such and such would thankefully embrace him, if he were sent unto
them; out of this foreknowledge his especial love accepting even these, though
few in number in comparison, did send his Son with intention to save, though
it were but these, in whom he would glorify his bounty, that for their sakes
he would have his Son to give his life, though he should gain no more than
them, who had they been much fewer, or none at all, surely the wise God either
would not have sent his Son to die in vain, or he would have mended the
measure and course of his graces and government, by which more might have come
into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Chrysostom in illud Pauli ad Gal. 2. Dilexit me and dedit semetipsum pro me.]
Declarat hoc quoque par esse, etc. He declares this also to be meet, that every
one of us no less give thanks, than if he had come into the World only for
his sake; for neither would Christ have refused even for one so great a
dispensation, he does so mightily love every particular Man with the same
measure of affection wherewith he loves the whole World. Therefore indeed was
he offered a Sacrifice for our whole nature, and 'twas sufficient to save all;
but to them only it will be profitable and useful, who have believed.
Nevertheless he was not skared from this kind of dispensation, because all
would not come; but in like manner as in the Gospel, the feast was made ready
for all, but because they which were invited, would not come, he did not
presently take away what was provided, but called others thereto.

August. ad artic. falso sibi impositos, art. 1. Quod ad magnitudinem and
potentiam preti^, etc. As to the Greatness and virtue of the price, and as far
as concerns the sole cause of Mankind, Christ's blood is the Redemption of the
whole World, but such as pass away this present life without Faith in Christ,
and the mystery of the New birth, are aliens to that Redemption, when therefore
by that one Nature of us all, which for all our sakes was truly taken by our
Lord and Savior, all of us are rightly said to be redeemed, yet are we not all
freed from captivity, etc. That Cup of Immortality, which was prepared partly
out of our infirmity, and partly out of Gods Power, has enough in it to profit
all, but if it be not drunk off, it is nothing profitable.

Homily 2. Concerning the Death and Passion of our Savior Christ. Concerning
the great Mercy and Goodness of our Savior Christ, in suffering Death
Universally for all Men: (in the very beginning. And afterward:) But to whom
did God give his Son? He gave him to the whole World, namely to Adam and all
that should come of him. (And after) It remains that I show you how to apply
Christ's Death to our comfort, as a medicine to our wounds, so that it may work
the same effect in us, wherefore it was given, namely the health and salvation
of our Souls: for as it profits a Man nothing to have salve, unless it be
well applied to the part infected: so the Death of Christ shall stand us in no
stead, unless we apply it to our selves in such sort as God has appointed.

Of Free Will. CHAP. X.
THis title now adays is in great disgrace and envy, invisum nomen, Dr. Abbot
Sarisbur. in Thompsoni Diatribam, page 143. Ille vero (Thompsonus sc.) hic
mereticulam suam, Arbitrii libertatem, quem commendaverat ante timidius, in
theatrum Ecclesiae productam palam exosculatur, Sic ille. But time was when the
Church of Christ stood and strove as earnestly in the defense of this Lady (ut
Gratiae pedissaeque, as the handmaid of Grace,) against the Manichees and other
Heretics, as any do now against her: which when learned Men do find in
Irenaeus, Origin, Chrysostom, and other great Fathers, I can but wonder they
should be so careless of their lavish terms; as also I marvel they should
be so mindful of the one part of a wise saying, Si non sit gratia Dei, quomodo
mundum salvabit Deus? and so forgetful of the other part, Si non sit liberum
Arbitrium, quomodo judicabit mundum Deus? when they find both in the same
Authors, Aug. Epist. 46. Valentino, Hieronym.

If the thing be of God, I will not fear the envy of the Name, and my defense
thereof shall be with such caution, as I will not offend against the grace of
God, by the help of Gods grace.

Freewill is a natural power in a reasonable Creature, whereby it can will or
nill, this or that, choose it, or refuse it be it good, be it evil.

Of Freewill to Good.
Freewill to Good was put into the first Man by God at his Creation, a faculty
of his reasonable soul created good; It was corroborated and guarded then by
an assistance of supernatural grace given by God to make him will good, more
cheerfully, constantly, and the highest eminent kind of good. But by the fall
of Adam this supernatural grace fortifying the will to good, was utterly lost;
and Secondly, the very freedom to any good of the superior kind; 1.
Spiritual, as to love God above all, to work the righteousness of the Law as
the Law is spiritual, to do any act suitable or equal to these, as to repent,
to believe in Christ: This freedom to good is wholly lost.

Some freedom to humane, natural, civil and moral good acts is only
remaining, and freedom to the outward good acts of Religion, as to go to a
Church, to hear, to attend, to consider, and compare the things delivered by
the Preacher of Gods Word, as a man can do the rules or definition of any act
or Science in the Schools: If then we seek for a freedom of will to
spiritual and supernatural good in the nature of man now fallen, we shall
not find it there, unless we find it restored and renewed by the grace of
Christ that goes with the Gospel. If the Son makes us free we shall be free
indeed. Without Grace, Freewill to Good is not once to be imagined in fallen
man.

I must declare this by distinguishing the spiritual good to which freedom is
restored by grace; There is the spiritual good commanded by the Law, as
Righteousness and true Holiness. To this good Freewill is lost, and is not
restored by grace at first, and immediately, but late, after a man is
justified, and made a new creature by grace.

There is another kind of spiritual good, not simply good, but in a case when
sin is once committed, (as Aristotle says of Verecundia, that it is good Ex
hypothesi of a fault) that is, Compunction, Fear, Conscience accusing, sense
of guiltiness. The freedom of will to this good remains commonly in a sinner
after his fall, nay sometime he is smitten with terror, will he, nill he; As
Adam when he had sinned, feared and fled, and hid his head. But if by custom
in sin this also be lost, the Spirit of God in the Law sets upon the will
to free it from the bondage of this security, and under the Law the will is
free to fear.

There is a third kind of spiritual good commanded by the Gospel, To repent
and to believe in Christ; To these the will of Man is not free of it self, but
the same Gospel that commands them, brings to the will a freedom to them,
which may be conceived possible to be done by two manner of ways.

1. By framing the Commandments of the Gospel so easy and accomodate to the
weakness and misery of the Will of man, that there may be a proportion
between the will of a sinner, and the Commandment of the Gospel; and then
the grace of the Gospel shall lie in this descending to the imbecility of the
will, and in accomodating the work to the workman, the task to the labourer.

2. Or by bringing and giving to the will so much power and help, as is
requisite to make a sinner able to do the Commandments of the Gospel;
admitting the Commandments to lay on him a work as hard and as heavy, as the
works of the Law.

I will not be so stiff to maintain the first way, as the second, although
to repent of sin, to believe in the Mercy of God, to rest in the Merits of
the Son of God, seem to be acts and duties very mercifully prepared by God,
as tendering the weakness and misery of a sinner, and fitted to his Estate.

But I maintain that the grace which restores freedom to the will, to will
the good of the Gospel, comes with the Gospel, which preventeth man's will,
and prepares it by infusing into it the power to will the spiritual good
things required by the Gospel, in that order and process which was declared
before in the Doctrine of Calling.

Depresse the nature of man as much as you will, call his Arbitrium, servum
arbitrium, the more I predicate the grace of God, which is proportioned and
fitted in goodness and power to quicken the dead, to strengthen the impotent,
to loosen the captive and most miserable will of Man. This being the very grace
of the Gospel, that it makes the Commandments of it possible to be obeyed by
man fallen, which the Law does not, so that no Man under the Gospel can be
excused in his disobeying the Gospel from his want of power, or impotency to
repent or believe.

And this was one reason of my Title chosen with respect to this part of my
Disputation, Appello Evangelium: Freedom on the left side of the will, as I
may call it, is to will Evil; that is, under the grace of God, or
notwithstanding the grace of God, whereby I may will good, yet I may decline to
evil, and leave the good.

This was in Adam before his Fall, a single, innocent possibility to decline to
evil, the very mutability of the Creature, seeing it is proper to God to be
immutably good: So that the very supernatural grace that Adam had for his
corroboration to God, yet did not immobilitate his will to evil.

This is the root of the praise of humane righteousness, for he is to be
commended that could transgress and would not, not he that was good and could
be no other. (The example of the righteous God is not here to be objected,
since he is above and out of all predicaments, wherein we are.) This is called
Resistentia connata, which Dr. Ward confesses is not taken away by grace.

This natural freedom to evil remains in Man fallen, and there is now come
to it over and above, Resistentia adnata, ^ precipitate pronenesse unto evil,
out of our thraldom to the dominion and tyranny of Satan.

These two must carefully be severed, for when I use these terms, the freedom
to sin, presently some body takes me down that the freedom to sin is a
servitude, the bondage and misery of the Will, not observing that the freedom
to sin is natural and before the fall; the bondage to sin since the fall,
and of corrupted nature, and these two differ as much as a live mortal man, and
a dead man.

The freedom to evil is not evil, but the use and practice of that freedom
is evil: The pronenesse to evil which is now in us, is evil.

That natural freedom to evil, grace, attempteth not in this life to take
away, but to keep it in from coming into practice.

That pronenesse to evil, grace attempteth to take away, or to weaken and
restrain, yet salva liberate naturali ad malum.

Of this liberty to evil, let Scholars read a determination of Dr. Baro,
without disdain, published at the end of his Lectures, on Jonas, Dei decretum
pravae voluntatis libertatem non tollit.

CHAP. XI. Of Grace and Free will conjunctim.
TO declare how these two are conjoynd in every spiritual work, let me first
possess you with three Principles or Axioms:

1. That in all the operations of these two (if we suppose them Co-workers)
either in our first conversion, or in every good work, Grace is evermore
foremost, the beginner, leader, principal in all; not only in the first, but
also in the second, third, and fourth operations to the last: The will of man
never working alone, never working foremost; but as the wheel of the
Water-mill, is set a going and kept a going by the continual following of the
water, which being stayed the wheel soon stays; So man's will is set a going,
and kept on going, by the perpetual stream of Gods grace, Phil. 2. 13. and
this arises (...), out of Gods good will, and desire of our salvation.

Veteres dixerunt precedente gratia comitante voluntate bona opera fieri;
Melancto. loc. com. de lib. arbitr.

2. That when Grace works upon man's understanding, will or affections, it
works so as it preserves and uses the natural Properties, Powers and
Motions of a reasonable Creature compounded as man is: Gratia non tollit
naturam, sed proficit, nec natura gratiam repellit, sed suscipit. Hence it is
that though the habits of Faith, Hope and Charity, and the like, are not
acquisite by man's industry alone, but infused by God; yet they are infused
after the manner of acquisites, God having ordained not to infuse them, but
upon the means of Hearing, Praying, Caring, Studying, and endeavoring.

Non ego, sed gratia Dei mecum; id est, non solus, sed gratia Dei mecum, ac per
hoc nec gratia Dei sola, nec ipse solus, sed gratia Dei cum illo. Aug. de great.
and lib. arbitr. Cap. 5.

3. That in all the operations of Grace, the nature and will of man being
prevented by grace, is to depend upon God as the Creature upon the Creator, the
receiver upon the giver, the weak upon the strong, the imperfect upon the
perficient, and the supplyant on his Lord; as the Earth depends upon the
Heavens for showers, for heat and influence: which when man neglects,
forgets or refuses to do, he is dry, barren and unfruitful in all
spiritual fruit.

Opus imperfectum in Mat. Homil. 14. ex cap. 6. in illa, Fiat voluntas tua,
etc. Vide quam caute loquutus est, etc. Behold how cautelously he speaks: He
says not, Father, sanctify thy Name in us, bring thy Kingdom upon us, make
thy will to be done of us; lest God should seem to sanctify himself upon
men, or to bring his Kingdom upon whom he list, or to make his will be done
by whom he please, and in regard thereof God should be perceived to be a
Respecter of persons. Again, neither has he said, Let us sanctify thy Name,
let us take thy Kingdom, let us do thy Will in Earth as it is in Heaven; lest
it should seem that it proceeded from men alone, that they sanctified Gods
Name, or that they received his Kingdom, or that they did his Will: But he
speaks in a middle way and impersonally; Hallowed be thy Name; Thy Kingdom
come; Thy will be done, that he may manifest how needful the work of both
parties is, because both man has need of God, and God is helpful to man, for
the performing of Righteousness. For as Man can do no good, except he have Gods
help, so neither does God work any good in man, except man be willing: As
neither the earth without seed fructifies, nor seed without the Earth: so
neither man without God, nor God without man does work righteousness in man:
Even as if he had said, If ye do these things, if ye pray for these things,
ye are children worthy of such a Father.

Now to try out the Truth, let me set forth into view four Propositions:

1. Without the Grace of God the will of Man can, and does both will and
perform that which is good.

2. Without the Grace of God the will of Man cannot will good, but through
Grace being once made able to will, afterward, without any further Grace, it
can alone both will and perform that which is good.

3. By or through the Grace of God working on the will, the will of Man can
both will and perform that which is good, and without grace it cannot will,
nor without further grace perform that which is good.

4. By or through the Grace of God working on the will, the will of man cannot
but will, cannot but perform that which is good.

The first Proposition of these, is the Heresy of Pelagius detested by the
whole Church of Christ.

The Second Proposition is the error of the Massilienses or Semipelagians. And
both these are against my first Principle or Maxim.

The Third Proposition holds out the light of Truth, subjoyning the will of
man to the Grace of God both in willing and performing that which is good, and
is the Doctrine of S. August. in his settled judgment, and the Catholic
Doctrine of the Church.

The Fourth Proposition is the extreme opinion of S. August. in his heat of
disputation against Pelagius and the Massilienses, and of many modern Divines,
of force defended to support your Doctrine of the Order of Predestination,
without the prescience of all particular events (putting only the prescience
of Adams fall.) But this fourth Proposition is destroyed by my two latter
Principles or Axioms, or they destroyed by it. Well said Nazianz. in the case
of extreme Opinions about the Trinity.

Quid enim necesse est tanquam ramum omnino in aliam partem declinantem, etc.
For what necessity is there, as a bough declining altogether one way, by force
to bend it the other way, and so by crookedness to rectify crookedness; and
not rather to keep to the middle way, and continue within the bounds of divine
Piety? but when I name the middle way, I mean the Truth, to which only we so
rightly direct our selves. Orat. 17.

Saint Augustine maintained, through Grace such help was afforded to the
predestinate, that not only they were not able to persevere without that gift,
but also through means of that gift could not choose but persevere: whereupon
Saint Hilary writes to Saint Augustine, His verbis Sanctitatis tuae ita
moventur, ut dicant quandam desperationem hominibus exhiberi: That by such
Speeches of his Son men were moved to say, They held forth a kind of
Desperation unto men.

It were a labor worth the taking to compare the two Epistles of Prosper and
Hilary, with the two books of Saint Austin de praedest. sanctorum, and de bono
perseverantiae, wherein he labors to answer those two Epistles; to see to
what he makes solid answer, to what he fails, or what he slippeth untouched
that is of moment, (sed hoc alias.)

The Question then is between the third and fourth propositions, and about the
manner and measure of working Grace upon the Will or with it: whether it be
such, as posita gratia operante, the Will may be Coworker or no, as the third
proposition affirms, or whether posita gratia operante, the work of Grace is
such as the Will of Man cannot but be a Coworker, as the fourth proposition
maintains: That is to say, for the state of a question rightly put is almost
(...), as it is said of an Oath, Heb. 6. 16. the end of all strife) whether the
Grace of God be only an efficient, operant, adjuvant prior cause, and the Will
also of Man an efficient prepared by Grace, cooperant and collaborant second
cause in the work of our Conversion, and every other good work: or whether
the Grace of God be an effectual, prepotent, invincible, prevalent, sole
efficient, that carries the Will to consent and obey willingly (if that be
willingly) as it neither will nor can choose to do otherwise.

For distinction sake, I will call the grace meant in the third proposition,
Efficientem; and the Grace meant in the fourth proposition, Efficacem.

The issue will be that if Gratia Efficax do work the Conversion and
perseverance of a Christian, then all in vain I have disputed before de
Praedestinatione secundum praescientiam; which is therefore defended, because
it gives place to freedom of Will, proper freedom in our working out our
Salvation, which gratia Efficax utterly destroys.

If Gratia Essiciens do work our Conversion, but not absolutely alone, but
with another co-worker which is free and Lord of its own action, and may fail
in working, then there must needs be prescience certain of this contingent
event, or else Predestination shall not be certain, and then this doctrine of
a sinners conversion will well stand with the doctrine of Predestination after
foreknowledge of all contingences, and this with that, as all parts of truth
ought to agree one with another.

The question in the useful terms is, (as some love to speak) whether grace
be resistable? which word though it be grounded upon Act. 7. 51. yet I had
rather use words more frequent in the Scripture, whether Grace can be
disobeyed? whether it can be in vain? whether a man can be wanting to the
grace of God, that has him in hand to convert him, or to work in him some
good, as Act. 5. 32. and 6. Romans 1. 5. and 10. 16. 2 Cor. 9. 13. and 10. 6.
Gal. 3. 1. and 5. 7. 2 These. 1. 8.

To come to the Truth by a near and compendious way: Let me take that first
which is given by an ingenuous and judicicious Adversary the Reverend professor
Doctor Ward in his Clerum, Phil. 2. 12. who yeildeth so much to the Truth, and
puts the question in so narrow a point, as he seems to me plainly to give over
the cause which he would expugne: See what he grants page 9. after much spoken
pro liberate Arbitrii: Nos enim libere profitemur, etc. For we freely
profess, neither operating, nor cooperating Grace, neither in Conversion, nor
after Conversion, does take away from man's Will, in the very exercise of its
Elicite Act, the power of Resisting or dissenting, if he will. For this
Resistibility is natural and borne with us, insoparable from the Will it self
as it is a natural faculty, etc. And after page 27. Non hic queritur, etc. It is
not questioned here simply, whether God in the work of Conversion or in any
other good work, does move the Will resistibly; for that we have affirmed
formerly. This is given then, that Resistibility is never taken away. See then
secondly, what remains in Controversy; De modo Resistibilitatis totalis est,
etc. Touching the manner of Resistibility all question is made; for this is
that which we say, when God by his effectual Grace works in the Will Ipsum
velle, this Grace does effectually produce Non-resistency, and so for that time
take away actual resistance; which is brought to pass by certain knowledge,
and the prevalency of delight, says August. Therefore do we maintain,
actual resistance, for that time to be certainly taken away, because it is
impossible, such a resistance should consist together with effectual Grace
received in the Will. Because these two things cannot co-exist together, or be
composed in the Will, namely, The Will to be wrought upon by effectual Grace,
and the Will at the same time to resist; which were as much as to say, in the
same Instant the Will not to resist, and to resist; or velle non resistere, and
velle resistere.

Let us have leave a little to search into this mystery: De modo
resistibilitatis tota lis est: nay truly, nulla lis est de modo
resistibilitatis; for resistibilit as est potentia resistendi and actus: now
about resistibilitas, the power, there is no controversy, for you grant neque
innata, neque adnata tollitur per gratiam in conversione: here can be no
question de modo resistibilitatis, all must be de ipsa resistitentia, or de
modo non resistentiae: for hoc est quod dicimus, etc. (rem haud magnam
dicitis,) Ideo enim contendimus, etc. (de re minime dubia contenditis;) for is
there any Remonstrant so silly to say, Posit a gratia efficaci, resistentiam
ipsam manner; that when the will does actually yield, that then it does and can
resist? who bears a part in hac lite? Plainly the State of the question is
changed; for the question of Contingency is not when things are in esse, but
before they were, whether they were not possible to be otherwise. Scholastici
utuntur hic erudita distinctione: Quod fit, consideratur duobus modis; uno, ut
est jam in se, and extra suas causas, and hoc modo ipsum fieri transit in
factum esse, and praesens in praeteritum, proinde res illa non potest non esse,
dum est, quia non potest non facta esse, quae facta est. Altero modo ut fluit a
causa, sive ut habet ordinem ad causam, id est, Quatenus est adhuc in manu
causae: atque hoc modo si causa est libera and contingens, potest res illa non
esse, and contingenter est, non necessario, quia habet ordinem ad causam, seu
(ut loquar cum Zabarella) connexione^ cum causa non necessarium, sed
contingentem, (ita Goclenius.)

The Question then of the Resistibility is before the very act of good, or
evil, not in it: It were sense I trow, to say, A regenerate man wills sin
resistibly, not in the very moment when he wills it, but because ere he
willed it, he could have resisted it; so a Convert obeys Grace, or wills
his conversion resistibly, because ere he willed it, he could have dissented:
Sin is resistible, though it be too late to resist when it is consented unto;
and Grace may be resisted, though to say so is too late, when it is accepted in
the Will; for to be received and then to be resistible cannot Coexistere.

3. Again, granting that non resistentiam which is in the very act of
consenting, the question is still as doubtful what is the Cause of this
Non-resistance, and in cujus causae manu sita erat, whether Gratia efficax be
the cause, or voluntas efficax, for the selfsame may be said of the Will that
you say of Grace; when the Will obeys it is impossible it should disobey or
will to resist. No man can tell by the very act of obeying, which is the cause
of not resisting, for put either of the two, Grace or Will, to remove
resistance, it is surely gone in the act of consenting. And to me it seems
demonstrable, that the Will is the proper cause that ends resistance, or
refuses to resist: First, because that gratia efficax which you speak of so
much, is but nomen sine re, there being no such Grace that can determine the
Will, but it destroys it, the nature of the Will being to determine it self.
Secondly, because to resist and not resist are the proper acts of the Will, as
to convert, repent, believe, are the immediate acts of man who converteth,
repents, believes; and are not the acts of God, (though without his help and
power they are not produced;) which is a plain sign, that man is later in the
operation than God, in the order of Nature, by whom the act was terminated.

Our Church in the Homily of Salvation. 1. tomo, understands the matter thus,
First, for the necessity of something to be done on our part for our
justification; to Gods mercy on his part, and Christ's satisfaction on his part,
concurs on our part, a true and lively Faith in the merits of Jesus Christ,
which yet is not ours, but by Gods working in us. Secondly, how it understands
this, Not ours but by Gods working in us, a l^^tle lower it declarerh, Lively
faith is the gift of God, and not man's only work without God. This might
suffice sober wits, that all confess, Gods grace to prevent, to operate to
help man's Will, and the Will of man to have some office and part under the
Grace of God, though we were not able to express or declare the manner of the
coworking; God promises to Circumcise the Heart, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. and Man is
commanded to Circumcise his own heart, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Jer. 4. 4. God promises
to put a new spirit into man, Ezekiel. 11. 19, and men are commanded to make them
a new heart and a new spirit. This promise and this commandment are both
Evangelicall: The promise supposes and implies our utter impotency of our
selves to do these supernatural acts, and tendreth unto us the power,
assistance and operation of God to comfort and encourage us. The commandment
supposes and implies a power in us by the power of God, to endeavor and to
do something toward these supernatural acts: and that they are our acts does
appear for that they savor of our imperfections, from whence it is, that we
daily accuse our selves, and complain of the weakness of our faith, the
coldesse of our love, the pride of our hearts, though it be true that God has
given us faith, love, humility; Why do we not rather magnify the gifts and
graces of God, but extenuate and disgrace them, like ungrateful persons? but
because we have impaired them, or made them defective, by our being wanting to
the Grace of God.

Let Bernard conclude this Chapter of Grace and Freewill conjunctim, who was a
true friend to the Grace of God, de lib. arb. prope finem: Sic autem ista
(scil. Gratia) cum libero arbitrio Operatur, etc. But so does Grace operate
with Freewill, that the Will only prevents in the first Act, in the rest it
accompanies; and so far it is preventing, that even now for hereafter it
cooperates with Grace; Yet so, that what is begun by grace alone, is perfected
by both alike; so as jointly, not severally; together, not by turns, they
work by particular degrees; not partly Grace, partly Freewill, but each by a
joint operatinn performs the whole: Freewill does the whole work, and Grace
does the whole work; but as the whole is wrought in the Will; so the whole is
wrought by Grace. Excellently S. Bernard.

Pardon my Curiosity or too much diligence, if I labor to present as it were
to the Eye in a scheme, the consistence of Grace and Freewill, in willing and
nilling good, (Grace helping Freewill to will or do good, and not hindering it
to nill good, or do evil,) in every estate.

1. Of Nature sound. 2. Of Nature fallen. 3. Of Nature in renewing or renewed.
4. In Nature glorified.
Again, on the next four pages following after this, give me leave to set down
the order of a sinners Conversion, and the process therein in them that obey
the grace of God to Salvation: and the manner of resistance and disobedience,
that is in every degree of them that perish.

Lib. Arbitrium Spirituale bonum potens vel
Per Creationem, velle Per gratiam praevenientem potens nolle, per naturam
iufra Deu^. Per gratiam supernaturalem ada^cto before velle nolle, naturali
non ejecto per supernaturalem gratiam. Per peccatum perdito velle and naturali
and adaucto nolle naturali permanente. nolle praeternaturali adaucto. Per
gratiam praevenientem reddito velle nolle naturali nolle praeternaturali
remanente. Per gratia^ adjuvante^ non vult, per nolle innatum. Contra operatur,
per nolle adauctum. Per gratia^ recuperante^ vult perficit Per gratia^
regenerationi^ adaucto before vult perficit. nolle naturali remanente, nolle
adaucto diminuto. In statu gloriae plenissime per visionem beatificam vult
perficit nolle omni ejecto for as. Ordo Conversionis hominis peccatoris liberto
arbitrio obediente gratiae Divinae.
Hominis sub natura corrupta and sine lege, Romans 7. 9. Men's caeca, volu^tas
perversa, vita impura, co^scie^tia stupida. Filius irae, miserrimus, se miserum
nesciens. Ubi natura desinit and deficit, incipit Lex.
Hominis sub lege ut lex est in ordine ad gratiam, Ex lege men's peccatum
agnoscit, conscientia accusans Spiritu timoris compuncta. Minus miser se
miserum sciens, conscientia mala sed sentiens, ingemiscens, Miserum me quis
liberabit? Ubi Lex desinit and deficit, incipit Gratia sive Evangelium.
Homo sub gratia per Evangelium vocante, praeveniente, operante, Ex Evangelio
miserationes Patris, merita filii, auxilia Sp. Sa^cti discens spem, votum
salutis concipiens, Salubriter a se deficit quem perficit Deus: Bernard. Aeger
sub Medico nondum Sanatus sed sanari cupiens and sperans: Conatus ii nulli sunt
nisi excita: Ubi Gratia praeveniens desinit, incipit adjuvans.
Homo sub gratia regenerante* Optans adjutus vult, volens adjutus credit,
cr^dens justificatu^, justificatus Sanctificatur. Conatus ii cassi sunt nisi
adjuvantur. Sanus tollens lectum suum. Justus ex fide vivens. Qu^ Justus est,
justificatur adhuc.
Homo sub gratia protege^te, and consummante Gaudens, gratus de praeteritis,
vigil, fortis ad futura, orans, pugnans, perseverans. Ecce sanus factus es,
noli iteru^ peccare, ne deterius tibi. Vir Spiritualis, perfectus proviatore.
Radicatus in fide, victor carnis, mundi, Satanae, Beatus. Benedictus Deus qui
benedixit nobis omni spirituali benedictione in Christo Jesu. Gradus and modi
peccatorum se obdurantium, Libero Arbitrio inobediente Gratiae Divinae.
Omnes extra Ecclesiam non vocati, in peccatis obdurati, de quibus haec dicta
-- Quos vult obdurat, Romans 918. Quicunque sine lege peccaverunt, sine lege and
peribunt, Romans 2. 12.

1. Contra legem objurgantem cor obdurans, Peccatum tegens, excusans,
defendens, Securus contemptor minarum, Pollicens sibi pacem, and impunitatem:
Deuteronomy. 29. 19.

2. Lege Sauciatus, contra Evangelium de misericordiis Patris, meritis Filii,
auxiliis Spiritus Sti. desperans, projiciens se omni sceleri, ut Cain and Judas.

3. Ex Evangelio spem veniae accipiens, contra Evangelium divitiis gratiae
abutens ad Lasciviam, differt convertere, praesumens de paenitentia and fide in
Christu^, qnovis tempore, vel extremo.

4. Elatus ex praeteritis, ingratus, securus, indulgens otio, car^i, preces
intermittens, vel metu perterritus fidem negat, vel tentationi cedens scelus
admittit, in perditionem ruit, nisi novo fidei and poenitentiae actu redeat ad
Deum ut justificetur a scelere, Ezekiel. 18. 26.

In quovis gradu datur occasio justa Divinae severitati deserendi hominis, and
non ulterius progrediendi in conversione procuranda; si pergat, superabundantis
est Gratiae.

By the view of these Tables a full answer may be made to those questions which
were moved in the beginning of the Doctrine of Conversion, cap. 8. what part
the sinner, the subject to be converted, yet a living, and a reasonable
subject, bears in his own conversion, whether he be active or passive,
where, and how far? whether he can hinder or further it? Who it is that puts
the difference, God, or man, if we suppose two equally called, the one to obey,
the other to disobey?

To these it may be answered by remembrance of the order of calling before
declared, cap. 7. and by reference to this description of the Order of our
Conversion.

1. That a sinner is passive in having the word of the Law and of the Gospel
preached unto him; but active in hearing, and in attending to it.

2. That he is passive in the illuminations of his mind, and in receiving
impressions of fear by the Law, and of hope by the Gospel: but active in
nourishing them, not defacing them, or putting them out of his heart; grace yet
coworking with him in that nourishing of them.

3. That he is passive in receiving sundry good thoughts, holy desires, and a
power to will, and motions to pray: But he is active in meditating on those
thoughts, in prosecuting of those desires, and in endeavoring to exercise his
power to will and to pray; grace ready to help him, ever offering it self.

4. That praying he is still passive, but a willing Patient, thirsting for the
gifts or habits of repentance, Faith, Love, or whatsoever he prays for; And
active, but an helped Agent, in producing the acts of repenting, believing,
loving, out of those gifts and habits infused into him.

5. That he is both passive under the vigilance and power of God, protecting
and keeping him being a believer and converted: and also active in watching
over himself with the grace of God to keep, and defend himself, 1 John 5.
18. 1 John 33. Upon which place S. Augustine thus, Videte quemadmodum non
abstulit liberum arbitrium, etc. Behold after what manner he has not taken
away Freewill, when he says, keeps himself chaste: who is it that keeps us
chaste except God? But God does not so keep thee being unwilling thereto.
Therefore when thou joynest thy will to God, thou keep thy self Chaste, Thou
keep thy self Chaste, not of thy self, but by him who comes to dwell in
thee: yet because in this business thou do something of thine own will,
therefore is something attributed to thee; yet so is it ascribed to thee, that
still thou may say with the Psalmist, Lord, be thou my helper: -- If thou
say, be thou my helper, thou do something; for if thou did nothing, how
could he help?

So then a sinner is never first, but always second; not a Leader, but a
Follower in every degree, and passage of his conversion. In the first entrance
a mere Patient, in the second progress a willing Patient, in the third an
Agent but an helped Agent, doing nothing alone without the adjuvant and
cooperant Grace of God, saying (as it were a weak sick man,) Now you have put
life into me, lift me, and I will rise; Stay me and I will stand; Draw me and
I will come to you. Avertat enim Deus hanc amentiam, ut in donis ejus nos
priores faciamus, posteriorem ipsum. August. lib. 2. ad Bonifac. cap. 9.

CHAP. XII. The Solution of the Question of two equally called.
AS to the Question when two are equally called, and one converteth, the other
not, (these both being supposed possible) who it is that puts the difference,
God or man; I ground my answer upon the righteous judgment of God, that man
puts the difference, and not God; for that God judges not his own acts, but
the acts of men; and for that every righteous Judge finds a difference, and
does not make any between party and party. Who put the differences between
the sacrifices of Cain and Abel, but themselves? both alike instituted in
religion by their Father: God a true witness testified of Abels gift as better
than Cains, Heb. 11. 4. Who put the difference between Pharaoh and
Nebuchadnezzar, Quantum ad naturam ambo homines erant, etc. As to their Nature
both were men; as to their Dignity both Kings; as to the cause both held the
people of God in captivity; as to the Punishment both were mildly admonished by
Chastisements; what then occasioned their different ends? Nothing else but that
One of them, sensible of Gods hand, groaned under the Memory of his own
Iniquity: The other by his own freewill fought against the most merciful
Verity of God. Aug. de Praedest. and Gra. cap. 15. See the same S. Aug. de.
Civitate Dei. lib. 12. c. 61. Concerning two equally tempted by the beauty of
one fair Body, whereof one yields to the temptation; the other perseveres the
same he was before: What else appears in these, except only that one would,
the other would not lose his Chastity? The difference between the Ninivites
repenting at the preaching of Jonas, and of the Jews not repenting at the
preaching of a greater than Jonas, if God did put it, how should they rise up
in judgment and condemn these?

But Saint Austine is the man that has made it so scandalous and so horrible
to pious ears to say, that a man makes himself to differ from another, by
wringing that place of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Quis te discernit? Besides
many absurdities that are said to follow this assertion; let us examine first
this notable place of S. Paul, and next those absurdities so much enforced with
so much confidence. 1 Cor. 4. 7. Ex causis dicendi sensus dictoru^ aestimandus:
It is evident the Apostle speaks, de donis gratis datis, not de donis gratum
facientibus: of Eloquence, Knowledge, tongues and the like; not of Faith,
Charity, Repentance, Conversion, and the like. This answer in substance was
given by the Remonstrants in the Conference at the Hague, to whom let us see
what Master Amese, coaetaneus meus, does reply in his Coronis, page 269. de
tali Doctorum discretione agit hic Apostolus, non nego; I deny it not, the
Apostle treats of such a difference between the Corinthian Teachers, sed tali
agit argumento, ut ad fidelium etiam discretionem optime possit applicari, but
he uses such an Argument, that it may be very well applied to the differencing
of believers from unbeleevers. Then the Text is not direct, but by application
may be well used to this purpose: Your reason? 1. Quia generalis est assertio,
In nulla re te discernis. That is, because the assertion is general, In
nothing do thou make thy self to differ. This the Text says not, or at
least this is the question, whether under the aids and means of faith common
to thee and to another, thou do not make the difference when thou beleevest
and the other does not. 2. Quia multo minus fides homini tribui debet, si non
charismata sibi comparare vel augere potest. This multo minus has in it nihil
minus; I demonstrate it by a reason which the Remonstrants did not, why this
Text cannot be applied to gifts necessary to Salvation; Because in them God
wills not that difference which is between believers and unbeleevers under the
word of faith, but would have all believe and obey the Gospel; this difference
offends and displeases God, and it proceeds as much from the disobedience
of him that believes not, as it does from the obedience of him that believes;
but of that part of the difference which is by disobeying, God I trow, is not
the Author; It is sin and shame to him that wants faith after the means of
faith afforded him, but no blame to him that speaks not with tongues, or
Prophecyeth not; These were given suddenly and immediately without labor or
means, but faith and the rest needful to Salvation, had means by which God
gave them, about which means men might use a different diligence. When the
Scriptures speak of Gods measuring to every man as he will, as Romans 12. 3. Ephesians.
4. 8. 1 Cor. 12. 11. these places respect those gifts of the holy Ghost that
were given for the public service of the Church: as if the measure that is of
saving graces, to be so small as it is, proceeded from men's negligence, rather
than Gods dispensation: but admit that God puts and approves a different
measure, even of saving graces, yet that difference of an Emptiness and
absence of faith in them that hear the word, he puts not, he approves not.

Lastly, the difference in the measure of gifts of all sorts, may come from God
that gives, but the different using of these gifts does come from man, that is
to reckon with God about the usage of them: That one Servant received five,
another two, another one Talent, this difference was from the Lord; but that
one Servant gained five, another two, another none, this difference was not
from the Lord, but from the Servants; whence it is that one hears, Euge serve
bone and fidelis, and another, Serve nequam, and piger. Vid. Origin. super
Numeros, homil. 12.

Being secure of this place of Saint Paul, I come with greater confidence to
avoid those absurdities, in pressing of which some so much triumph; They say,
that if man make the difference between himself and another, then it follows,

1. That God does no more for his Elect, than for the Reprobate.

2. That the Saints have no more to give thanks to God for than the wicked.

3. That one man may glory against another, for that he has done something
more than another did.

To these I answer 1. in particular. 2. in general.

1. To the first, admitting for a while that God in the grace of Vocation, does
no more for the Elect, than for the Reprobate, yet in the grace of
Predestination he does incomparibly more: In that foreknowing the different
successes of his Calling, and the Ends of the called so different, he was
pleased to decree and confirm that Calling to some which he foreknew would be
saving to them; and to decree no other to the rest than that which he foresaw
would not be saving to them, through their own disobedience, when it was in
his power to have altered their Calling, to such, as obedience (in his
knowledge) would have followed. So that in the Preparation, and in the
Execution of his gracious Calling, which God knew would prove happily to these,
his Election of them, and his love to them appears singular, and they have
infinite reason of gratitude above the Reprobate; The Reprobate have cause to
thank God for preparing that Calling, whereby they might have been saved as
well as others are, and are to blame only their own contempt and folly: but
they have not this to thank God for, that he did alter their Calling to a
better, when he found the Event of this would be Evil unto them; neither can
they blame him, seeing he was no way bound to do so; for if he were, He should
not have suffered any to perish at all. And the Elect who obey their Calling,
which of them can tell in the preparation of their Calling how often God
changed it, and amended it, (to speak after our manner of Understanding, who
use to bring things thus to perfection and to our liking) until he had brought
it to that order, as where of he saw the Effect would be the free Conversion of
the Called.

But it was admitted only, not affirmed, that in the Grace of Vocation God
does no more for the Elect than for the Reprobate: for what if the time wherein
a Convert obeys, be not the first, second, third, or the hundredth time that
he has Suffr. 3. and 4. thesi. 6.
been called upon, but God has showed him that Patience, as one that would
not give him over until he win him? What if the time wherein the unconverted
refused mercy, was but the first, second, or the third, after which God in just
severity would no more move him by his Spirit, nor wait upon him, but forsook
him? here is much inequality in Grace and favor: for it is enough for my
supposition (of the liberty of man's Will under Grace, and of two equally
called, that one may obey and not another;) that sometime two may be equally
called, and unequally obey, though all that be called be not every one called
as often as another; for as we may suppose an equality in some, so do we
confess an infinite variety and inequality in most; yet there is a time when
that has place which our Church says in the Homily of the knowledge of the
Scripture, the second part, page 5. That God receives the learned, and
unlearned, and casts away none, but is indifferent unto all.

2. To the second I answer, for matter of thankfulness: That as Grace is not
therefore Grace, because it is given to one, and denied to another, but because
it is given the Unworthy, (for Grace were not the less but the greater if it
were given to all:) So my thanks are not therefore given to God, because he
has been merciful to me, more than to another, but because he has been
merciful to me unworthy; and my thanks are not diminished, because many more
are partakers with me in the same benefits, but the greater, and should have
been yet greater, had more still been partakers than are. Hear the words of
Salvianus, or whosoever be the Author, l. 2. ad Ecclesiam Catholicam prope a
principio: Sed forsitan dicis, etc. But happily thou do say, there is a
general debt of all men touching these things of which we speak, and that all
mankind without exception are obliged thereunto, (namely in the Passion of
Christ;) we confess it is Truth; Yet does any man therefore owe the less,
because another also owes the like sum? etc. That which I said formerly,
though it be a general debt, yet no question it is also a special debt;
although all men in common be engaged, yet every one in particular is also
bound: For Christ as he suffered for all, so he suffered for every one, and
bestowd himself upon all, as well as upon every one; and gave himself wholly
for all, and wholly for every one. And in regard of this, whatever our Savior
by his suffering performed, as all owe themselves wholly to him for it, so
every one wholly: except in respect of this every one owes more, than all
Mankind, because every one has reaped as much benefit thereby, as all men.

This is a good rule for thankfulness: but take heed of the Pharisees form
of thanks for Graces, with comparisons to other folks, Lord, I thank thee I am
not like other men, or as this Publicane. Indeed, as some put the case of
mankind, like a company of Rebels, out of whom the King chooses whom he
pleases to pardon, and executes the rest with the sword; those pardoned owe
thanks for their pardon, and more thanks for culling them out, that were like
to the rest in Rebellion: But the Scripture puts not the case of mankind so,
but rather thus: God by the Gospel as a King, mercifully proclames a general
pardon to all the company of Rebels in such a County, upon condition, that he
that comes in and yields his sword, and takes at the Kings Pavilion a Ticket of
his pardon, be free to go home and enjoy the State of a good Subject, but they
that stand out and refuse this grace, be after such a day pursued with fire and
sword. They that submit, magnify the amplitude of the Kings mercy, sorrow for
such as obstinately stand out, justify his Execution done upon stubborn,
ungrateful Rebels. You think to win greater thanks to God, by amplifying his
Grace upon one consideration of sparing some simply, but with prejudice to his
Truth; proclaimed to all. I think to win greater thanks to God by amplifying
his Grace upon another consideration of sparing all upon favorable conditions,
according to the Gospel, the most wise comprehension of the Grace, Mercy,
Justice, and Truth of the Almighty.

3. To the third particular I answer, for matter of glorying: let this Rule
stand firm, Qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur, let him that glories, glory
in the Lord, or let him not glory. Remember again, that the gifts of God are
either immediate, and proceeding from himself alone, as prophecy, tongues,
etc. or mediate, and such as proceed from Gods Grace and Man's will together,
as I have declared; of those immediate gifts there is no glorying, the latter
part of the Text is strong, What have thou, that thou have not received? and if
thou have received, why boastest thou as if thou had not received? here
accepisse excludes boasting over another whose non-accepisse has been no fault
of his, it having proceeded from the mere will of the giver. But for gifts
mediate, as Faith and Repentance, and obedience in any particular duty, they
must be considered as Dona Dei, and as Debita a nobis, as the gifts of God and
as our duties; things necessary upon Gods Commandment, and upon peril of our
Salvation: as they are gifts of God wrought in us by his Grace, preventing,
helping, and strengthening us, there is no glorying of them but in the Lord: So
Paul gloryeth, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Plus omnibus laboravi, yet not I, but the Grace
of God with me, which Grace was not in vain, Phil. 4. 13. I have the art both
to abound and to want, etc. I am able to do all things, (...), through Christ
that strengthens me: here also accepisse excludes glorying in a man's self.
Again, the same gifts considered as duties owing by us, and as proceeding from
the will of man (yet helped by Grace) are no matter of glorying, because they
are done; S. Paul 1 Cor. 9. 16. Though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to
glory of, for necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is me if I preach not the
Gospel: So woe is to me if I believe not the Gospel (does the hearer say)
accepisse is not the only excluder of Glory, debuisse is as much: Luke 17. 9.
Does he thank that Servant because he did the things that were commanded him? I
trow not; So likewise we, when we have done all those things which are
commanded us, say, We are unprofitable Servants; we have done that which was
our duty to do. What matter of boasting is it for a man to have kept himself
from a detestable crime, whereinto another rushing, precipitated himself to
Hell? Yet I pray you do not exclude all kind of glorying, not that which
Saint Paul names so, 2 Cor. 1. 12. (...), etc. The testimony of a good
conscience is some comfort and some joy that he wants who has an Evil
conscience. Let Innocence wash her hands without a check of Vaineglory: Let
Samuel call witness of his Integrity, and Nehemiah record his own good deeds,
cap. 5. 15. The former Governors before me had been chargable to the People,
even their servants bare rule over them: but so did not I, because of the fear
of the Lord.

In general I answer to these three Objections: when things succeed well and
prosperously unto us, whatsoever be our natural parts, whatsoever have been
our industry or our labor more than others, who is so void of piety or of
understanding, that does not ascribe his good success unto God the Fountain
of all good, and the universal or principal cause of all happy events, who
builds the house more than all that labor on it, who keeps the City above all
that watch or ward, who gives more to the increase than all that plant or
water: yet the Builder, the Watchman, the Planter, the Waterer, have their
parts and offices, which being neglected the house is not builded, the City is
betrayed, the Tree is unfruitful. Because some little thing is done by men,
but nothing comparable to that great which is done by God, therefore the form
of the Saints rejoicing is thus conceived, Not unto us O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy Name give glory; that, not unto us, implies that something has been
done by us, and that man's corrupt heart is too ready to claim some glory to it
self for it, but true Wisdom and Piety soon removes it, and says, Not unto
us O Lord, but to thy Name give glory.

Neither truly should these poor things of the will of Man, whether wish or
will, whether endeavor or labor, whether yielding or obeying have been once
named the same day that Gods Grace and Works are praised, or have been pleaded
or contended for in these disputes had not there been a necessity compelling
thereunto; Qui vero necessitate cogente vera de se bona loquitur, tanto magis
verius humilitati jungitur, quanto and veritati associatur, says Bern. Sermon.
20. in coena Domini. They have compelld me, who under a color of magnifying
the grace of God, and bringing greater thanks to him, and of justly reproving
them that have been Adulatores naturae, are turned themselves Adulatores
gratiae, so far forth as by them Satan seeks to subvert the Truth and
righteousness of God, and to extinguish and destroy all Piety and Religion in
Men, bringing into the World a stupid sloth for some, a remorslesse infidelity
and impenitency for others, and an invincible desperation and hardness for
other some, the natural offspring of that Doctrine that takes away all manner
of freedom of will from men in matters of Salvation, that turns the general
Promises of the Gospel into particular and private, that limits an especial
kind of grace which is only effectual to a few secret ones by a direct
decree, the rest being left destitute of true grace, though they be called by
the word of the Gospel.

These things I was warned of long ago by Melanchton, before the name of
Arminius was heard of here, in his common places, cap. de Praedest. Removeamus
a Paulo Stoicas Disputationes, etc. Let us remove from S. Paul such Stoicall
disputes, as overthrow Faith and Prayer, for how could Saul believe or pray,
when he doubted whether the promise belongd to him, or when that fatal Table
of the Destinies had prepossessed him? For it is decreed that thou shall be a
castaway, etc. And in the Chapter de lib. Arbitr. he admits of their
disputation that say, Si nihil agit liberum arbitrium, etc. If my Freewill does
avail nothing, in the mean time till I perceive that Regeneration you speak
of, wrought in me, I will be indulgent to my unbelief and other vicious
affections. This Manichae an imagination is an horrible falsehood, and from that
error our minds are to be ferch'd off, and taught that Freewill does avail
much.

To conclude with reference to the question de causa discriminis, the same
grave Author there says thus; Cum promissio sit Vniversalis, etc. When as the
Promise is Universal, neither are there in God contradictory wills, there is a
necessity, some cause of this difference to be in us, why Saul was rejected
and David received; that is, of necessity in those two there was some different
Action. But still remember that this agere aliquid, and aliquam actionem, is
not to be conceived to be by mere natural strength but by the help of Grace.

CHAP. XIII. Of Conversion under the terms of a new Creation, Regeneration,
the first Resurrection, etc.
THis Chapter is an answer to another Objection. There be that delight much in
these Metaphors, rather than in the simple term of Conversion: inferring hence
that a man does no more to his new Creation, than he did to his first, nor to
his Regeneration than he did to his Generation, nor to his Resurrection from
sin than Lazarus did to the raising of his dead body.

Hence proceeds that Doctrine of Mr. Pemble of Grace and Faith, p. 13. That the
seed of spiritual life, and the habits of Faith and Grace, (like a new Soul)
are infused into men before they be so much as illuminated supernaturally,
illumination going before the act of Faith, but not before the habit, or the
grace of Sanctification in the Soul; So he. Hence Dr. Tailor upon that Text,
2 Cor. 5. 17. Whosever is in Christ is a new creature, infers, that Grace
cannot be resisted, page 80. because no Creature can resist his Creator in the
creation thereof, etc.

But they might have been pleased to have been advised,

1. That this leans too much to an Enthusiasmus, such as the judicious
Divines in their suffrage do disclaim, p. 48.

2. That in our spiritual Nativity, as in our natural, there are many
preparative dispositions, as the same Fathers say, p. 42.

3. That Arguments taken from Allegories and Metaphors are weak and
deceitful, if they be extended infinitely, and beyond that to which the
Scripture intends them.

4. That as Mr. Beza himself confesses, 2 Cor. 5. 17. here is an (...), more
than is strictly to be taken, for that the new Creation extends not to the
substance, but to the qualities of a man, else if we press the letter, we
may better defend a Transubstantiation in a man's conversion, than the Romanists
can do in the Sacrament of Christ's Body; or we may help with an Argument the
absurd opinion of Fla. Illiricus, that Original sin is the very substance of
Man: but we have learned better of Chrysostom in 3. Johannis, Nativitatem hoc
in loco, non secundum substantiam, sed honorem and gratiam intelligi.

5. They might have been advised that this (...) respects;

First, the Universality of the change in qualities to be so diffused over the
whole Man, ut non cognoscas eundem esse, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. 5. Hom. 11. propter
hoc and crassiore nomine vocat Resurrectionem (sive novam creaturam) ut multam
nobis mutationem and varietatem ostendat. That appears by S. Paul's
descriptions of the old and new Man, Col. 3. and by his parallels to this Text,
Gal. 6. 17. In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avayleth any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but a new creature. Gal. 5. 6. In Christ Jesus neither
circumcision, nor uncircumcision, but Faith that works by love. 1 Cor. 7.
Circumcision is nothing, uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of Gods
Commandments. That Is something; where this makes up a new creature, Faith that
works by love, or the keeping of Gods Commandments.

Secondly, It respects the necessity of this change; except a man be borne
again, etc. Joh. 3. first, in opposition to our first birth from Adam, by
which we are all sinners, and excluded out of the Kingdom of God. But by Faith
in Christ we become to be in him as in a second Adam: and have from him
righteousness and holiness, as real, and avayleable to our entrance into the
Kingdom of God, as our being borne of Adam was avaylable to our excluding
thence.

Next, in opposition to the Jews boasts of being the children of Abraham, as
if that were enough to righteousness and happiness; but if they be not borne
again by another birth, and that of God, Joh. 1. 13. they may be the children
of the Devil, Joh. 8. 44.

Thirdly, It respects the necessity of a divinum and supernaturale principum,
from whence this change must flow, else there is no hope for us ever to be
converted: Therefore, the Apostle having said, Old things are past away, behold
all things are become new, adds, verse. 18. and all things are of God, etc.
for it is he that made us and not we our selves in both creations, Psalm. 110.
and we are therefore (...), Gods Manufacture created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, Ephesians. 2. 10.

6. But now as to the manner and many circumstances; each Creation and
Generation has its proper and peculiar manner; for he that made us without
us, will not save us without us, as is alleged out of S. Augustine.

There, the change is a non ente ad ens, here, a non tali ad tale.

There, is a rude Mass; here, in a Creature already living, reasonable, moving.

There, God wrought immediately, here, by means.

There, was never Creature heard say, Create me, renew me O Lord: here one is
heard crave, Psalm. 51. Create in me a clean heart O God, and renew a right
spirit within me.

There, it was never said to a Creature, make thy self: here it is said, Make
you a new heart and a new spirit, for why will you die O house of Israel, Ezekiel.
18. 31. Jer. 4. 4. Ephesians. 5. 14.

There, was never any Creature blamed that was not made, nor reproved for being
as it is: but here, to keep on the old man, and not to put on the new, is
imputed as a notorious fault in them that profess Christ Jesus and the Gospel.

For this matter see if you please Doctor Jackson of justifying Faith, Sect. 3.
cap. 1. 279. and deinceps; Unless you be sick of the disease of these times,
which is one among others more, that Nazianzen says was the sickness in his
times, in Apologetico: Malos autem and bonos, non ex moribus, neque ex
conversatione, sed ex partibus judicamus, and ea quae placebant hodie in
aliquo, crastino, si fuerit partis alterius, displicebunt: and qui landabatur
hesterno, culpabitur hodie: That is, we estimate Good and Bad men, not from
their manners, nor for their conversation, but by the faction they take; and
those things which this day did please in such a man, to morrow if he turn on
the other side, will be disliked, and he that was praised yesterday, shall be
faulted to day.

CHAP. XIV. The Sum of the Doctrine of Grace and Free Will.
IN the year of the Lord, 1543. 35. H. 8. some three years before his death,
there was published a Book by the King, made by the Clergy, seen and very
well liked by the whole Parliament, entitled, A necessary Doctrine, and
erudition for any Christian man, etc. In which Book there is a Declaration of
the Article of Freewill, with the understanding whereof and some other points,
the heads and senses of the People in those days were wuch imbusied and
traveled, says the Preface. This Declaration I have transcribed wholly, not
to press the Reader with the authority of this Book, for there are therein
some few things of the error of former Times, although the Authors rejoice in
God, and that worthily, for the light and knowledge then manifested, in
comparison of the darkness and ignorance of the former Times: But first to
make use of the cautelous Expression, and Declaration of this Article, composed
by the best and soundest judgments of that Time; and secondly, what was the
last and immediate Doctrine in this point that went before our Articles and
Homilies in the beginning of Edw. 6. and finding that Doctor Cranmer and some
others were of the Clergy, in both Kings Reigns, and likely to have had their
heads and hands in both these works, it may well be presumed, the difference
not to be much in any matter of moment: Let it not be troublesome then for you
to read, that which was not tedious for me to write.

The Article of Freewill.
The Commandments, and threatenings of Almighty God in Scripture, whereby Man
is called upon, and put in remembrance what God would have him to do, most
evidently do express and declare that Man has Freewill also now after the
fall of our first Father Adam, as plainly appears in these places following.
Be not overcome of evil, Romans 12. Neglect not the Grace that is in thee. 1 Timothy 4. Love not the World, 1 John 2. If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments, Mat. 19. which undoubtedly should be said in vain, unless
there were some faculty or power left in Man, whereby he may by the help and
Grace of God (if he will receive it when it is offered unto him,) understand
his Commandments, and freely consent and obey unto; the which thing of the
Catholic Fathers is called Freewill: which if we will describe, we may call
it conveniently in all Men, A certain power of the Will joined with Reason,
whereby a reasonable Creature, without constraint in things of reason,
discerns and wills good and evil, but it wills not that good which is
acceptable to God, except it be helped with grace; but that which is ill, it
wills of it self. And therefore other men defined Freewill in this wise,
Freewill is a power of Reason and Will, by which Good is chosen, by the
assistance of Grace, or Evil is chosen, without the assistance of the same.

Howbeit the state and condition of Freewill was otherwise in our first Parents
before they had sinned, than it was either in them or their posterity after
they had sinned: for our first Parents Adam and Eve, until they wounded and
overthrew themselves by sin, had so in possession the said power of Freewill,
by the most liberal Gift and Grace of God their Maker, that not only they
might eschew all manner of sin, but also know God and love him, and fulfill
all things appertaining to their felicity and wealth. For they were made
righteous and to the Image and Similitude of God, having power of Freewill (as
Chrysostom says) to obey and disobey: So that by obedience they might live,
and by disobedience they should worthily deserve to dye. For the wise Man
affirms that the state of them was of that sort in the beginning, saying
thus, Ecclus. 15. v. 14, 15. God in the beginning did create Man, and left him
in the hands of his own counsel; If thou will, to keep the Commandments,
and to perform acceptable faithfulness.

From this most happy estate, our first Parents falling by disobedience, most
grievously hurt themselves and their posterity: For besides many other evils
that came by that transgression, the high power of man's Reason and Freedom of
will were wounded and corrupted, and all Men thereby brought into such
blindness and infirmity, that they cannot eschew sin, except they be
illuminated and made free by an especial Grace, that is to say, by a
supernatural help, and working of the Holy Ghost, which although the goodness
of God offers to all Men, yet they only enjoy it, which by their Freewill
do accept and embrace the same. Nor they also that be helped by the said
Grace, can accomplish and perform things that be for their wealth, but with
much labor and endeavor: So great is in our nature the corruption of the
first sin, and the heavy burden bearing us down to evil. For truly albeit
the light of reason does abide, yet it is much darkened, and with much
difficulty does discern things that be inferior and pertain to this present
life, but to understand and perceive things that be spiritual, and pertain to
the everlasting life, it is of it self unable. And so likewise, although there
remain a certain freedom of will in those things, which do pertain to the
desires and works of this present life, yet to perform spiritual and
heavenly things, Freewill of it self is insufficient: and therefore the power
of Man's Freewill being thus wounded and decayed, has need of a Physician to
heal it, and an help to repair it, that it may receive light and strength
whereby it may see, and have power to do those Godly and spiritual things,
which before the fall of Adam, it was able and might have done.

To this blindness and infirmity of man's Nature, proceeding of original
sin, the Prophet David had regard, when he desired his eyes to be lightened of
Almighty God, that he might consider the marvelous things that be in his Law,
Psalm. 119. 18. and also the Prophet Jeremy saying, Heal me O Lord, and I shall
be made whole, Jer. 18. Saint Austin also plainly declares the same, saying,
We conclude, that Freewill is in Man after his fall, which thing who so denies
is not a Catholic man: but in Spiritual desires and works to please God, it
is so weak and feeble, that it cannot either begin or perform them, unless by
the Grace and help of God it be prevented and helped. And hereby it appears
that Man's strength and Will in all things which be healthful to the soul, and
shall please God, has need of Grace of the holy Ghost, by which such
spiritual things be inspired into men, and strength and constancy given to
perform them, if men do not wilfully resist the said Grace offered unto them.

And likewise, as many things be in the Scriptures which do show Freewill to
be in man, so there be no fewer places in Scripture, which do declare the
Grace of God to be so necessary, that if by it Freewill be not prevented and
helped, it can neither do nor will any thing that is good and Godly. Of which
sort be these Scriptures following; Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. No
man comes unto me except it be given him of the Father, John 6. We be not
sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, to think any good thing, 2 Cor. 3.
According unto which Scriptures, and such other like, it follows, that
Freewill before it may think or will any good thing, must be helped by the
Grace of Christ, and by his Spirit be prevented, and inspired, that it may be
able thereto; And being so made able, may freely thenceforth work together with
Grace, and by the same sustained, helped and maintained, may do and accomplish
good works, and avoid sin, and persevere also, and increase in Grace. It is
surely of the Grace of God only, that first we be inspired and moved to any
good thing: but to resist temptations, and to persist in goodness, and go
forward, it is both of the Grace of God, and of our Freewill and endeavor. And
finally, after we have persevered to the End, to be crowned with glory
therefore, is the gift, and mercy of God, who of his bountiful goodness has
ordained, that reward to be given after this life, according to such good works
as be done in this life by his Grace.

Therefore men ought with much diligence and gratitude of mind, to consider and
regard the inspirations and wholesome motions of the Holy Ghost, and to embrace
the Grace of God, which is offered unto them in Christ, and moves them to good
things. And furthermore to go about by all means to show themselves such, as
unto whom the Grace of God is not given in vain; and when they do feel that
notwithstanding their diligence, yet through their own infirmity, they be not
able to do that they desire, then they ought earnestly, and with a fervent
devotion, and steadfast faith, to ask of him who gave the beginning, that he
would vouchsafe to perform it, which thing God will undoubtedly grant
according to his promise to such as persevere in calling upon him, for he is
naturally good, and wills all men to be saved, and cares for them, and
provideth all things by which they may be saved, except by their own malice
they will be evil, and so by righteous judgment of God perish and be lost.
For truly men be to themselves the Authors of sin, and damnation, God is
neither Author of sin, nor cause of damnation. And yet does he most
righteously damn those men, that do with vices corrupt their Nature, which he
made good, and do abuse the same to evil desires, against his most holy will:
wherefore men be to be warned, that they do not impute to God their vice or
their damnation, but to themselves, which by Freewill have abused the Grace and
benefits of God.

All men also be to be monished, and chiefly Preachers, that in this high
matter, they looking on both sides, so attemper and moderate themselves, that
they neither so preach the Grace of God that they take away thereby Freewill:
nor on the other side, so extol Freewill, that injury be done to the Grace of
God.

In horum numero me quoque cupio inveniri. (Nazianzen. in Apolog.) Thus was it
determined in that age, from which I wish there had been no declining neither
to the right hand, nor to the left.

Here is no Freewill to spiritual good without Grace.

Here is no Grace so prepotent but may be disobeyed.

Here is enough for the praise of Gods Grace, and for convincing of man's
ingratitude.

This book is alleged by Doctor Ward in his determination, Omnes infantes
baptizati proculdubio justificantur, as agreeing with the Doctrine of our
Liturgy in the baptism of Infants, showing that our Reformers had a respect
to the Doctrine lately before published.

CHAP. XV. Of Perseverance.
THe next work of the Divine Providence executing the decree of his
Predestination, is to preserve and continue the Called and Converted in that
State of Regeneration and Sanctification unto the End, it being our assured
Confidence, That he which has begun a good work in us, will finish it, (...),
will hold it out to the End, Phil. 1. 6. yet about this work there was much
Dispute; I, by searching for the true State of the questions, will endeavor to
shorten it.

1. I take it there is no question, Whether there be a special gift or Grace
called Perseverance, like to the gift of Faith, Charity, Patience, Chastity, or
the like, for that a man may as safely deny, as that there is a Grace of
Beginning, seeing Perseverance is but the continuing and abiding in the same
Graces of Faith, Charity, etc. So long as I confess that by the protection,
government, Visitation, and supportance of Gods Grace, all gifts given by God,
are by him continued, and preserved from loss or from decay.

2. There is no question, that without the Grace, Protection, preservation of
God, no man of himself alone is able to continue in the midst of so many
assaults of Satan, the World, and the Flesh.

3. There is no question, that the Elect do finally persevere in Faith and
Sanctification, for whosoever persevereth not, by that selfsame
not-persevering he is declared to be none of the number of the Elect; Election
according to my fifth opinion presupposing an infallible foreknowledge of
final perseverance; if there be any such, (as Doctor Carlton late Bishop of
Chichester says) as maintain that the Grace of Predestination or Election may
be lost, I have no acquaintance or confederacy with them.

4. The question is not, about every believer, for all confess, that some
believers of some kind or degree of Faith, may lose it: Nor is it, whether a
believer not perseveing does lose all Graces at once, or all at last, it being
confessed that he may keep many, by which yet he cannot be saved, and may lose
those that be essentially necessary to Salvation: as fides mentis may abide
with an evil Conscience, when fides cordis cannot, but is lost by mortal
sin.

5. But the question is of a believer whose Faith works by love, whether it
may be lost; and it is the same question which heretofore was wont to be
disputed in these terms, An Charitas amitti poterit? and is handled at large
by Gratian de Paenitentia, distinct. secunda, where the distinction of Charity
is into Inchoatam Perfectam, begun, and perfect planted and radicated; and so
may Faith be distinguished (as often in the Gospel) into weak and strong,
little Faith and great Faith, etc. Now the Question is not, of great, strong,
rooted, perfect Faith and Charity, whether it may be lost? but of weak, green,
tender, yet true and Salvifica, such as would save if it were held, or if a man
did depart his life in it, whether this be not many times lost? Such as was
Peter's Faith before Christ's passion, when he feared to confess Christ at the
voice of a Damsel; but after the Spirit given in Pentecost, his Faith and
Love were so corroborated, ut vires persequentium caesus despiceret, and
Redemptorem suum libere inter flagella praedicaret, as it is there cap. 15. out
of Gregory in Ezekiel. hom. 15.

6. Lastly, a double question may be put, 1. Of those that are not Elected,
whether there be not many of them that attain to true Faith, true Repentance,
Justification and Sanctification, wherein they persevere not to the End, but
lose them, and so perish.

2. Of those that are Elect, whether God permit not them sometimes to fall into
heinous sins, as Adultery, Murder, or the like? and if so, then what their
estate is while they are in those sins, until they actually repent? whether
they be still justified, or in state of Salvation? For the Perseverance of the
Elect may be conceived to be of two sorts or degrees; either continued without
interruption, by a constant holding of Faith and a good Conscience from the
beginning to the End, which is rare: Or with interruptions, and falls, and
risings again, and renewings by repentance, finally Faith to deliver their
Spirits into the hands of God, which is ordinary.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Faith of such as persevere not, or of those that are not
elect.
FOr the affirmative part in the first Question, I bring but two Texts of
Scripture, Mat. 24. 13. and Ezekiel. 18. 21. The first has the Promise of
Salvation to him that continues to the end: Out of which I collect two things:
1. That he to whom Salvation is promised if he continue, is in the right in
which he should continue; is not only begun and must add or increase, but is
so ripe and so perfect (as I may say) as if he but hold out such to the end,
he shall be saved. 2. That he who by the Promise of Salvation is excited to
persevere in Falth, or in Love, is supposed possible to wax cold in love, or to
deny the Faith, and embrace this present world.

These Inferences seemed strong to S. Bern. Ep. 42. disputing this very
question; Siomnes qui habent charitatem, etc. If all such as were endued with
love, had perseverance in love, our Lord in vain admonished his Disciples, To
continue in love: for if either as yet they did not love, he ought not to say,
Continue, but Be in love; or if they did love already, there was on need for
him to admonish them of Perseverance, whereof they could not be deprived
according to some Men's Opinion. And a little before: Hi radices non habent,
etc. These Men have no root, who for a while believe, and in time of temptation
fall away; Whence and whither do they fall? Even from Faith to Unbelief? I
ask furthermore, could they have been saved in that Faith, or could they not?
If they could not, what prejudice is it to their Savior, what joy to the
Tempter, that they fall from thence where there was no Salvation? It seemed to
S. Jerome a good Argument which is taken from admonitions, against Jovinian,
lib. 2. S. John exhorts, Filioli, custodite vos a simulacris; Si omnis qui
natus est ex Deo, non peccat, and a Diabolo tentari non potest, quomodo
praecipit ut caveant ne tententur?

The answer that some rest in, that Exhortations, Precepts and Promises are the
means whereby Perseverance is upheld, is against themselves, unless these
were infallible means; for seeing the Obedience to Exhortations and Precepts
is in Man who fails, these means do often fail: The sixth and seventh
Commandments were known to David, as means to hold him back from his two
sins, but they failed through him: So Peter's warning of his denial, was a
means to humble his confidence in himself, and to have persuaded him to
beware of putting himself into danger, but he took not warning.

Neither is that answer to purpose, That in regard of our weakness we may
easily fall, and means must be used for our support, but in regard of Gods
Election, and Christ's Intercession, we cannot but stand fast: for we now
treat of those, whom it is yet uncertain whether the Election of God have
embraced them or no: O^ howsoever if any one or two means be infallible, we
may be secure, all other supplies are superfluous: If two pillars be strong and
sure to bear up such an house as Sampson was in with the Philistines, what
need other supporters beside?

The second Text of Scripture is that of Ezekiel. 18. 21. 26. 27. which by no
evasion can be avoided, if the comparison there between a righteous man and a
wicked be well observed: for deny you any-wise that a righteous man can turn
away from his righteousness and die; and I will deny likewise that a wicked man
can turn from his wickedness and live; and so we shall solvere Scripturas,
make void the holy Word of God; if a supposition puts nothing in the one, it
puts nothing in the other: if the wicked there whom the Text speaks of, be
truly and Legally a wicked man, then the righteous there is truly and
Evangelically a righteous man, for Legally righteous the Scripture knows but
one: if it be ever seen that a wicked man turns from his wickedness and
lives, then it may as well be seen that a righteous man turns from his
righteousness and dies.

To these places I find no answer made by our Divines at Dort, from whom I
hoped for satisfaction in all things: but to diverse others as, Heb. 6. 4, 5.
and 2 Pet. 2. and such like, they frame this answer; That such places speak of
initiall and precedaneall degrees of Faith, not of true justifying Faith; men
but entered a little may go back, but not they that have attained unto true
Faith: yet such beginners say they, are to be counted in the visible Church for
true believers and justified persons. Of these reverend Doctors give me leave
to demand; 1. If they be to be taken for justified persons, by what shall we
know these things mentioned in the Texts, which they will have to be only the
initia and precedent dispositions to Faith, not true Faith? 2. If these be but
initia, what have they more or better to give to a true Believer, than to have
tasted of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the World to come, Heb. 6.
And to be purged from his old finnes, 2 Pet. 1. 9. To have escaped the
pollutions of the world. 2 Pet. 2. 20. To have the strong man armed that kept
the house, to be cast out by a stronger, Luke 11. 22. if these be the lowest
and first gifts of the Spirit, what be the highest and the last? words of
sense, as Tasting, Hearing, Seeing, are not used in the Scriptures to express
a little superficial conceit of things Spiritual, quasi primoribus labris
gustasse, but rather the full, clear, certain, deep apprehension of them. See
Job 34. 3. Psalm. 34. 9. Joh. 6. 40. Joh. 8. 56. 47. Et alibi passim.

From hence it is, that the renewing of these men again by Repentance is so
hard, or impossible, that fell from so great an height, whereas to be renewed
after lesser faults is ordinary: How will these Divines of the School satisfy
weak ones, and our common Christians of the Country, in whom they shall not
find so much as these things which they call initialls? how will they persuade
them, that they are in the state of Regeneration, and have that justifying
Faith, whereof they say Believers may be assured; or will they exclude them out
of the rank of Believers?

3. I oppose S. Augustines judgment in this, which must not be refused by any
replyer, De corrept. and great. cap. 8. Mirandum est quidem, multumque mirandum,
etc. It is to be wondered at, and very marvelous, that God should not give
Perseverance to some of his Children, whom he has Regenerated in Christ, and
to whom he has given Faith, Hope and Love; when as he forgives so great
wickedness to other strange Children, and makes them his Sons by conferring
his Grace upon them, etc. The thing that S. Augustine admireth, is, Cur illos
Deus, etc. why God should not then snatch away those his children, which have
lived faithfully and godlily, out of the danger of this present life, lest
their evil inclinations should work a change in their minds. And he refers
this to the inscrutable judgments of God, most wisely and holily: But his
Opinion is, that if these men had dyed in that time when they lived justly and
piously, they had been saved, therefore their faith was more than begun, they
were more than seeming Christians, they were truly justified and sanctified,
and then fit for the Kingdom of Heaven.

4. Lastly, I maintain and prescribe this to be the public Doctrine of the
Church of England, by Law established: and first, Hear King Henry's
Protestations in the Book before praised; In the Article of Justification: If
after our Baptism it chance us by our Spiritual enemies to be overthrown, and
cast into mortal sin, then is there no remedy, but for the recovery of our
former estate of justification, which we have lost, to arise by Penance,
wherein proceeding in sorrow and much lamentation for our sins, etc. we must
have a sure trust and confidence in the Mercy of God, that for his Son our
Savior Christ's sake, he will yet forgive us our sins, and receive us into
his favor again, and so being thus restored to our Justification, we must go
forward in our battle aforesaid. Again a little after: And it is no doubt,
but although we be once justified, yet we may fall therefrom by our own
Freewill, and consenting to sin, and following the desires thereof. For
albeit the house of our conscience be once made clean, and the foul spirit be
expelled from us in Baptism or Penance, yet if we wax Idle, and take not
heed, he will return with seven worse spirits, and possess us again.

This I allege not for it self, but for the affinity our 16. Article made in
Edw. 6. has unto it, as a Child of the same Fathers.

Article 16. Of Sin after Baptism.
Not every deadly Sin willingly committed after Baptism, is Sin against
the Holy Ghost, and unpardonable, wherefore The place for penitents, Artic.
Edw. 6. The grant of repentance Artic. Eliz. Is not to be denied to such as
fall into Sin after Baptism. After we have received the holy Ghost, we may
depart from Grace given, and fall into sin, and by the Grace of God we may
rise again, and amend our lives. And therefore they are to be condemned which
say, They can no more Sin, as long as they live here, or deny to such as
truly repent Place of forgiveness, Eliz. The place for Penitents, Edw. 6.

This Article my Opponents would be well contented it had naught against them,
though it were not for them: But I hope to evince it to be so far against them,
that while it stands they must needs be Heterodox in the Church of England,
that preach or publish that Opinion which is now so prevalent every where. This
I shall do by three ways.

1* By the Concession and Confession of their own friends that have complained
of this Article.

2. By Analyzing the Propositions, and scanning the Literal and Grammatical
sense, to which we are bound to keep us, both by the Law of learning, and by
the Declaration of K. Charles prefixed to our Articles.

3. By Paralleling our 16th with the 12th Article of the Augustane Confession,
from whence it was taken, and with other Doctrine of our Church in the Book of
Homilies.

1. For the first: The Authors of the second admonition to the Parliament, page
43. lin. 30. do accuse some Bishops then as suspected of the Heresy of
Pelagius, and for Freewill not only they are suspected (say they) but others
also. (Then they add) And indeed the Book of Articles of Christian Religion
speaks very dangerously of falling from Grace, which is to be reformed,
because it too much inclines to their Error. So they. There were then some
Bishops that held this Error of falling from Grace, as it was counted by these
Authors, who count also the Article too much inclining to their error. But a
wiser and learneder man than they, in the Conference at Hampton Court, 1.
Jacobi, made it his first motion, page 24. That the Articles of Religion
concluded 1562. might be explaned in some obscure places, and enlarged where
some things were defective: for example, whereas Article 16. the words are
these, After we have received the Holy Ghost we may depart from Grace.
Notwithstanding the meaning be sound, (says he,) yet he desired, that because
they may seem to be contrary to the Doctrine of Gods Predestination and
Election in the 17th Article, both those words might be explained, with this or
the like addition, yet neither totally nor finally. So th^n, if this Article
did not speak dangerously of the falling from Grace, and seem to contradict
the 17th Article, this motion was needless. And in truth so it was, and so
judged, for nothing was done to the explaining or enlarging of the Article;
neither is there any contradiction betwixt the 16th and 17th Articles; and the
addition of finally and totally, would have quite subverted, not have
explained, the sense and scope of the whole, as I will demonstrate in the two
places.

2. For the second way, by Analyzing the Propositions, etc. thus I proceed:
The Title is of Sin after Baptism: Clearly it is not the scope of any part of
this Article (as some would have it) to define and declare that all men do
sin, even those that are Baptized and borne again in Christ, for this was
done already in the next precedent Article, Christ alone without sin, etc.
But all we the rest, although Baptized, and borne again in Christ, yet offend
in many things. This need not to be said again. But the scope of this, is to
define something about the measure, degree, demerit of sin after Baptism,
and to condemn the excesses and extremities of Opinions in this point, some
aggravating this sin too much, some extenuating it, and making of it too
little: for these there be here two Propositions definitive, and two
Conclusions derived out of the Definitions.

1. Against the extreme rigor of Novatus, Not every deadly sin willingly
committed after Baptism, is sin against the Holy Ghost, and unpardonable.
There is the first definition: The Conclusion hence is, wherefore the grant of
Repentance is not to be denied unto such as fall into sin after Baptism, and
therefore they are to be condemned which deny place of forgiveness to such as
truly repent: This is a mitigation of one excess and rigor of Opinion, and a
stay to weak ones and fearful.

2. The second Proposition is, After we have received the Holy Ghost, we may
depart from Grace given, and fall into sin, and by the Grace of God we may
rise again and amend our lives. This is the Definition: The Conclusion hence
is, Therefore they are to be condemned that say, They can no more sin as long
as they live here. This is against another extremity of certain Anabaptists,
that dreamed of such a perfection as of not sinning; and of other Anabaptists
(for there was an 100. confusions among them,) that esteemed all manner of
foul actions done by them that had received the Holy Ghost, to be in them no
sins, or not to be reckoned so; to whom our men incline that hold, no sins
in the regenerate to impeach their justification, or state of Salvation: which
this branch of the Article does directly oppose, saying, that they which do so
fall or sin, are departed from Grace, and need to rise again by Repentance.
Now for amending or explaning these terms, if it should be done as King James
left it to be considered, page 30. of the aforesaid Conference, by putting in
the word (Often) or the like, (We may often depart from Grace, or we may depart
far from Grace,) This I think would little content them, since the Psalm
says, 73. 27. Ecce qui se elongant a te, peribunt; succidis omnem fornicantem
a te. But if the amendment were made by putting in, we may depart from Grace,
yet neither finally nor totally, then this also had been a clause of
Mitigation, and had not pinched them a whit against whom it was provided, nay,
it had made this proposition all one with the former; for what difference is
there between these two, Every deadly sin willingly committed after Baptism,
is not sin against the holy Ghost, (and) After we have received the holy Ghost,
we may depart from grace, but not finally or totally, seeing this is true, that
the sin against the holy Ghost is no other than a total or final departing
from Grace? And whereas the Deane of Paul's used this exception of Finally and
Totally, page 41. of the Conference; he does it of those that are called
according to the purpose of Gods Election, and not of all that are called or
justified. But our 16. Article speaks not of the Elect only, for it says,
We may rise again by the grace of God; whereas if it spoke only of the Elect,
it must have said, We shall rise again by the grace of God: and so must they
that would have put in, not finally, nor totally.

Neither does the 17. Article treating of Gods Election any thing contradict
this 16. as Dr. R. feared; for although it affirms that all predestinate to
life are called and justified, etc. yet it does not say that all that are
called and justified, and made the sons of God, be predestinate to life,
because Perseverance to the End is presumed, where Gods purpose is
predestinating to life. But that Article we shall also clear, and show the
consisting of these two full well without contradiction.

Thus of the Article in Branches and Propositions; now let me note something
out of words and terms: First, here is admitted and yielded, that after
Baptism we may sin willingly. Secondly, that such asin is a deadly sin, in
phrase of the Fathers, and in the sense of Melanchton, Loco de discrimine
peccati mortalis and venialis. 3. That this sin is not sin against the holy
Ghost, but near it, great; and fearful, else it need not have been severed
from it, and a stay made for scrupulous and timorous consciences, and to the
severity of the rigorous. 4. That though such a sin be pardonable, yet it
requires great, deep, bitter repentance, in a manner such as the ancient
Church required in the solemn reconciliation lapsorum, to obtain pardon of
God. 5. That the phrase to depart from grace, is not diminutive, nor a
mitigation, but an aggravation of the sin; That after the holy Ghost received,
a man should depart from grace given, is a grievous thing. In hoc enim quisque
peccator fit culpabilior, quo est Deo acceptior, says the Master, li. 4.
distin. 16. A. Jer. 17. 5. Cursed be the man whose heart departs from the
Lord. 6. That there is a departure from Grace in the heart of him that has
received the holy Ghost, before he fall into sin actual or mortal, a
departure from Grace as from a light and guide, from an help and strength, a
departure from God, a quo non locorum spatiis, sed voluntatis aversione
disceditur: Aug. de genes. ad literam, 8. 12. Poterat David retinere Spiritum
Sanctum, and ab eo adjutus fuisset, nisi volens eum excussisset, and volens
aluisset incendium in animo ortum. Melanct. de discrimine peccati. And this is
foremost ever, Man forsaking God, or departing from him, before God forsakes
Man, or departs from him; for there is a departing of God from Man, as a
punishment and fruit of sin committed; and of this many speak when they reason
de amissione gratiae, etc. Our opponents perhaps will grant the first, that man
sinning mortally departs from Grace, but God for all that departs not therefore
from man, nor does he take away his gifts of faith, or hope, or charity. To
this let Aquinas answer, 2 a. 2 ae. 24. 12. in C. Sed charitas cum sit habitus
infusus, etc. But Love, being an infused habit, depends on the Action of God
infusing it, who in the giving and preserving of love is like the Sun in the
illightning of the Air: and therefore, as the light in the Air would cease
presently, if there were any impediment to hinder the illumination of the Sun;
so love presently is extinct in the Soul by the interposition of some obstacle
that hinders Gods influence of love from coming into the Soul. But it is
manifest, every mortal finne, that is contrary to Gods Commandments, is such
an obstacle of hindering the foresaid influence, because by that very act man
chooses sin, and prefers it before Gods love, etc. Whereby it follows, that
presently by one Act of mortal sin, the habit of love is lost.

3. My third way to come to the true meaning of our Article, was to parallel it
with the twelfth of the Augustane Confession, etc.

Art. 12. Augustanae Confess. Art. 16. Anglicanae Confess. De poenitentia
docent, quod lapsis post Baptismum contingere possit remissio peccatoru^
quocunque tempore cum convertuntur: Et quod Ecclesia talibus redeuntibus ad
poenitentiam, absolutionem impertiri debeat. Not every deadly Sin, etc. is
unpardonable, wherefore the grant of repentance is not to be denied to such as
fall into Sin after Baptism. Damnant Anabaptistas, qui negant semel
jnstificatos posse amittere Spiritum Sanctum. Item, qui contendunt quibusda^
tantam perfectionem in hac vita contingere, ut peccare non possint. Damnantur
and Novatiani, qui nolebant absolvere lapsos post Baptismum redeuntes ad
poenitentiam. After we have received the holy Ghost, we may depart from Grace,
and fall into sin, etc. Therefore they are to be condemned, which say, they
can no more sin as long as they live here, or deny place of forgiveness to
such as truly repent.

What need many words? there is nothing more clear than that this is the
Doctrine not only of the Church of Rome, from which our first Reformers
desired not to depart, but where it had departed from Scripture and Antiquity:
But also of the Churches of upper Germany and of Denmark, with which ours kept
most conformity: So that the Calvinists are singular and alone in their Opinion.

Other doctrine of our Church of like nature to this, is found in the book of
Homilies, especially in that which is entitled, Of declining from God, in the
Table, and of Falling from God, in the book: Out of the first part whereof I
transcribe but this sentence, page 54. For whereas God has showed to all men
that truly believe his Gospel, his face of Mercy in Jesus Christ, which does
so lighten their hearts, that they (if they behold it as they ought to do) be
transformed to his Image, be made partakers of the heavenly light, and of his
holy Spirit, and be fashioned to him in all goodness requisite to the children
of God: So, if they after do neglect the same, if they be unthankful unto
him, if they order not their lives according to his doctrine and example, etc.
He will take away from them his Kingdom, his holy word whereby he should
riegne in them.

Out of the second part thereof I transcribe this sentence, page 57. God will
take from them the teaching of his holy word, so that they shall be no longer
of his Kingdom, they shall be no longer governed by his holy Spirit, they
shall be put from the grace and benefits that they had, and ever might have
enjoyed through Christ, they shall be deprived of the heavenly light, and life,
which they had in Christ whilst they abode in him, etc.

In the second tome, in the Homily of Repentance, the first part, page 261,
262. there is a full paraphrase upon the 16. Article according to the two parts
I made of it, too much to write out; admitting that we may chance after we be
once come to God, and be grafted into his Son Jesus Christ, to fall into some
horrible Sin, and yet be received again into favor, defining that the Sin
against the holy Ghost is a final faling away from Christ; that the promises
of mercy to them that turn to God, Jer. 4. Isay 55. Osee 6. ought to be
understood of them that were with the Lord before, and by their sins and
wickedness were gone away from him; that David and Peter were justified, yet
fell horribly, but by repentance were forgiven.

Lastly, the prayers of the Church have ever been a place from which Arguments
have been drawn, thus; Against them that say the Regenerate may be perfect
without sin, Why then does our Lord teach them to pray, Forgive us our
trespasses? against them that say, they cannot be tempted to evil to be
overcome, why does he teach us to say, Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from evil? So Jerome 2. lib. Contra Iovinianum.

In like manner I argue, if a Believer cannot finally fall from God, why does
our Church pray in the Liturgy at the burial of the dead, O God most mighty,
suffer us not at our last hour for any pains of death to fall from thee.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Persevering Faith of the Elect.
THe second question stated was of the Perseverance of the Elect, whether it be
without interruption, in a perpetual constancy, or happy if it be final; that
is, what the state of a regenerate man is, (suppose him one of the Elect,
though known so to God only) under some grievous Sin into which he is fallen,
until he repent.

Here I will first argue ex concessis, and then rest in one argument out of the
Scripture.

Our Judicious Divines that were at Dort, apprehending well the danger of their
Tenent, that maintain the Regenerate sinning to be still actually in the state
of Salvation, say very much of the evil plight of a regenerate man lapsed, so
much as I require no more: That he is not actually reconciled until he repent,
but verily in state of damnation, and unapt for to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Yet some things they hold fast, that they may not forsake their party
altogether: That which I object is, that the things which they deny cannot
stand together with the things they grant.

1. They say first, Though the Regenerate so sinning be guilty, yet they are in
the purpose of God to be absolved.

Ans. So they were before they were regenerated, or repented, or believed at
all.

Secondly, That they are not dealt withal by God in rigor.

Ans. No more are many reprobates fallen from Faith, whom yet God would bring
to Repentance by his long-suffering.

Thirdly, That they have not lost jus ad Regnum, but usum Juris; as a leprous
man has not lost the right of his house, but the Use.

Ans. I understand you well by a similitude, but I care not for an Argument out
of that place: Then belike an Elect person guilty of Murder, has jus ad
regnum; O Sancte Paul, thou speak too loosely, 1 Cor. 6. 9. Gal. 5. 21. Be
not deceived, I tell you, that they which do such things shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God: Shall they not inherit that have jus ad regnum? that have
right to a Kingdom?

Fourthly, They say, That their Universal Justification is not made void.

Ans. Truly their former absolution from former sins, is not made void: But
this new sin which has made them Filios mortis, and guilty of the whole law,
Jam. 2. 10. needs a new absolution, that is, a new justification from the
condemnation that this sin deserves, for to me Remission of sins is
justification, by Saint Paul, Romans 4. 7. and opposite to condemnation, Romans 8.
33, 34.

What universal justification else is I know not, unless it be the
forgiveness of all Sins past, present, and to come, which I trow your
wisdom will not admit: you say truly and soundly, Non prius, quam per exitatam
fidem and poenitentiam, veniam impetraverit, actu absolutus.

Fifthly, Their state of Adoption remains immovable.

Ans. In the purpose of God, not in Act.

Sixthly, There remain Seeds, by which life may spring again.

Ans. I grant that, far sooner than in an habituated wicked man, but that
alters not the state of a sinner who is guilty of death: No more than the crime
of a Noble man's Son, who has friends in Court more speedily to beg his life.

This agrees well with the fifth assertion of the ninth at Lambeth, that
says, Vera fides, etc. non extinguitur, etc. in electis aut finaliter, aut
totaliter. (in electis.)

My one Argument out of the Scripture, that the Regenerate fallen into a
mortal sin, is not then Filius Dei, is taken out of Saint John, 1 Ep. 3. 9.
He that is borne of God, does not commit Sin, for his seed remains in him,
and he cannot sin because he is borne of God. I shall here do two things at
once, overthrow the strongest Arguments of my Opponents for the perseverance of
the Elect without intermission, for (say they) if the seed of God remain in
him, and he cannot sin, namely, deadly, what intercision or intermission can
there be of his Justification? and I shall retort the Text unavoidably upon
themselves. How may this be? by the true sense of that place. The scope of
Saint John is not, to prove, that they that are borne of God cannot depart, or
change from righteousness to sin, or that there cannot be a succession of
these two, that where righteousness was, sin could make no Entrance, and
righteousness depart, (and contra) for this in the Apostles time was out of
Question; whence the admonitions that they who had begun in the Spirit, should
not end in the Flesh. But his scope was to prove that these two cannot consist
or stand together (which the will of the flesh would feign have,) to be borne
of God, and to commit (deadly) sin; they admitted it for true, that he that
had been the member of an harlot, might by repentance become the member of
Christ; and that the member of Christ might become the member of an harlot, by
falling into Adultery; but that a man might be at once, together, a member of
an harlot, and a member of Christ, that they utterly deny, these expelling one
the other.

For this hear Saint Jerome lib. 2. against Jovinian, who abused this Text for
the like purpose that many do now adays: Propterea inquit, scribo vobis
filioli mei, etc. Therefore he says, little children I write unto you
(whosoever is borne of God, does not commit sin,) that ye may not sin, and
may know that so long as ye shall not commit sin, ye remain the children of
God: yea and those that persevere the children of God, cannot sin; (for there
is first a departure from Grace, before we fall into sin, according to our
Article:) What communion is there between light and darkness, Christ, and
Belial? In like manner as Day and Night cannot mingle, so neither can
Righteousness and Iniquity, Sin and good Works, Christ and Antichrist: If we
have entertained Christ in the Inn of our hearts, we put the Devil to flight
presently, If we sin; and by the gate of sin give entrance to the Devil,
forthwith Christ departs. Let them consider this who defend David to be still
borne of God, when he stood guilty of Adultery and Murder; and let them beware
they be not made to hear that which Tertullian has de poenitentia: Sed aiunt
quidam, etc. But some men say, they have God sure enough, if they receive him
in heart and mind, though there be no sign thereof in their Actions: And thus
they commit sin, thinking their Fear and Faith safe; which is as much as if
they committed Adultery, and yet thought their Chastity never the worse; or
poisoned their parents out of an Opinion they did God good service. And thus
whilfl they commit Sin, notwithstanding their Fear, they themselves shall be
thrown into Hell notwithstanding their Pardon. Let them consider this that say,
Peter, salve amore and salvo fide, to have denied and forsworn his Master.

But they count it a ridiculous thing to say, we be so often born of God, as we
repent of sin. It is more lamentable to fall often into such sins, than
ridiculous to be often renewed by Repentance; Stick not to the letter of an
allegory too long: because in our natural birth we are born but once,
therefore in our spiritual we are borne but once, there is no necessity in
this consequence, S. Paul was not aware of this absurdity when he said, Gal. 4.
19. My little children, of whom I travel in birth again until Christ be
formed in you. As for the Unity of Baptism the Sacrament of our new birth,
that has another Reason, whereof I need not now speak, especially seeing the
prudent Divines in their preface to the fifth Article, de perseverantia, do
bar us from an Argument taken from the justification that is conferred in
Baptism; knowing well the Doctrine of our Church concerning the efficacy of
Baptism.

But to return to the interpretation of the Text in Saint John: Bishop Ridley
one of our blessed Martyrs, and a chief guide in the reformation of our Church
in King Edwards time, in a treatise of his published by Master Fox, in his Acts
and monuments, page 1672. mentioning this speech of Saint John, says in a
parenthesis (he means, so long as that seed does abide in him, he cannot
sin.) In the Homily of Faith the second and third parts, there is at large this
proved, that faith without good works is dead: and often use of the sentences
of S. John in his Epistles, the sum whereof is interpreted to be that Faith,
Hope and Charity cannot stand with evil living; and again, cannot consist or
stand without good and godly works, page 26. Consist, and stand, imply a
being, and a presence sometimes of Faith, Hope and Charity, but a flying away,
and an avoiding the place, as soon as an evil gross work comes in; as well
as that evil works standing and abiding, Faith, Hope and Charity will not,
cannot endure to stand and abide with them. And lest we should think that S.
John labors only to convince them that made a bare profession of Faith, and
of knowing God, and yet were not changed in their lives, nor did forbear from
any sin, that they were mere Hypocrites, and did lie in saying they were in
the light, when they still walked in darkness: Mark also that he writes to
his own Filioli, of whom he judged better, that their sins were forgiven
them, that they had overcome that evil one, 1 John 2. 1. 12, 13. that they
also sin not, that they love not the World; that they love their Brethren:
Hence he uses so often these Phrases of abiding in him, verse. 6. of abiding
in the light, 10. abiding in the Father, and in the Son, 24. by walking as God
walks, by loving his Brother, by not sinning: which things none can do, but
they must first be truly engrafted and entered as it were into Christ, in whom
they are to abide: So that if they sin, or love the World, or hate their
brother, and yet say, they abide in the light, they lie also as well as they
that never were in the true light at all. Vide Origenem super numeros, Homil.
13.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the certainty of Perseverance. Election. Salvation.
THis is an Appendix to the question of Perseverance; for we can have no better
assurance of the certainty of Election and Salvation, than we have of the
certainty of our Perseverance, if our Election and Salvation do presuppose and
forgo our Perseverance. The certainty we speak of is not to God, whose
knowledge is infallible, and purpose unchangeable, but to us here while we
live, either for knowledge, or for faith of our Peseverance and the rest
depending thereon.

The Divines in their Suffrage, methinks, speak here so variably, and take up
that which they lay down, and lay down again that which they took up, that I
doubt not they will easily admit and allow these three Conclusions, wherein I
rest, with many sober and humble spirits in the Church of God.

1. That for the present time and state, after much use of the holy means of
Salvation, while he is in studio Sanctitatis, and out of tentation, and in the
peace of a good conscience through faith in Christ, a Believer has, by the
testimony of the holy Ghost in him, a comfortable assurance that he has true
faith, and is now in the state of Salvation, which begets in him true joy, and
fervent love, and thankfulness unto God. And if this be, when he is near to
the end of his Race, or at the point of death, it may be more abundant and more
triumphant; according to that of S. Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 6. I am now ready to be
offered up, etc. verse. 7. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, etc. This is the doctrine of the Lutherans against the
perpetual doubting of the Papists, that would have no man certain of his
estate present, no not when he is best: But our Homily of Faith says well,
Part three, He that feels his heart set to seek Gods honor, etc. such a man
may well rejoice in God, perceiving by the trade of his life that he
unfeignedly has the right knowledge of God, a lively Faith, a steadfast hope, a
true and unfeigned love and fear of God. Thus I understand the sixth Assertion
of the ninth at Lambeth.

2. That for the time to come, as to our Perseverance to the end, especially
when as yet probably we have a long race to run (as in youth) and many dangers
to pass through, we have no certain assurance of the event, that we shall
undoubtedly persevere, but we have a sure confidence in God and his Goodness,
that he will not be wanting unto us, if we be not too too much wanting to
our selves, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

For this I refer my self to the judgment of the Ancients, holy men,
practiced and experimented Divines: S^ Austustine de Civit. 11. 12.

Hodie non imprudenter beatos vocemus, etc. At this day we do not indiscreetly
call them blessed, whom we see live justly and godly with hope of future
immortality, and without such a crime as makes shipwreck of Conscience: who
though they be assured of the reward of their Perseverance, yet are they found
very uncertain of their own Perseverance: for what man is there that knows
for certain he shall continue to the end, in doing and proceeding on in
Righteousness, except he be assured thereof by some revelation from him, who
touching this matter, in his just and secret judgment, is not pleased to
inform all, though he deceive none.

Ambros. de bono Mortis, cap. 3. Tibi sacrificabo hostiam laudis, Psalm. 115.
etc. He says not I do sacrifice, but I will sacrifice: signifying that to be
a perfect sacrifice, when every one, freed from the chains of this body, shall
stand before the Lord, and offer himself a sacrifice of praise, for that before
death there can be no perfect praise, nor can any man in this life be extolld
truly with his due commendations, when as his latter times are so incertaine.
Bern. Sermon. 1. in. Septuages. Quis potest dicere, ego de Electis sum, etc. Who
can say of himself, I am one of the Elect; I am one of them that are
predestined to life; I am of the number of Sons; because as yet we have no
certainty, but may be comforted with the assurance of hope, lest we be wholly
tormented with the suspense of doubtfulnes. For which end there are given us
some signs and marks of Salvation, that it may be past all doubt such an one
is of the number of the Elect, in whom those signs are to be found: -- and for
this cause there is a kind of necessity, that being always thus in suspense,
we should be bumbled with fear and trembling under the Almighty hand of God,
for that we art able to know even in part what ones we are at present, but what
we shall be hereafter, that is altogether impossible for us to know. Therefore
let him that stands take heed lest he fall; and persevere and proceed in that
state, which is a mark of Salvation, and an argument of his being predestined.

3. That for the certainty of our Election, besides this testimony of S.
Bernard, we have S. Austugine clear for the Negative. De corrept. and great.
cap. 13. Quis enim ex multitudine fidelium, etc. For who is there among the
multitude of Believers, that so long as he lives in this fleshly Tabernacle,
can presume himself to be of the number of those that are predestined,
because that is needful to be conceald in this life, where puffing up is so to
be taken heed of, that even by the messenger of Satan so great an Apostle
should be buffeted lest he should be puffed up. -- Many the like things are
spoken, for the usefullnesse of this secret, lest happily any man be puffed up;
but even all that run well, may fear, whilst this is hid, whither they shall
go. vid. plura ibid.

King Henry's Book in the first Article, which is of Faith, well expresses my
mind in these words; But whether there be any special particular knowledge,
which man by faith has certainly of himself, whereby he may testify to
himself, that he is of the predestinates, which shall to the end persevere in
their Calling, we have not spoken, ne cannot in Scripture, ne Doctors find,
that any such faith can be taught or Preached. Truth it is, that in the
Sacraments instituted by Christ, we may constantly believe the Works of God in
them to our present comfort, and application of his grace and favor, with
assurance also that he will not fail us, if we fall not from him; wherefore so
continuing in the state of Grace with him, we may believe undoubtedly to be
saved. But forasmuch as our own frailty and naughtiness ought ever to be
feared in us, it is therefore expedient for us to live in continual watch, and
continual fight with our Enemies, and not presume too much of our Perseverance
and continuance in the state of Grace, which on our behalf is uncertain and
unstable; for although Gods Promises made in Christ be immutable, yet he
makes them not to us, but with condition; so that his Promise standing, we may
yet fail of the Promise, because we keep not our Promise. And therefore if we
assuredly reckon upon the state of our felicity, as grounded upon Gods Promise,
and do not therewith remember, that no man shall be crowned, unless he
lawfully fight, we shall triumph before the victory, and so look in vain for
that which is not otherwise promised, but under a condition. And this every
Christian man must assuredly believe. So there.

The same seems to me to be averred by our 17 Article, where the Counsel of
God predestinating to life, is said to be His Counsel secret to us: and in K.
Edw. Article it was repeated again in the last paragraph, thus; Although the
Decrees of Predestination be unknown to us, yet we must receive Gods Promises,
etc. which words do not exclude only our knowledge, or privity to the
Counsel and Decrees of God a priori, but also a posteriori; and not only
before we be called, or by Grace obey the Calling, but even after faith, and
after justification; for then there is the chief place of the Profit of this
secret, lest perhaps any such should be lifted up, that S. Augustine spoke of;
but if we may be certain that we may have true faith, as we may; and be
certain that true faith cannot finally be lost, as they resolve us that would
be counted the sound Divines; and we be likewise most certain that God has
elected them that persevere to the end in a lively faith, as the Scriptures
clearly resolve us, then the Counsel of God as to our selves that once
believe, is no more secret, nor his decree unknown: and by our knowledge
thereof we have lost some profit which we had by the ignorance thereof,
whereof we have still as much need as ever. And King James at Hampton Court
Conference is reported, page 30. lin. 20. to have said, by inferring the
necessary certainty of standing, and persisting in Grace, a desperate
presumption may be arreared.

CHAP. XIX. Of the last Judgment.
THe last work of the Divine Providence executing the decree of his
Predestination, is the work of the last and general Judgment, wherein is
executed the decrees concerning the Ends of all men, for Praedestinatio finium
is nothing else but the foreknowledge and approbation (o^ decree) of the last
judgment: It being true which the first of the nine Assertions at Lambeth
says, Deus ab aeterno quosdam praedestinavit ad vitam, and quosdam ad mortem
reprobavit, (though it say not, in what Order;) In the last day distributing
life and death, according as from everlasting he had decreed.

Now here, as elsewhere, the Execution of the decree shows, what the decree
it self was; as the building set up and finished, shows what was the device
and plot of the builder.

But in the last judgment is showed the execution and consequution of Ends; So
that if we admit (as we must do) that God propounded an End for himself to
attain, namely the glory of his mercy and bounty, in giving some men Eternal
life; and the glory of his sovereign power and justice, in afflicting on other
some Eternal death, he has the consequution and attainment of this End in
the last righteous judgment.

Again, if we admit (as we must do) that God propounded Ends to men, for
them either to aspire unto or attain, as Eternal life; or to shun with all
fear, and if not fearing and shunning to fall into, as Eternal death, these
Ends are attained, or executed also in the last judgment.

Moreover, if we admit (as we do) that Eternal life, at the last judgment,
is given, as a free and bounteous gift, Romans 6. 23. And yet also as the reward
and crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4. 8. And that Eternal death is then
inflicted as the wages and punishment of sin, Romans 6. 23. and as the
demonstration also of Gods sovereign Power and Dominion (yet with justice and
equity,) Romans 9. 21, 22. If these things be most certain Truths, (as they
are,) it cannot be conceived by ordinary humane understanding, how a decree of
these things could be made before the foundation of the World were laid,
without Gods Prescience, as life is a reward, and death a punishment, seeing no
justice can prepare reward or punishment, but upon supposall or foreknowledge
of good, or evil deserts: Nor without that Prescience of God, which we call
(after our manner of understanding) simplicis intelligentiae, simple and
natural understanding, as life Eternal is a gift of his free goodness, and
as death Eternal is a Declaration of his supreme Dominion and Lordship; and as
in both he does attain that high End, which he seeks for himself, his own
glory.

Let the prudent Reader ponder this a little, because it seems to me to
clear my maine and prime Proposition, That Prescience is necessarily to be put
into the definition of Predestination; and yet not every Prescience, but that
which is in the first, highest, simple, natural understanding of the Almighty,
as that which is most proper and fit for the Prime Author, and supreme Disposer
and Ruler of all things, whereby a trim composition and comprehension together
may be made of those things that most men through contention do separate, nay
oppose one to another. Prosper shall help with an expression of his of the
best part of this Notion, Epigra. 28. Siomnes homines simul consideremus, etc.
If we consider all men together, whereof some may be saved in mercy, some
others damned in truth; all the ways of the Lord, that is, his Mercy and
Truth, are distinguished by the End: But if we look only upon the Saints,
these ways of the Lord are not descryed; for there Truth is not to be
distinguished from Mercy, nor Mercy from Truth, because the blessedness of the
Saints is both from the Reward of Grace, and Retribution of Justice.

This sentence clears the most doubtful part, for that eternal death is de
retributione justitiae, is a truth so clear, and not possible to be decreed,
from before time, without foreknowledge of sin, as my Opposites therefore
love not to argue about Reprobation, or if they do, they fly to the Dominion
and Liberty of God, as a Lord absolute and unaccountable, to exclude Prescience
even here, if it were possible: But for Predestination to eternal life,
because it is the gift of God, they are confident it may be decreed without
Prescience what man will do; which they well might seem to have some color
for, if the blessedness of the Saints were only de munere Gratiae, and not
also de retributione Justitiae: But why strive they to separate and dis-joyne
those things which God has joined together, he having made the blessedness of
the Saints to be the retribution of Justice, out of his Prescience of their
laboring to attain their end, life; and to be also the gift of his Grace, out
of his own understanding what will bring them to happiness, if he grant them
these benefits, whereby he shall also attain his end, the glory of his free
love in giving eternal life to whom he will; both these being understood and
known, before the very existence of men, or any act of his be allowed to be by
any decree of the will of God; that is, only upon condition or supposition, if
he please to will the Creation, Calling, Governing of the Saints, in such sort
as he foreknowes will bring forth life unto them, and this be a way of Glory to
himself.

In sum, this judgment being ex praeteritis, the predestination of it cannot
but be ex praevisis.

The Judge whom God has ordained for that day is Christ the Lord. God and man,
not the Father himself immediately; the reason is, Joh. 5. 22, 23. that all
might honor the Son, as they honor the Father; and the reason of that is,
because as the Father has Created, so the Son has Redeemed mankind: And
this shall be the great crime upon which the World shall be judged, Joh. 3. 19.
That light is come into the World, and men loved darkness more than light; and
Christ's Word shall judge him in the last day, whosoever has rejected Christ,
Joh. 12. 48. as after the Gospel is preached any where, the rule of judgment
is, Mark. 16. 16. He that believes and is Baptized shall be saved, he that
believes not, shall be damned. But S. Paul more fully, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. When the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven, to recompense rest to them that have
been troubled for his Truth, and in flaming fire taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. The severity
of the last judgment, in flaming fire, rendering vengeance. The particularity
of the Persons, we must all appear before the judgment Seat of Christ, 2
Cor. 5. 10. The specialty of causes which God shall judge, the very secrets of
men by Jesus Christ, Romans 2. 16. When as many as have sinned without Law, shall
also perish without Law, verse. 12. having had a Law written in their hearts;
which is as much as that vengeance shall be rendered to them that know not God,
as Tertullian says, Illius etiam est ignorantes Deum plectere, quem non liceat
ignorare; when those that have sinned in the Law shall be judged by the Law,
and they that have not obeyed the Gospel, shall be judged by the Gospel, by
the like proportion. This specialty of causes argues I say to me, that
Original sin, which is one just cause of death, shall justly be alleged
against them that have had no other cause of condemnation in them but this, as
against all Infants that have dyed, and have not this sin purged by the
lavacre of Regeneration, either in act or vow of the Church: but to allege it
against them that have lived to years capable to know God, and to obey the
Gospel, and perhaps have by Baptism that sins forgiveness sealed unto
them, as it seemed strange to Doctor Whitakers, that any man should be
Reprobated for that sin which is forgiven him; so it seems strange to me,
that those sins should be alleged against a man, for which he is condemned,
and yet for which he was not Reprobated, since the sentence of Reprobation is
the heaviest and most woeful sentence that can be, as that which draws after
it the sentence of Condemnation, as the fourth Assertion at Lambeth says. I
conceive, the same sins for which the wicked are condemned at the last, were
the sins for which they were written Reprobates before all days, Jude verse.
4. altogether, first and last, great and small; but especially their final
impenitency, and obstinacy in sin; else, what needed this exactness of
differencing the specialties of causes? Or how does it more burden the guilty
to hear of their several crimes, when they all were rejected in the common
case of mankind fallen, and from thenceforth unable to arise and amend, having
neither Savior to die for them, nor Spirit to call them, nor help to heal
them, all which Reprobation has excluded and debarred them from, or these from
them? God will overcome in judgment, but not by pleading his prerogative, or
his Sovereign power, or by putting men to silence with his greatness, (else
Abraham was too bold to expostulate with God, shall not the Judge of the whole
earth do right?) but by Justice and equity; else, he would not offer himself
to be tried, Isay 5. 3. Judge I pray you, betwixt me and my Vineyard, what
could I have done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? God will
convince the ungodly, and put them to silence and shame by their
unthankfulness and stubbornness against his abundant goodness, patience, and
long-suffering showed unto them.

Let me take my leave of the ingenous Reader, by leaving with him my doubt,
and my resolution thereof, expressed in the words of the grave Cardinal
Sadolet, no carnal man, nor enemy to Truth, as his times had light; In his
Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Romans, page 1178. he brings in this
Objection; At enim ex contaminatio genere oriundi, etc. But even we being
borne of a corrupted original, are now by nature it self made to destruction,
that those whom God passes by, and does not call unto himself, might have no
just cause of complaint: To this he answers thus; At ego video, etc. But I
conceive in the judgment of the World to come, Christ Jesus will not so pass
the sentence, who shall then sit in judgment for his Father, upon them whom he
has condemned, as thus to pronounce, Seeing you proceeded out of the corrupted
loins of Adam, and have contracted the fault and guilt of your Parents, for
this cause do I sentence you to eternal torments: He shall not pronounce
thus; But what then shall he say? Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, for ye
saw me an hungry, and fed me not, etc. But these are not the common sins of
all mankind, but the particular faults of every particular man, which
therefore shall then be specially objected to every one, lest in that sharp
torment and grief of mind, they should presume to beg mercy of God, who
themselves have denied mercy to their poor Brethren craving it.

CHAP. XX. An Abridgement of the whole Doctrine of this Book.
TExts the Foundation of it; Acts 15. 18. Known unto God are all his Works
from everlasting.

Psalm. 135. 6. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in Heaven and in Earth.

Romans 8. 29. Whom he did foreknow, he did predestinate.

1 Pet. 1. 2. To the Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father.

Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. Blessed be God who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ, according as he has chosen us in him,
before the foundation of the World.

To conceive aright of the Order and Manner of the Divine Predestination in the
Mind of God, revealed unto us in the holy Scriptures, after our manner of
Understanding; It is necessary to consider something of the Nature of God, who
did predestinate; and something of the Nature of man, who was predestined.

Of the Nature of God chiefly in this matter must be considered with humble
Reverence,
His infinite Understanding or knowledge. His just Will. His Sovereign
Dominion.
His knowledge may be conceived of two sorts, that which is called Scientia
Visionis, knowledge of Vision, or that which is scientia simplicis
intelligentiae, knowledge of simple, or mere Understanding, that is called
also scientia libera, because it follows some free act of the Will of God;
this is called Naturalis, Natural; because it is in God, who is of Infinite
Understanding, before any act of his Will be supposed to have passed.

His knowledge of Vision, or of sight, is only of those things which either
have, or shall have a being, and therefore this knowledge is after
Predestination, and builded upon it; for when Predestination has decreed what
things shall be, then God by his Understanding of Vision does know them, as
beholding them: Seeing then this knowledge is after Predestination is finished
and concluded, it has no place in the Act of God predestinating; neither can
any thing that is under such knowledge or sight, be any cause or rule of
Predestination: whence it appears that Romans 8. 29. Whom he foreknew he did
predestinate, such foreknowledge of Vision cannot be understood, seeing there
Foreknowledge goes before Predestinating, as Predestinating goes before
Calling, and Calling before Justifying: So that they speak improperly, that use
the terms of praevisa fides, for fides Praecognita, in the Question, whether
Faith foreknown have any place in Gods Predestination: with this knowledge then
of Vision, we have no more to do in this matter.

Gods knowledge of pure or simple Understanding is of the same things that are
predestinate to be, but before they were predestined, and of infinite things
more, besides them: all which it understood and compared together, before any
thing was decreed or determined to be.

This knowledge is founded on Gods Omnipotency, for he knows his own power,
and so it is of things but as possible to be, if he please to give them being:
and he knows also by this his Understanding (if he please to give them being)
what will be their Operations and effects, and what may flow or issue from
them, either as they are Natural Agents or Voluntary: So by this means the
knowledge of God arises to an infiniteness, and to be without number, as the
Psalm. says, 147. 5. But if it should be limited to these things alone, which
have a being, and are within the circle of heaven, or within the compass of
the ages of the world, the knowledge of God should in a sort be finite, since
these things though to us they be many, yet certainly they are finite.

Now the first act of Predestination was in choosing these things to be which
now are, and the decree to put them into being, refusing and rejecting infinite
other things, which God knew as possible as these, and which might have been,
if it had pleased him. But of this predestination of all things that are, and
the rejection of such things as are not, our inquiry and dispute is not, but of
Angels and Men that have a being, in what order and manner some were
predestined to life, and some rejected. To which my answer is, that this was
not done without that selfsame foreknowledge of simple Understanding of this
part of the world, Angels and Men, which was used in the predestinating of the
whole;

That is to say;

1. That God did Understand, that if it pleased him to create among other his
glorious works, some creatures endued with reason, and of a free Nature, they
would be more fit than the rest for him to show forth in them his wisdom,
goodness, bounty, justice, mercy, fidelity, and all his glorious properties,
yet it remained at his pleasure to create them or not.

2. That he did understand, that such creatures according to their freedom
would vary in their choices, some cleaving fast to good, some declining to
evil; he knew this not only in general, and as possible, but particularly
the very persons (if they were created, and put to the trial) yet it remained
at his pleasure to create them, or to try them, or no, to permit or hinder any
of them in their choices, which he knew how to do if he would.

3. That he did understand, that of them whom he knew would forsake their first
good estate (if he permitted them) he might justly forsake some, and punish
them for their rebellion: or he could find means to restore them, and reconcile
them to himself: but yet he determined neither.

4. That he understood that it might be more justifiable and equal, not to
spare Angels, but to show mercy to Men, as more frail and weak, as also
deceived by Angels; Yet he would consider what to do.

5. That he understood, that if he should out of that mercy, provide excellent
means, sufficient to raise men fallen, and to restore to them power and
freedom to work like reasonable and free Agents, in the Use of those means to
their Salvation; he understood, I say, that among many some would thankfully
receive his mercy, some ungratefully reject it, for the sake of the pleasures
of sin: the very particulars he knew, of al his own mercies in their several
degrees and varieties, of all the Persons in their several conditions and
events: but still the determination what should be done, or permitted of all
this, was as it were held in suspense.

6. That he understood, that if he should condemn them, that had refused his
many mercies, and should receive them to favor that returned to him, he should
do justly to the one, and mercifully to the other, and judge them all
righteously. But all these things, understood from the first to the last, from
the beginning to the end of the world, with every particular circumstance (the
same that now are under execution) I say understood them as under condition,
and with supposition, if it shall please the Sovereign Lord to determine and
decree to put them into being, and into act, were brought, and presented to the
wisdom, counsel, and will of God, to allow or amend, to approve or to alter,
or to decree and establish them for ever; which after long and deep
contemplation (that we may still speak after our poor manner of Understanding)
it pleased the only wise God, and Lord of all, upon them to pronounce this
mighty word or decree, Fiant, let them be so: This frame, this Order, these
Causes with their Effects, these benefits, these Mercies, these Judgments,
these Ends, glory to some, shame to others; Let them be established and
ratified to the glory of the divine wisdom, justice, Grace, power and
holiness; Amen, Amen, Amen, said the blessed and eternal Trinity.

Thus the Will of God coming to his knowledge makes the Decree of
Predestination, which Knowledge or Understanding alone does not.

Of this Will of God we are further to consider an essential property of it,
and a necessary distinction.

The Property of the Will of God is to be free, absolute, independent, to
proceed out of no cause, but out of himsefe; in so much as even his occasioned
will had liberty not to have taken the occasion: from whence it follows, that
the things predestinate cannot be causes or motives of their predestination,
neither are things predestinate out of Prescience of simple understanding such,
for therein all things were known yet but as possible, and having no
subsistence at all, being as possible never to be, they could not be movers of
Gods Will to will them. They are deceived therefore that think Predestination
out of Prescience, makes Gods will to depend on Man's Will, or to be a
conditional or uncertain Will; nay, a decree out of this Prescience of simple
understanding concludes Gods Predestination to be as absolute, free, certain,
infallible, as his Omniscience is infallible, and his Will free, and his Power
supreme, or as any other way or manner of understanding this mystery can
conclude it.

The Distinction of the Will of God is that of Damascen out of Chrysostom,
into his Antecedent, and Consequent Will: That is his chief and primary Will,
proceeding out of himself, or out of his own goodness, and therefore is
called by Anselme, The will of his Mercy; This other is his occasioned will, or
the will of his Justice, as the cause now stands: Out of the first proceeds
all the good of Grace and Glory, which the reasonable creature receives; Out
of the second proceeds all the evil of Punishment and Revenge (for the evil
of Chastisement may proceed from love, and so from the first Will, as good)
that an offender suffers or endures. From the first of these flows that
part of Predestination, which is to Life; which decrees to give those means
and benefits, which understanding knows will be saving to such men, if they be
given them, which is the very decree of Election. From the second of these
flows the other part of Predestination, which is to Wrath; which decrees to
give but those means and benefits which foreknowledge understands will fail
to be saving to some men, through their extreme fault, and to inflict Death
upon them for their fault, which is the Decree of Reprobation. And thus much is
enough of the Will of God.

Of Gods Dominion.
The third excellency in the Nature of God seen especially in his
Predestination, is his Sovereign Lordship and Dominion, called by the Apostle
(...), Romans 9. 21. whereby he has right and power to disspose of his creatures
at his pleasure (yet with wisdom and justice according to his Nature,) and by
which he is accountable to none for his so doing.

From hence an answer is given to any that shall ask a reason, Why God allowed
and allotted unto these men the means which he foreknew would bring them to
Glory, and settled the End, Glory and Eternal life upon them? and why he
permitted any at all to perish, or why these rather than others, when he
foreknew their Ends would be unhappy through their own fault, when he could
have remedyed, and have so disposed things out of the Treasures of his wisdom
and knowledge, whereby these also might have been saved, and others that are
saved might have perished?

The Answer, I say, to this is, out of the Dominion of God, that it was his
high pleasure to have his Justice manifested, as well as his Mercy, and his
Justice in these, as his Mercy in those, out of the same his pleasure, without
wrong or injustice to any, with free and frank bounty to others, as Lord of his
own things. Thus is that verifyed in God, as the supreme Cause, disposer and
ruler of all, (then when all things were in contriving and ordering how they
should be) to have Mercy on whom he will, and to Harden whom he will, Romans 9.
that is, not to help him farther whom he finds to fail under sufficient
help already given him.

Here is to be seen that Mass or lump of Mankind, out of which the great
Potter made Vessels to honor, and to dishonor, namely the whole race of men,
from the first man to the last, under all circumstances accompanying every
particular both on Gods part, and also on Man's, known and considered by the
Natural and simple understanding of God: for then they were as a Lump without
determined forms, capable of any change, or amendment, which the great
workmaster might please to have: For as God by his Sovereign power, makes of
the same Earth some piece gold, some lead, or baser stuff; so of Mankind, he
made some to holiness and honor, some he permitted to be defiled and come to
dishonor: But with this difference, that there his own hand did all, as
working upon a dead and senseless matter, here he works upon a living and
reasonable creature, whose Nature we must suppose and provide to be preserved
in Gods working upon it: for in comparisons, as there must be some likeness,
so the differences must be marked, as the Nature of things compared do differ,
else nothing is more fit to deceive with, than a similitude.

Thus much for the Consideration of the Nature of God, who did Predestinate:
there follows the consideration of the Nature of Man, who was Predestined.

It pleased the most wise and omnipotent Creator, amongst other his glorious
works, to conceive one more admirable and excellent than the rest; To subsist
of a mixed and compound Nature, of Spirit and of flesh. By the flesh inferior
to the Angels, by the Spirit superior to beasts, to whom he might say, Be not
as the Horse and as the Mul^ that have no understanding; For he would make him
a reasonable Creature, and so a free Creature; not free to be under no
superior, or to be absolute and sufficient in himself to himself, and
independent on any other (for this belongs only to God himself) but in such
things as he should will or nill, the Nature of his will to be free, and at
liberty to choose, or refuse, this or that, to be the Master and owner of his
own Acts, to be thereby capable of righteousness, or of Sin, of doing good
or evil, of obedience or disobedience, and thence a Subject of praise or
punishment, of bounty or of Justice, which no Creature could properly be, that
is not free in Will, and loose, and at liberty from all kind of Necessity.

This perhaps may be said to be true of the first man Adam, in his Creation;
but since his fall, that freedom of man is to all kind of things decayed, and
to things Spiritual utterly lost: which being granted, yet this is to be
added; That God who knew and permitted this fall, and loss, knew also how to
provide, and to prepare graces of his powerful Spirit, to restore and supply
that which was lost, and how to give a new Commandment, or make a new Covenant
with man fallen, fit and proportionable to the impotent will of Man, and to
those graces of his Spirit, which he would be ever ready to supply, either
preventing man, or working in him, or assisting, helping, protecting,
preserving him, as need shall require: So that this Noble creature still might
hold and keep the place and rank of a free Creature.

For we may not think that the wisdom of God made such an one to show him to
the Angels, and to the world, and ever after to have banished him out of the
world: or to have admitted so notorious a defect in this Universe, that there
should not be found in it, the noblest Nature of things here below, above a day
or two, in the very infancy of the world; and ever after men should all either
be necessarily evil, or necessarily good, after the Maniches heresy, seeing
God created man to be the Subject of his righteous Judgment: The old saying
therefore must be remembered; If there be not the Grace of God, how shall God
save the world? If there be not Freewill in Man, how shall God judge the world?
Grace is to be defended so, as we do not subvert the freedom of man's Will,
and the Freewill of man is to be defended so, that we do not evacuate the
Grace of God.

To conclude with uniting the consideration of these two Natures together of
God and man, in our conceiving the Order and manner of the divine
Predestination.

Seeing the Nature of a free creature is the Subject and the root of most
contingency in the world, and the Natural knowledge of God, or his simple
Understanding, is the infallible foreknower of all future contingents, even
conditional, if God please to create such a free Creature; it follows from
hence, that a just Decree before all time, what shall become of every free
Creature in the end of time, cannot possibly be conceived by us to have been
made, but as proceeding from that infallible foreknowledge, which is in God, of
every man's works, since he will render to every man according to his works.

And again, because the same Decree does proceed from a Sovereign Lord,
whose Will is absolute, who will be debtor to none, but will have all debtors
to him; it follows again, that the foreknowlege out of which the Decree
proceeds, can be no other (after our manner of Understanding) than that of
Gods Natural, simple understanding of things, when they were but as possible,
before any Decree was made, that they should be created or come into being. To
which knowledge when the omnipotent will of God adjoined it self, an
infallible an unchangable Decree was made, that things should be such as they
are now, Necessary or Contingent, Means or Ends, Causes or Effects, such as
foreknowledge had apprehended them, and understood them; so that the Salvation
of every man, who is saved, is from God, and the Perdition of every man that
perishes, is from himself. To God only wise, the Gracious and Righteous
Lord, be all Honor, Glory, and Dominion for ever, Amen.

Irenaeus lib. 2. cap. 34.
Sufficiant quae dictasunt: Nec enim oportet, quod dici solet, universum
ebibere mare, eum qui velit discere, quoniam aqu^ ejus salsa est.

CHAP. XXI. An Analysis to the 17th Article Confessionis Anglicanae.
TO make manifest how perfect a consent the fifth Opinion has with the
Confession of the Church of England, in the 17 Article, which is of
Predestined and Election, and to show who are worthy to be accounted
Heterodox from the Church, I most humbly crave leave to Analyze and explicate
the said Article.

In doing whereof I desire the judicious Reader to consider with me three
things.

1. The Scope and Intent of the Article.

2. The Parts and Paragraphs with their Connnexion.

3. The lowest and particular terms in every part, and that in their literal
and Grammatical sense, as we are commanded by His Majesty's Declaration, and
according to those places of Scripture from whence the terms are taken so
religiously, as nothing could be better.

1. The Scope of the Article is,

1. To establish an Unity of Doctrine in the high point of Predestination and
Election, among the members of this Church.

2. To direct them to the right use of this Doctrine, and to prevent abuses.

2. The Parts and Paragraphs distinguished to the Eye in most Editions are two.

The first from the beginning to these words, They attain to everlasting
felicity: This has respect chiefly to the First end, the establishing of the
sound Doctrine of Predestination.

The second begins at these words, As the Godly consideration, etc. and
reaches to the End: This has respect chiefly to the Second; To direct the
Church in the direct use of this Doctrine, and to avert abuses and scandals.

3. The lowest and particular terms will come to be considered in their own
places, as they lie in every Paragraph.

The first Paragraph that concerns Doctrine has two Branches:

The first, the Definition of Predestination.

The second the Description of the Execution and Manifestation thereof.

The first branch, the Definition is set down in these terms; Predestination
to Life is the Everlasting purpose of God, whereby before the Foundation of the
World was laid, he has constantly decreed by his Counsel, secret to us, to
deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in Christ out of
Mankind; and to bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as Vessels made
to Honor.

Here be two things to be considered The thing defined. The Definition.

The thing defined is Predestination to life, which very term admits another
Predestination, which is to death; though the Article say nothing expressly of
it, or of Reprobation. Not as if God decreed nothing what to do with wicked
men, or had not a purpose to glorify his Justice in them, or were not certain
in his knowledge, who and which they would be: nor as if the Church shund to
touch upon that string as harsh and unpleasant: (The Doctrine of Reprobation
being as profitable to drive men from the ways of wickedness that lead to
perdition, as the Doctrine of Predestination is profitable to draw men into the
ways of righteousness, being rightly understood:) But the reason why the
Article says nothing directly of Predestination to death, or of Reprobation,
is, because it is easily understood by the contrary, whereof the Article says
so much: for if Predestination to Life be the purpose of God to deliver from
curse; then Predestination to Death must be the purpose of God not to deliver
from curse and damnation those whom he has not found in Christ, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
but to cast them into everlasting fire as Vessels to dishonor.

The Definition follows; That Predestination to life is the everlasting
purpose of of God, etc.

Here I crave leave for clear understanding to sever and put asunder the
essential parts of the Definition from the Adjuncts and ornaments that are
annexed to every several essential part, to make every part more complete,
perfect and comely.

The substance of the Definition is this; Predestination to life is the purpose
of God to bring to salvation those whom he has chosen.

Here are three things:
1. An inward Act, his Purpose. 2. An outward Act, or End purposed, To bring to
salvation. 3. The subject upon which the purpose settles the outward Act or
End, Those whom he has chosen.
To every one of these there are several Adjuncts, making them more full; as
to the Purpose of God is adjoined,

1. That it is an Everlasting purpose before the foundation, etc.

2. That it is a Purpose whereby he has decreed; So it is a Decree as well as
a Purpose.

3. That what was decreed, was constantly decreed.

4. That it was decreed suo consilio, by his own Counsel; so a wise decree
made by Counsel; a free decree made by his own Counsel, (...).

5. That this Counsel is secret to us; So it is a hidden purpose, nobis quidem
occulto (says the Latin Article:) all these inform us concerning the nature
of the inward Act.

The outward Act or End purposed, To bring to Salvation, has these adjections
or amplifications:

1. The state and Terminus a quo, from whence these are brought, from curse and
damnation; To deliver from curse.

2. The means by whom they shall both be delivered from curse, and brought to
Salvation, that is, by Christ.

3. This is illustrated by a similitude out of S. Paul, Romans 9. 21. as vessels
made to honor.

To the Subject upon whom the purpose setleth the outward Act or End,

The Chosen, these things are added.
1. That they were chosen in Christ. 2. That they were chosen out of Mankind.
Thus you have the essential parts of the Definition, and the Adjuncts to
every part, which I separate not, as if the Adjuncts might be spared in the
Definition, but only for the clearer contemplation of them being severed and
singled one from another.

Now if I take these again into consideration, I must join to every of the
three principals his accessories also, as I have laid them out.

And here some man would think, I were bound to begin with the first thing
named in the Definition, The everlasting purpose of God: but I can give him a
reason why I must do otherwise: for in the Logical and Grammatical
construction of the Article, there is here expressed one higher, prior,
eternal Act of God, viz. to have chosen some out of Mankind in Christ, before
the other act of his Purpose or decree, to deliver from curse, and to bring to
Salvation those whom he has chosen: for though in truth both these be
coeternall, yet in order of nature (after our manner of understanding, and by
the words of our Article) one is before the other; choosing in Christ, before
purpose to bring to Salvation: for the purpose is to bring to Salvation those
whom he has chosen (says our Article,) which is agreeable to the words of S.
Paul, that purpose is according to Election, Romans 9. 11. but that which is
according to another, is after that according to which it is framed: so if we
shall place things according to due order (and of order is our principal
iniquiry,) Predestination to Life may be thus defined; Gods choosing of some in
Christ out of Mankind before the Foundations of the World were laid, and his
everlasting purpose to deliver them from curse, and to bring them to
everlasting Salvation, by the same Christ, in whom they were chosen. And I
appeal to any reasonable man whether this change do offer any violence, or
wrong to the words of the Article.

Now in good time comes this term (chosen in Christ) first to be examined,
as that wherein lies the issue of this Controversy, Whether Christ was
considered in the very act of choosing his Elect? and full well did the Article
keep the words of the Apostle; that whosoever has the Apostle (if that were
not enough,) he may be sure he has the Article also for him. Let us try out
therefore the meaning of the words of the Apostle, Ephesians. 1, 3, 4.

1. To take from Arminius the envy of his Interpretation, hear what S.
Chrysostom long ago wrote upon this place; Quod dicit, perinde est, ac sic
dicat, per quem nos benedixit per eundem and elegit. And a little after, Quid
est in ipso elegit? per eam, quae in ipso habenda esset, fidem; hoc praestitit
priusquam ipsi essemus, magis autem priusquam mundi hujus jacerentur
fundamenta. The Commentary ascribed to S. Ambrose thus writes upon the Epistle
to the Ephesians; Sicut elegit nos in ipso: praescius Deus omnium scit qui
credituri essent in Christum, sicut dicit ad Rom: Quos praescivit and vocavit
non solum ex Iudaeis, sed etiam ex Gentibus. So by these as purpose is
according to Election, so Election is according to foreknowledge, 1 Pet. 1. 2.
and foreknowledge of what? of Christ and faith in him.

And this was the common Opinion of the Fathers before S. Augustine, although
they were not ignorant of the grace of God, nor of the superiority of it, and
power of it over all the infirmity, and indignity of man.

But to let pass authorities; consider we secondly the very Text, God has
blessed us (...), with all Spiritual blessings by Christ: but that it is a
spiritual blessing, not only our Article confesses, when it says, wherefore
they that are endued with so excellent a benefit of God, etc. but also the
Apostle who makes it the prime, the pattern, and the leading blessing, by
saying; He has blessed us with all spiritual blessings, (...): So that this
is the chief and exemplary blessing, to be chosen in Christ; as to be
justified in Christ, to be sanctified and glorified be following blessings
imitating the first: And if we were elected without respect to Christ, then
have we one spiritual blessing, (and not the meanest,) but the first and the
greatest, and not from or by Christ, contrary to the Apostle saying, God has
blessed us (...), in Christ: Christ is therefore not only the head of the
Elect, but also the Fountain and Foundation of Election: God not choosing
Christ for an head, until he knew his Members, and together with him choosing
them: else this great grace and benefit of Election shall flow out of some
other Fountain than Christ.

3. Consider, that when these words, he has chosen us in Christ, be
interpreted, He has appointed us to Salvation to be obtained in or by Christ,
applying Christ to our obtaining Salvation by him, and not our Election and
choosing; mark, I say, our Article to despise this interpretation, when it
plainly severs these two, and presevereth them both distinct, to choose in
Christ, and to bring to Salvation by Christ: So that Christ is as well respected
in our Election, as in our justification and glorification, which are things
obtained to us by Christ: if therefore Election be virtutis signum, as
Chrysostom says on Romans 8. Quis intentabit crimina adversus Electos Dei? All
that virtue which the chosen did approve was from Christ, in whom he accepted
those, whom he found in him, not from faith, not from works, but from Christ,
as it is in the cause of Justification.

If it be objected, that by this the Election of God is quite taken away, and
his Justification is only left him; for to take Believers is an act of
Justice, and not of choice: I answer, that Election and Justification differ
not in this, that Faith in Christ is requisite to Justification, but not to
Election, but the difference lies in a difference of time, though in both
faith in Christ be requisite. The difference in time is this: Before the Decree
of God be past, or when the Decree is past, and gone out; while the Decree was
in making, or was not yet determined, that which did conclude it and determine
it, was choice and not justice; for then God is said to have chosen Believers
in Christ, because when things were under deliberation and consultation what
should be done, choice had place and swayed all. But after the Decree is
pronounced and established, when God beholds a Believer as infallible
futurum, then he justifyeth properly, and electeth him not: for his Election is
already upon the infallibility of Gods foreknowledge, and the immutability of
his Will. And this difference only observed, the Doctrine of our Election in
Christ does strongly confirm our Faith of Justification and Salvation by
Christ, as our Article says after: And our Justification by Christ does much
enlighten and clear the Doctrine of our Election in Christ, according to the
three Hypotheses of Melancthon, loco de praedestinatione.

1. Iudicandum esse de Electione ex Evangelio. 2. Totum numerum Electorum
propter Christum electum esse. 3. Non aliam Justificationis aliam Electionis
esse causam.
Thus much of the first addition chosen, Chosen in Christ.

2. The Second Adjunct unto chosen is, that they were chosen out of Mankind;
Then by our Article all Mankind was not chosen, but some out of Mankind; yet
all Mankind was considered in the Omniscience of God, from the first man to the
last; for he that chooses out of all, must weigh and examine all.

Out of Mankind, not out of Angels kind; for seeing the Election is in
Christ, and Christ took not hold of the nature of Angels, but of humane
nature, the Election must be out of humane kind, as taken hold on by Christ:
Christ being provided and Preached to humane kind, as one Mediator between
God and Man, The Man Christ Jesus, who for us Men, and for our Salvation came
down from Heaven and was incarnate.

Lastly, if humane kind be it, out of which the Election is made, it must be
distributed into two parts; either as found in Christ, or as found out of
Christ, because the Election is in Christ, therefore out of Mankind as
something to do with, or some relation to Christ: for if God in his
Predestination had bent his consideration unto the Mass of Mankind innocent,
and uncorrupted, there had he found no man Reprobable, being that work of his
own hand: If to the Mass of Mankind fallen, and corrupt, there had been
found no man Eligible, all being under the curse: But considering Mankind as
under Christ, that should die for it, and should be Preached to the World,
there he found some eligible, viz. such as laid hold on Christ by faith; and
some reprobable, that being sinners received not the Savior that would be sent
to deliver them from curse and condemnation. And thus much for the first act of
God in the order of nature, (though the third thing mentioned in the letter of
the Definition,) those whom God has chosen in Christ out of Mankind.

Now I come to the first thing in the Letter of the Definition, (but the second
inward act of God) touching them whom he has chosen, viz. his everlasting
Purpose and decree what to do for them, and how to do it: And first let me
treat of the Principal, the purpose it self, then of the additions and
properties of this purpose.

The Article calls it the purpose of God, and not the purpose of man: Every
thing that is read (though in ancient Fathers) is not presently to be embraced
as made our own: The word is S. Paul's, Romans 9. 11. (...), though there (...)
be not ambiguous, whether it belong to (...), or to (...); but is true in both.

First, (...) may signify two things; Typus, or Archetypus; the plot, the
form, or frame of allt things, according to which all things that now are,
were made and wrought by God, it self being first wrought, that is, devised,
and contrived, and set in order by him. The understanding of God is the Seat
and Subject, in which this plot and frame is described, and as it were written,
as the plot of an Architect is drawn, and set out in paper, or in the sand,
(for the help of his weakness) that he may see with his eye a model of
that which is in his mind, and in time it may be should be raised and builded
by him. Thus seems S. Paul to use the word, Ephesians. 3. 11. when he says, The
various Wisdom of God is known to Angels by the Church, (...); this word
(...), implies a pattern that is followed, and this word (...) says the
pattern was made by God himself in Christ Jesus: as God doing nothing without
the Son, being the chiefest piece in the Frame.

Secondly, this word (...) may signify the Purpose, Decree, Determination and
Resolution of the Will of God, to execute, and to put into being, the things
whereof the plot which is in his mind is the pattern; thus S. Paul takes it,
2 Timothy 1. 9. when he joins purpose and grace together, Who has saved us, and
called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to
his purpose and grace given unto us in Christ Jesus, before the World was: or
of both these together is the purpose of God consisting: the Counsel and the
Decree of God intending those things, the order, and course, and form whereof
he has in his Mind, and his Power, and lastly in his Will.

So that I may say with Vrsinus on Esai. 14. Eventus rerum accuratissime
respondent consilio and praevisioni Dei tanquam Archetypo: So S. Paul would say
all things come to pass (...), all things do, and fulfill the purpose of God.
This purpose is about Ends and Means to those ends, and all circumstances
accompanying them, both in things of the order of nature, and of the order of
grace, and about those things God will do himself, and those things he will
permit the Creature and all secondary Causes to do.

And although in the whole frame or plot there be two parts, or two ways; one
that leads some to happiness, and another wherein some go to their own
destruction: and although the purpose of God runs upon them both, as being not
without his Counsel or his will: yet in S. Paul that only which is the way to
happiness to some (as the more worthy and desirable part) is called the
purpose of God; just as in the foreknowledge, where although the wicked are not
unknown to God, as ignorant of the men, and of their works, yet the faithful
only and the Elect are named and called those whom God foreknew, because in
them he is pleased and delighted: So it is in purpose, that part only of
Divine disposition that brings unto happiness is called Gods purpose,
because he delights in the good of his Creatures, and has no pleasure in
their death and destruction, which is of themselves and not of him, yet
adjudged by him, and decreed upon their rebellion. And this may suffice for the
opening of this Term, The Purpose of God: As for the Adjuncts added by our
Article to purpose, as the everlasting purpose, they are so clear, as they
need no further Explication, than was made in the Analysis before: Only to
the last we may add a word;

By his Counsel secret to us; Consilio nobis quidem occulto. This Clause I
would have reserved and kept in mind to prove that Doctrine which I delivered
in the 18. Chapter of the third part of this work: That although there be
revealed to us some hopeful signs of our Election and Predestination; (as it
is witnessed in the next branch of this paragraph,) yet the very certainty of
our Election or Predestination is a secret hidden in God, and in this life
unknown to us.

Come we now to the outward Act or End purposed by God to his chosen, viz. to
bring them to everlasting Salvation: This is terminus ad quem, the end which
Predestination intends, as that which decrees a perfect work, and leaves
not the issue uncertain, or contingent, as unto God.

To this is added in the Article the terminus a quo, from whence men are
brought to Salvation; from curse and damnation from which they are delivered.
And there is added the means by which they are both delivered from curse, and
brought to Salvation, and that is, Christ: and lastly, there is an
Illustration, As Vessels made to Honor.

Out of these words To deliver from curse, is rightly collected by Robert late
Bishop of Salisbury, that the Church of England does acknowledge them, quos Deus
in Christo elegit, to be maledicto and exitio liberatos; nam privatum est, non
publicum Ecclesiae judicium, quicquid aliter a quibusdam inconsiderate scriptum
est: So he in praefatione ad Lectorem. In these quibusdam are no meaner men
than Doctor Whitakers, and Master Perkins, who took this Article to speak for
them; Whom yet this learned Bishop says, have written aliter, and
inconsiderate: the Article then has not been understood, and so it may yet be
not fully apprehended by great Praelates: for likewise out of this, that our
Article says with the Apostle, that our Election is in Christ; Doctor
Carleton, late Bishop of Chichester, well collecteth, that this Counsel of God
had respect unto the corrupt mass of Mankind; for says he, the benefit we
have by Christ appears not in the state of Innocence, page 10. against the
Appealer, where the said reverend Bishop disputes earnestly against them that
teach Predestination to be a separation between men and men, as they were found
in the Mass of Mankind incorrupt, which is the Doctrine the Appealer so much
inveighed against, as contrary to our Church in the 17 Article: So that to me
it is strange the Bishop should be so severe against the Appealer, whith whom
himself concurreth in the condemning of the same Novelty: But more strange it
seems to me, that out of those words Chosen in Christ, he could collect the
fall of Mankind to be presupposed by God, before the Counsel proceeded to
Election; and could not as well collect now, that Christ himself was
presupposed to be sent into the World, to be preached, to be believed on, or
refused, before God proceeded to Elect or to Reprobate man; Seeing the first is
collected more remotely, that the Gift of Christ supposes sin, and a curse
from whence men had need to be delivered by a Savior: But the second is
expressly affirmed by the Apostle, He has chosen in Christ: and so it may
immediately be collected that we were chosen, not to Christ, as to be sent,
but in Christ supposed as sent, and we found Believers in him: seeing the
foreknowledge of God did as well understand the issue and success of Christ
preached in the World, that he would be the occasion of the rising of many,
and of the sorer fall of many others, as it understood the issue of the
Creation of man, of the Commandment given, of the Tempter permitted, that it
would be to the fall and corruption of all Mankind.

It is very true that the Bishop of Salisbury says, Sect. 1. P. 2. That God
looking upon the Mass of Mankind defiled with sin, and guilty of eternal
Death and Damnation, did there see subesse ibi commoditatem evolvendi and
explicandi opes illas, and abyssos sapientiae suae, justitiae, misericordiae,
potentiae, patientiae, summa ut in illum gloria, and istustrium virtutum
praedicatio redundaret: but how to show all this? The Scripture says by
sending his Son to die for the World, for therein are all these riches
opened. But that he saw a fit occasion to open all these by separating some ex
promiscua illa perditione, qua ad unum omnes pari mortis aeternae condition
obstricti erant, the Scripture no where says; and he himself that says it,
dares not do it but with this parenthesis, interponente se hic dilecto filio,
quos in illo voluit: it would clearly appear that the separation of man was
not made upon the view of Mankind corrupted, no more than upon the view of the
same uncorrupted, but upon Christ interposing Himself: God separating quos in
illo voluit, (voluit autem credentes in ipsum:) This let me express in the
words of Alesius on John. 17. 1. Cum filius Dei praevidisset genus humanum
ruiturum in aeternum exitium propter peccatum, factus est supplex aeterno Patri
(ecce interponente se hic dilecto filio) ac promeruit Pater ei daret universos
qui credituri essent in ipsum, ut eos servaret a tyrannide Diaboli, and morte
aeterna. The Father never denied the Son any thing which he asked, Psalm. 2.
Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance.

So by this the intercession of Christ has obtained all that believe in him to
be given to him, to deliver from curse, and to bring to eternal Life and
Salvation; not their faith, nor their works, but Christ's favor with his Father.

The last thing in the Definition is an illustration; the predestined to Life
are accounted as Vessels made to honor.

This is taken out of S. Paul Romans 9. 21. where you shall find the Vessels
made to honor, to be also called Vessels of mercy, verse. 23. and the Vessels
made to dishonor called Vessels of wrath, verse. 22. but mercy and wrath do
both presuppose sin: Both so far wide from the Apostle, and our Article, are
the defenders of the first Opinion. What sin is it that is presupposed?
That Is now in the question: Whether Original sin, or sin against Christ?
It seems by the Apostle, that Vessels of Wrath were such as God endured with
much long-suffering, which being despised, he then showed his wrath and his
power over them, ver. 22. which argued their sin to be impenitency. And
Vessels of Mercy to be such, in whom he makes known the riches of his Glory;
but this is done in Christ above all, Ephesians. 1. 6. 7. and 2 Timothy 2. 20. the very
visible Church of Christ is the great house wherein are Vessels, some to
honor, some to dishonor: But the whole Chapter, Romans 9. deserves an especial
elaboration, that together with the whole, the similitude of the Potter and his
lump, and his Vessels might be openly cleared. The sum is;

That whereas the Salvation of all those that are saved, and the perdition of
all those that perish, is referred (as it ought to be) to the Will of God, to
his mercy, to his love, to whom he will enlarged, and from whom he will
restrained; and that there is no resisting, nor complaining against this Will:
that then God and his Will is to be considered as it is by the Apostle, as the
Universal and supreme Cause of all things, and as the general Mover,
Governor, disposer of them, through whose understanding, judgment and
allowance they have all passed, and might have been otherwise disposed, and
other Events have proceeded out of them, if God had willed.

And again, the Supreme Cause, as such, must not only be considered as the
chief, and prime agent of things, or as alone doing all, but permitting other
created Natures to use their properties, faculties and freedoms, and to
govern them and to use them to such ends and uses, as the wisdom of God, his
Justice, his Mercy, his Dominion shall judge fit to use them, and apply them,
holily and righteously, and according to Gods Nature: God therefore in
contemplation of his own works, which he himself would do, and of his
creatures of free nature, what they would do, (if he permit,) conceiving the
issues would be diverse, some good, some evil, out of his own Sovereign
pleasure and power, confirmed and ratified by an immutable decree those issues,
and their free causes that would bring them forth, whereby he prepared some men
to glory, some men to destruction as unto ends: but not without the intervent
of their own acts, as well as of his: who though he could have mended or
altered any of his own works, or any of the other Creatures to other issues,
yet he would not, notwithstanding he knew that letting things go thus the
greatest part of the Mass or multitude of Mankind would go into perdition;
and but a few in comparison would be transmitted to life and glory: yet he
rested in this purpose with as much blameless liberty, as the Potter has, who
makes of the same lump of Clay vessels for honorable uses, and vessels for
viler and baser uses: For although there seem a great deal of neerenesse
between the Potter (as a man an owner) and his Clay, and there come but few
things between the Will and power of the one, and the uses and End of the
other (as put case the aptness and inaptnesse of Clay to an end, which yet the
Potter could mend if he list by cost and labor;) whereby the Potters power
seems to be more great and absolute: yet it is most true, that there is a
great deal more of neerenesse between God and his Creature, and though there
come many more things between the Will of God, and the End of his Creature,
yet is the infinite Knowledge, Wisdom, and Power of God, that notwithstanding
these many more things intervenient, Gods Will is nearer to the End of his
creatures, than the Potters Will can be to the End of his Clay, where so little
or nothing come between. Those then whom God chose in Christ, and decreed to
bring to Salvation by Christ, upon supposition of his own acts in giving
Christ and his Spirit unto them, and upon supposition of their acts in
receiving Christ, and obeying his Spirit, these are Vessels made unto honor.
And again, those whom he rejected, and decreed to bring into everlasting
destruction, upon supposition of their acts in despising his Promises, and
inabusing his benefits given unto them, those are Vessels made to destruction:
There is a necessity of such suppositions here, because the Mass of Mankind
is not like unto the Mass of Potters earth, rude, reasonlesse and senseless,
but is a free Creature, whose nature is by the Ordinance of the Creator, to
work out and to procure to it self its own End good or evil: good, by
working according to God seeking that good to men, or evil, by declining from,
or forsaking of God in his Work, and so failing of God he falls into evil:
But because God was able to have altered or amended the whole, or any piece of
the Mass, which happily the Potter is not always able to do in his Mass,
therefore God must needs be acknowledged to have a more excellent power over
Mankind his Mass, than any Potter has of his Clay to make Vessels to honor
or dishonor: whereby at last all is resolved into the Will of God; but as it
is the supreme and universal cause which does allow all inferior causes to
move, and work according to their Natures; which movings, and workings he
orders and applies to his own Glory of Justice, or Mercy, as seems agreeable
to his Will. Vide Epiphan. Haeres. 64. contra Orig. p. 246. Et Hieronimum
Hebdiae Quaest. 10. Thus much for the first branch of the first paragraph, viz.
The Definition of Predestination to life.

Now follows the second Branch, which is a Description of the Execution, or
of the manifestation of our Predestination to life, which is expressed in these
words, Wherefore they that be endued with so excellent a benefit of God, be
called according to Gods Purpose by his Spirit working in due season: This
strain seems to be an Imitation of S. Paul, Romans 8. 29. and it is a good
explication thereof; saving that S. Paul tyeth the Linkes together one unto
another by a repetition, or replication: Those whom he foreknew, he did
predestinate; And whom he did predestinate, them he also called; whom he
called, he also justified, and whom he justified he also glorified: But our
Article uniteth all these latter unto one the first, as so many effects of one
cause, and implies the connection of one of them to the other, only by the
order of their enumeration, saying thus; They that be endued with so excellent
a benefit of God; which is as much as they that be elected by Christ as
foreknowne, they be called, they be justified, they be glorified: So the
imitation agrees well without any material difference. The Explication our
Article makes, appears most by the additions, which it puts to S. Paul.

1. As first, instead of whom he foreknew, it calls our Predestination
praeclarum Dei Donum; those that he endued with so excellent a benefit; with
reference to the Definition before.

2. That it esteems this excellent benefit the Fountain and the cause of all
spiritual blessings that follow in the Article, viz. Calling, Justifying,
Glorifying, for it says, Vnde qui tam praeclaro Dei beneficio sunt donati,
vocantur; wherefore they that be endued with so excellent a benefit of God are
called.

3. That to S. Paul's words called according to purpose, the Article adds, by
his Spirit working in due season, and they through grace obey the Calling: By
which two additions the Article declares what Calling according to purpose is,
viz. when Gods Spirit works in Calling, and not the outward word alone; and
when by grace that Calling is obeyed: for these two are in the course and plot
approved by God.

4. When to S. Paul's justified, the Article adds, They be made the Sons of
God by adoption, they be made like to the Image of his holy Son Jesus
Christ, they walk righteously in good Works: These are added as so many
effects of our Election originally, and as so many effects of our Justification
immediately, and as so many pledges and signs of our future Glorification; for
upon this is concluded, that at length by Gods Mercy they attain to
everlasting felicity. Out of this Declaration which the Article makes of the
Execution and Manifestation of Predestination, there be four things
especially to be learned:

1. That the Article intends the same thing which Melanchton says S. Paul
intended, Romans 8. 29. Totum ordinem complecti voluit, quo Ecclesia condita est
a Deo: To the end that our Faith of eternal Salvation by Christ might be
established and confirmed, since God has contrived the whole course whereby
he will build his Church, that is, whereby he will have on Earth a chosen
Generation that shall inherit in Heaven everlasting felicity. And this we may
certainly believe; because the Knowledge of God which is infallible, his
purpose which is unchangeable, his Calling according to purpose which cannot
be frustrate, his justifying which cannot be controuled, and his glory which
is invincible, are all found in this order and course here set down: besides,
the Scripture says, The Counsel of the Lord stands sure, and the thoughts
of his heart to all Generations, Psalm. 33. 11.

2. Secondly, whereas in this chain there is one link, which is put not only
as the first in order, but also as the cause and fountain of all the rest,
which are not only tied to it, but derived from it, namely, the excellent
benefit of our Election and Predestination in Christ, which was given unto us
by God, and settled upon us by his purpose before the Foundation of the World,
2 Timothy 1. 9. from whence do flow all the lower blessings of Calling according
to purpose, justifying, glorifying, as effects, as issues out of the first and
highest. Therefore we are bound to bless God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, (as S. Paul does,) who has blessed us with all Spiritual blessings,
viz. with calling, justifying, and according as he has chosen us in him, that
we should be holy, and unblameable before him in love, Ephesians. 1. 3, 4. for the
latter blessings do call upon the first, not only as a pattern, but as a
Fountain and root of them all. Now if it should seem strange that those
should be the Effects of Predestination, and yet be foreknowne before
Predestination, according as S. Paul sets Foreknowledge before
Predestination, and Calling after it as the Effect, this doubt is cleared by
the remembering that the foreknowledge that S. Paul speaks of is that only of
Simple understanding, which is not the cause of any thing absolutely to be,
but only as possible, or futurum but sub Hypothesi, if the Will of God say it;
and by remembering secondly, that the Will and Decree of God (wherein
Predestination properly consists,) is only the cause why any thing comes to
act, and into being absolutely, God willing it to be indeed after that manner,
as he knew it might be before he willed it to be. So by this it is plain
that the things which were the Objects of the Understanding foreknowing them
first as possible, are after the Effects of the Will of God, when they are
commanded by a Decree absolutely to be, and to come into act: The knowledge of
God being unto him a light and a guide; but his Will being to us the Fountain
of all our good, and the ground of the duties of thankfulness.

3. Thirdly, whereas the lower linkes say, whom he predestined, he called,
etc. we learn from hence, that the ministry of the Word, whereby the holy
Ghost calls, justifyeth, sanctifyeth the Elect people of God, chiefly
intends the Execution of Predestination, according to S. Paul, Ephesians. 4. 12.
That Pastors and Teachers are given for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ; Non ergo alios,
sed quos praedestinavit, vocavit, justicavit, ipsos glorificavit. Aug. de
praedest. Sanct. cap. 17. This may seem contrary to the general (...), or
love of God to all men, which is also the Fountain of the general promise of
the Gospel which calls all.

From hence some do teach Grace to flow from God by two Fountains; by the way
of Preaching, or by the way of Gods Purpose, Carlton page 41. But it is
certain that the Graces which come from God by the way of Purpose, come also
by the way of Preaching, and no other way without Preaching. But this is
reconciled by S. Paul, laying down Gods Foreknowledge as the first link of
this Chain that leads and guides all; for though the general love of God
be the Fountain from whence the Preaching of the Word, Calling, and Promise
of all Grace do proceed, even to the very Elect, yet it being impossible for
God to be ignorant, or not to know the success of the Word Preached, or of
his Calling, or of his Promise, who would obey and who not, it was impossible
but he resting in them, and being content in their persons, and in their
number (though few) though otherwise contemptible, whom he knew would believe,
should not as mainly intend their Salvation and their Calling, as if he sent
his Word only for them, and sending his Word unto the rest, as if he held in,
quasi in se contineret, the knowledge of their disobedience, would not by his
Prescience hinder the Declaration and Manifestation of his good will to them.
So that by this the Preaching of the Word is the Fountain of all Grace to them
that receive grace, and might be also to them that receive it not; And Gods
purpose, or Predestination out of foreknowledge is the Fountain of Grace to
them that have it, because for their sakes especially it was that the word was
sent and Preached: And they which have not Grace, to whom the Word is Preached,
want it not through the want of Predestination; but through their own neglect
and disdain; for had their obedience been foreknowne, they might have been ex
praedestinatis: Remember ever that Quos praescivit is as much before
praedestinavit, as quos praedestinavit is before vocavit.

4. Lastly, we learn by the links of this chain observed severally, that
whosoever would know, whether he himself be of the number of the Elect, he do
not fix his eye immediately upon either of these extremes, Predestination, and
Glorification, but upon the middlemost (that be between,) and try whether he be
called, or whether he obeyed the call; whether he be justified, or made like to
the Image of Gods only Son, or walk religiously in all good works; these
things if he find, then may he trust, that God has Elected him, has
Predestined him to Salvation. Vide Keckerm. System. 461. de Sorite logica.

So Bishop Bancroft understood our Article, page 294. at the Conference at
Hampton Court; to teach to reason rather ascendendo: and so Melanchton
understood Saint Paul to teach, Romans 8. 29. Nusquam esse electos, nisi in caetu
vocatorum. Loco de Praedestinatione.

Now I come to the seeond paragraph, which gives direction to the right use of
this Doctrine, and cautions for avoiding abuses and scandals.

The whole paragraph consists of two propositions; the first begins here,
As the godly consideration of Predestination, etc: The second at, Furthermore,
we must receive.

The first Proposition is long, and consists ex particulis relativis,
quaehabent notas comparationis, expressed by the signs, Quemadmodum, Ita; As,
So.

The second period is shorter, but yet consists of a copulative proposition,
which is in substance two: One directing to receive Gods promises generally;
the other directing to follow in our doings that Will of God, which directly is
expressed in the word of God.

The comparison in the first period, is laid between two unlike considerations
of two different things, which produce two unlike effects in persons of unlike
quality, expressed in these words; As the godly consideration of
Predestination, and our Election in Christ is full of sweet, pleasant and
unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as feel in themselves the
working of the spirit of Christ, mortifying the works of the flesh, and their
earthly members, and drawing up their minds to high and heavenly things, as
well because it does greatly establish and confirm their faith of eternal
Salvation to be enjoyed by Christ, as because it does fervently kindle their
love toward God: So for curious and carnal persons lacking the Spirit of
Christ, to have continually before their Eyes the sentence of Gods
Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the Devil does thrust
them either into desperation, or into retchlesnesse of Unclean living, no
less perilous than desperation. So far the first period.

Out of the first part of this Comparison we may conceive these instructions
given us by the Church.

1 That the consideration of our Predestination and Election in Christ,
according to the Definition and doctrine in the former paragraph, is the only
Godly consideration of predestination, and therefore ought to be used by all
that will either teach or consider this mystery, not to consider our Election
without considering Christ.

2. That this consideration wherein Christ is had, is the fountain of most
sweet, pleasant and unspeakable comfort; as indeed without Christ there can be
no comfort to any child of Adam.

3. That this comfort appertains and is appliable only to Godly persons, and
such as feel in themselves the working of the Spirit of God, so that no man is
to presume of his Election, before he feel the working of the Spirit in him
mortifying, etc.

4. That to such their Faith may be greatly confirmed of obtaining salvation by
Christ, seeing themselves conformed to the Image of Christ; and their love to
God greatly kindled, finding that God has called them, and sanctified them in
Christ Jesus.

5. Lastly, That the publishing of this doctrine of our Election in Christ is
very justifiable and warrantable, because to suppress or with old so good an
occasion of confirming the faith, and inflaming, the zeal of Godly men, would
be a great injury to them, and a great wrong to the grace of God.

Out of the second part or reddition of this comparison; so to curious and
carnal men, we may conceive these cautions to be given as by the Church.

1. That to have continually before a man's eyes the sentence of Predestination,
is a different thing from the godly consideration of Predestination in Christ.

2. This sentence is perniciosissimum praecipitium; is like some exceeding high
and steep rock, which is dangerous for any man to stand upon, or to look down
from; seeing from such high downfalls the Devil uses to tempt men to throw
themselves down, as he did Christ, Mat. 4. 6. and from this percipitium the
Devil may thrust men either into Despair or Security.

3. That this having the Sentence of Predestination continually before their
eyes, is the use and practice but of curious and carnal men, and such as lack
the Spirit of Christ, to whom also these evils do betide of despair and
security; and therefore this would be shunned and avoided, as he that loves his
safety would shun to walk upon, or gaze from some high and deep downfall.

One point in this comparison needs some more full Explication, for it may be
questioned, whether the Article means that these different Effects of comfort
or downfall, do proceed only from the difference of the persons that do
consider; being either pious or curious, carnal or spiritual, having the
Spirit of Christ, or lacking the Spirit of Christ, or do flow also from the
difference of the things considered, viz. either of Predestination or Election
in Christ, or the sentence of Gods Predestination?

There are that make no difference between these two, and so to them the
difference that the Article moteth must arise, only from the difference of the
persons considering one and the same Doctrine of Predestination. But I may be
bold to put a difference between the things considered, as well as between the
persons considering, because the Article does so: so for curious and carnal
persons etc. The Article does not say it is a dangerous downfall, namely the
consideration of Predestination and Election in Christ, as keeping the same
subject whereof he had spoken before as comfortable; but it substituteth
another subject, to have continually before their Eyes the Doctrine of Gods
Predestination: that is a dangerous downfall, and not the other. And to me it
should seem incredible that either the Article should say, or that Doctor
Bancroft should say, That the sound, full and whole Doctrine of Predestination
and our Election in Christ (such as is here delivered in the former paragraph,)
should be a dangerous downfall even to carnal men, and even them that lack the
Spirit of Christ. For although it be true that the fruit and comfort of this,
and many other Divine truths be reaped only by godly persons when they are
come to have the Spirit of Christ, etc. And it be true also that our curiosity
and carnal affections be great impediments to the right conceiving and
judging of Divine truths; yet it is as true that every necessary Doctrine is in
sacred Scripture so fully, perfectly, and coherently delivered, and ought to be
therefore fitly deduced by the Church, that of it self it have no aptness to
become a praecipitium even to carnal men, and such as have not the Spirit of
Christ, since the Scripture was not written to be read only of them that do
already in humility believe it, and are filled with the Spirit of Christ, but
even by natural men having only ordinary humane judgments, and to taste of
the things of God.

What then is it that the Article says, has so much as a likelihood of a
downfall to the curious and carnal? To have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods Predestination: what is this Sentence? The bare and naked
Sentence; that very decree it self in generality, That God has Predestined
some men to life, and has reprobated some to death, (such is the first of the
9. Assertions at Lambeth,) without any mention or consideration of Christ, of
faith, of Gods Prescience, or any other of his Attributes. This naked Sentence
without any thing of the order, or manner how this decree is concluded, or come
unto, is that praecipitium, that exceeding height from whence the Devil does,
or may thrust men curious and carnal into despair or security, laying all
their religion upon Predestination: If I shall be saved, I shall be saved. This
is that which Bancroft calls a desperate Doctrine, page 29. of the
Conference: The selfsame for substance methinks I find expressed by Hemingius
in his Syntagm, loco de praedest. whom I beseech you hear with a little
patience.

1. De aeterna praedestinatione recte erudir^ ecclesiam summopere necessarium
est; nam ut nulla doctrina uberiorem consolationem piis conscientiis afferre
solet, quam doctrina praedestinationis recte explicita; ita nihil periculosius
est, quam recta praedestinationis ratione aberrare.

2. Nam qui a vera deflectit, in praecipitium fertur unde se recipere non
potest.

3. Sunt quidam, qui cum audiunt nostram salutem in Dei electione and proposito
sitam esse, and modum verum haud observant, somnia Stoica, and fabulas Parcarum
fingunt, quibus and seipsos misere implicant, and alios perniciose seducunt;
vide These. 4, 5, 6, 7.

4. Modus autem praedestinationis verissimus est, quem Paulus nobis
commonstrat, cum ad Ephesians. scribit, Elegit nos in Christo. 1. 9, 10, 11. in hoc
modo conditio fidei includitur: Nam cum fide inserimur Christo, ejus membra
efficimur, and ideo electi, quia Christi membra sumus. The Sentence therefore
of Predestination without the Modus is Praecipitium; but the Modus in Christo
is the fountain of all comfort, and hope, and godliness, which makes this
matter of so much worth to contend for: The true Modus Praedestinationis
divinae.

Now I come to the period of the second Paragraph, and the whole Article:
Furthermore, we must receive Gods promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth unto us in holy Scripture, and in our doings, that Will of God is to
be followed, which we have expressly declared unto us in the word of God.

This part of the Article Bishop Bancroft showed King James at Hampton Court,
page 29. line 19, 20. as the Doctrine of the Church of England touching
Predestination; and it was there very well approved. Moreover the Kings most
excellent Majesty that now is, in his Declaration, commanding that all farther
curious search be laid aside wills, that these disputes be shut up in Gods
promises, as they be generally set forth unto us in the holy Scripture; as if
the general promises of God were the surest principles to determine all these
doubts and differences by, and they rest safely that rest in them.

The Authority of this Article, together with other like passages in our
Catechism and Homilies, constrained our divines that were at Dort to deliver
in secundo Articulo these Theses, for the third and fourth.

3. Deus lapsi generis humani miseratus, misit filium, qui seipsum dedit
precium redemptionis pro peccatis totius mundi.

4. And for the fourth Thesis: In hoc merito mortis Christi fundatur universale
promissum Evangelicum, juxta quod omnes in Christo credentes remissionem
peccatorum and vitam aeternam reipsa consequantur, which they confirm by Mark
16. 15. so that this part of the Article though it be the last, yet it is not
the last in worth and use.

For whereas it says, Furthermore, we must receive, etc. It intends to give
farther remedy against the harm, which may be taken by curious and carnal
persons, from the Sentence of Predestination had continually before their Eyes:
Which harm arises from the sentence alone, without reference, and without
order to the general promises of God: for if we receive Gods promises in such
wise as they be generally set forth to us in holy Scripture; It is not possible
we should conceive that God has decreed any Sentence of Predestination before
the contemplation of the Success and Event of those his general promises: For
if he have before decreed to give Faith and Salvation but to some few chosen
already thereunto, and then come after with a promise of Salvation generally
unto all upon condition of Faith; this promise must needs be to many illusorie
and deceiptfull, and thence it comes that the Sentence of Predestination is a
praecipitium to despair and carelessness.

This is the reason why they that teach as Melanchton, Hemingius, Hunnius, and
the Divines of Saxon do, the order of Election to be after the Redemption
wrought by Christ, and after faith in him considered in Gods foreknowledge, do
so earnestly urge the Universality of Gods promises, and the Unity of Gods Will
to that whith he has revealed: and so does our Article.

This consequence (the promise to be illusory after Predestination decreed)
Bucer himself did well see and acknowledge, and therefore according to his
principles he was necessarily tied, to lay another foundation than the general
promise, which is this; Primum quod Deo debes est, ut credas te ab eo esse
praedestinatum; nam id nisi credas, facis eum tibi, cum te ad salutem vocat per
Evangelium, illudere. And Again, Si dubitas te Praedestinatum esse, necesse
est te dubitare de omni promissione salutis tuae; dubitare de Evangelio, hoc
est, Deo nihil tredere omnium, quae tibi in Evangelio offert. And again,
Tanquam caput omnis noxae tentationis repellenda est haec quaestio, Simusne
praedestinati? Praesumendum est igitur tanquam principium fidei, non omnes esse
a deo praescitos, praefinitos, separatos a reliquis, and electos in hoc ut in
aeternum servemur, hocque propositum Dei mutari non posse. Bucer. ad Romans 8.
page 411.

But this form of teaching seems to me at least new and strange, to presume
that at the very first, which is the last thing we attain unto after long
exercise in goodness; namely, To believe that we are predestined unto life,
whereof we have neither promise nor sign at the first entrance into
Christianity: Quanto rectius hic qui nihil molitur inepte. Sanctus Paulus ad
Romans 10. 9. This is the word of Faith which we preach, that if thou shall
confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe with thy heart that
God raised him from the dead, thou shall be saved. Saint Paul's meaning is, that
the first thing we owe to God, is, to believe the general promise, out of
which we cannot exclude our selves; if thou believe and confess thou shall be
saved; unless I interpret Bucers credere, in a more large manner, that I
believe it possible I may be one of the Elect; under hope I will try and hear
what God will work, as he that ploweth ploweth in hope; (Vnicuique agendum in
spe, says Doctor Abbot, Sarisbur. page 141.) but this is far from the Faith
Bucer speaks of God. And even this hope must have a ground and warrant, or
else it makes ashamed: but what ground can it have like to the universal
redemption by Christ, and the general promises of the Gospel?

This is that net, which the Fisher of men spread over all men to draw them on
to God: If I once surmise or suspect that God intends to draw by the Gospel,
or to gather to himself but some few special particulars, whom he has
marked out, I begin presently to trembly, fearing I may be none of them, seeing
the number is but small, and it is easier to be found among the many, than one
of the few.

When the Lord said to the twelve, One of you shall betray me; Every one began
to fear and suspect himself, when yet there was but one of twelve that should
do the thing: How much more may men fear, when it is said, Faith is the Gift
of God, and this he gives but to the Elect, which are few in comparison of
those that have it not? this way leads me to discomfort or despair, or at
least it takes away from me all remorse for unbelief and impenitence: for if
God gives me not Faith and Repentance, and that out of his Decree by which he
determined not to give it, but to some few, I cannot do withal, nor help it,
if I have not Faith.

But when I hear that the Mercy and Love of God to Mankind, has given his
Son (...), 1 Timothy 2. 6. and that the God of Truth has made a general promise
to save all that believe; though I know but few to be saved, because few
believe; since yet I know this to arise from the contempt and neglect of men,
and not from God, I am no way dismayed, but have a door of hope opened wide
unto me from God, and have cause to fear and blame none but my self; and
against mine own natural corruptions, which are indeed deeply to be feared, I
have sufficient relief from the Grace of God, which is in the word of the
Gospel, and in God ready to help me.

Neither does it satisfy to say, the Promise is therefore delivered in
general, because the Preachers that publish it, are ignorant who be Gods
Elect, and therefore they call, and let God work when he will.

1. For first, the Promises thus general are to be read in holy Scripture,
wherein God speaks himself, who knows who are his.

2. Preachers are to be accounted true witnesses for God, and say no more, no
less, than God himself would say, if he would preach to men.

3. The Commandment to believe, which is joined with the promise, binds all
that hear it, and makes them guilty that do not obey. I applaud our Doctors
in suffragio: Evangelio nihil falsum, aut simulatum subest, sed quiquid in eo
per Ministros offertur, aut promittitur hominibus, id eodem modo ab authore
Evangelii offertur and promittitur iisdem, page 28.

And again, page 43. Quod si non omnes, quos hoc verbi Spiritusque sui dono
dignatur Deus, ad conversionem seriam non seria invitaret; certe and Deus
nonnullos, quos ipse filii sui nomine vocat, falleret, and promissionum
Evangelicarum nuncii a vocatis falso perhibiti testimonii accusari possunt, and
qui ad conversionem vocati parere negligunt, redderentur excusabiliores. It is
nothing therefore which is said of the mixture of the Reprobate with the Elect,
as to the Truth of the generality of the promise, although it be something as
to the Foreknowledge and Omniscience of God, who cannot be ignorant of the
success and event of his promises general: But the generality of the promise
testifyeth against them that say, God has decreed before to whom to give Faith,
and to whom to deny it, out of the multitude of Mankind fallen, out of his
own pleasure; that they as much as in them lies make God a Liar and a
Dissembler.

The last Caveat or direction is not much different from the former: That in
our doings, that Will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly
declared unto us in the Word: for this Doctrine arises from the true and
necessary distinction of the Will of God, which is Deuteronomy. 29. 29. into secret
and revealed, and that of the School into Signi and Beneplaciti; which some
abusing, by thinking that God may have another will secret and different about
the same thing, whereof he has a declared and revealed Will: or that which is
signified, is less pleasing than that which is secret, called Beneplaciti; do
forsake or neglect his Will revealed, to fulfill his Will secret, which they
count to be his only Will.

As in this present matter: when the Word of God reveals it to be the Will of
God, that every hearer of the Gospel do repent, believe and be saved; some
man granting this to be Gods revealed Will, and signified Will, may
notwithstanding imagine that God has another secret Will, and that of his good
Pleasure, which shall stand, not to have him, repent, nor to believe, nor to be
saved: And this imagination is commonly founded upon the Doctrine of
Predestination, which excludes Prescience, and makes God to proceed
immediately to his Election, upon the consideration of the fall of Mankind.

But against this, our Article advises to follow in our doings the Will of God
declared in his Word; and this it does not only by way of advice, as if it
were at our liberty, and only the best and safest way, but even out of
necessary grounds: For,

1. First, That which is secret and hidden can be to us no certain ground to
build upon, for who knows God will not give him leave to repent, believe, or
be saved?

2. That there can be no secret Will of God, contrary to his revealed and
declared Will; for this were to make God a Liar: but even these two secret and
revealed have two diverse Objects; or of one Object, yet diverse times wherein
they are placed: As for Example, That there shall be a day of judgment, is
the revealed Will of God, but when that day shall be, is secret to us, though
determined and known to God: these be two Objects, that a day shall be, and
when that day shall be.

Again, the Gospel of our Salvation before the World was, was a secret
counsel and Will of God; but since the World was, it has been revealed and
opened to the Prophets and Apostles, and is no more hidden but manifested: the
same thing in both, but in two times, in the one hidden, in the other revealed:
being wellpleasing unto God, while it was secret; and not ceased to be so,
being signified and declared to the sons of men.

To conclude; This expressed Will of God, whereby he commands all men that
hear the Gospel, to believe it, Joh. 6. 29. 1 John 3. 23. and whereby the
disobedience of them that believe not is aggravated, Joh. 3. 19. 2 These. 1. 8.
strongly persuades me, that the way to life is yet open, and that Salvation
is to be had, until that Commandment come; nay until it be contemned and
despised.

And that the God of Truth, who uses simplicity and sincerity in all his
sayings, and who will overcome when he is judged, has not made so much as any
secret Decree, not to give a man Faith, nor Salvation, whom he commands to
believe the Gospel, before the consideration of this Commandment given, and
the disobedience thereto observed in mente Divina omniscia: And therefore all
Opinions and Imaginations of Predestination, determined before the
consideration of obedience or disobedience to the Gospel, in the Church where
the Gospel is preached, are utterly to be excluded; which if I obtain in
this Discourse, Habeo intentum, and for this, Appello Evangelium, and Appello
hunc Articulum Ecclesiae Anglicanae.

FINIS.
Dr. POTTER His own VINDICATION Of Himself,

By way of Letter unto Mr. V. touching the same Points.

Written Julii 7o. 1629.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for John Clark, and are to be sold at his Shop under
S. Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1651.

The Preface to the Reader.
AFter the publishing of the former Treatise was concluded on, the ensuing
Letter very fortunately was met withal, and by the advice of grave and serious
men judged fit to be made public, as well for strengthening of our Evidence
touching the Points in difference, that where a single Testimony, though never
so pregnant, is not able to carry the Cause, there, according to Gods own
Rule, this Word of Truth might be established in the Mouths of two or more
witnesses; as also to let the World see how the Eyes of (specially the most
sharpsighted in) both Universities looked one and the same way, and that those
famous Sisters unanimously concentred in their Opinions, even in those days
when these Controversies were first ventilated.

As for the Occasion of this Letter; you may be pleased to understand, Dr.
Potter having Preached at the Consecration of the late Bishop of Carlisle, 150.
Martii, 1628. did afterward Print his Sermon, Anno 1629. which his ancient
Friend Mr. V. having perused, it seems he boggled at some passages therein,
yet with a friendly, though somewhat vehement affection, in a Letter he
expostulates with the Doctor touching his change of Opinion, as he conceived.
The Doctor for his friends satisfaction, and to quit himself of inconstancy,
presently returns him this modest, yet very judicious and Rational Answer.

And for the Readers Ease, that he may rightly understand and judge whether
Mr. V. had any just cause of exception against the Doctor, those passages of
the Doctors Sermon, at which the exceptions were taken, are herewith Printed,
as follows:

For our Controversies, first let me profess, I favor not (I rather suspect)
any new Inventions; for ab Antiquitate non recedo nisi invitus: especially
renouncing all such as any way favor or flatter the depraved nature and will
of man, which I constantly believe to be free only to evil, and of it self
to have no power at all, merely none, to any act or thing spiritually good:
Most heartily embracing that Doctrine which most amply commends the Riches of
Gods free Grace, which I acknowledge to be the whole and sole cause of our
Predestination, Conversion, and Salvation, abhorring all damned Doctrines of
the Pelagians, Semipelagians, Jesuits, Socinians, and of their rags and
relics, which help only to pride and prick up corrupt nature; humbly
confessing in the words of S. Test ad Quir. lib. 3. c. 4.
Cyprian, (so often repeated by that worthy champion of grace, S. Cont. dua^
epist. Pelag. l. 4. cap. 6.
Austine) In nullo gloriandum est, quandoquidem nostrum nihil est: It is God
that works in us both the will and the deed, and therefore let him that
glories, glory in the Lord. But for the points in question, they might sure be
debated with less edge and stomach, as they are at this day in the very Inter
aliquot Jesuitas and Dominicanos.
Church of Rome: and it were happy, if we could suffer Charity to moderate in
all our disputations. If it be truth we seek, and not victory, why take we
not the counsel of S. Paul, (...), Ephesians. 4. 15.
To seek and speak truth in love. Since the matters questioned are clogged
and perplexed with so many insuperable difficulties, that the greatest Wits and
Spirits of all Ages have here found themselves entangled in a maze, and at
length after all vexing disquisitions, seeing no evasion, no issue out of this
Labyrinth, no bank or bottom in this Ocean, were forced to check their
restless repining understandings with Saint Paul's, O Altitudo! Since on all
hands they are Pareus in Iren. Frid. 3 Palate. in Confess. ad fin. Admon.
Neustad.
confessed to be not fundamental, not essential to the Faith; since our own
Church (as the Coelestin. Ep. R. ad Episc. Gall. c. ult. Vid Epistolas Prosp.
and Hilarii ad Aug.
Primitive) in great wisdom has thought meet here to walk in a latitude,
and to be sparing in her definitions; why should we not all be wise unto
sobriety, and let God alone with his secrets? why may not our Romans 14. 1 Phil.
2. 3. -- 3. 15. 2 Timothy 2. 22 1 Cor. 13. 4. 7. See Perkins in Gal. 1. 2. and
Gal. 3. 15 Vide insignem S. Cypr. erga dissentientes a se modestiam Epist. 73.
ad Jubaian. in fine; and in praefat. council. Carthag laudatam saepe ab Aug. de
bap. cont Donat. l. 2* c. ult. and l. 3. c. 3. and. l. 4. c. 8, 9. etc.
hearts be united, though our heads do differ? why do we not desire rather
safely and sweetly to compose these differences, than rashly and with Aug.
Enchir. ad Laurent. c. 59.
danger to define them? and forbear all Capital censures either way, which
must needs involve many holy Souls now at rest with God, many Bez. Annot.
major. in Romans 11. v. 35. and Calv. Inst. l. 3. cap. 22 Sect. 1. and. Sect. 8.
P. Melanc. in Romans 9. Sixth. Scu. lib. 6. ann. 251.
Catholic Bishops of the ancient Church, many learned and godly Doctors of
our own, nay entire reformed Churches, all which have varied in these
Opinions, though most nearly linked in their affections? The fair and moderate
carriage of these Controversies between those two Reverend Men (whose memories
we justly honor) Vide eum in praefat. ad Loc. com. Melanct. Gallice a se
versos. and Epistolas (...).
John Calvin, and Philip Melancthon, easily persuades me that their violent
followers at this day are not more learned, but more uncharitable. And it
appears by that which Master Exam. of Ioh. Careless
Fox has recorded, that our own blessed Martyrs in the days of Queen Mary,
in their very prisons freely disputed and dissented in these Opinions. And
Bishop Hooper has left his judgment to posterity, in the Preface to his
Exposition of the Decalogue, which happily he learnt at Zurich of H. Bullinger
his intime Friend and Familiar.

Dr. POTTER to Mr. V.
GOod Mr. V. and my honest Friend, I shall answer your late loving and vehement
Letter (which I received but yesterday) with no less love, but with less
vehemence; Only, before I begin, let me entreat, that though we be two in
Opinion, yet we may be still one in amity; wherein for my part, I am resolved
to persist with an invincible constancy: and if you become mine enemy, because
I tell you the Truth; yet I will be still to you the same, your most
affectionate entire Friend.

I like and love the heat of your Zeal, only I desire in it a little more
mixture of cooling Charity; I verily believe your zeal to be true, but you
shall give me leave to tell you, that (in very many) that which is so called,
is indeed, but an angry, unmercifull Passion; and (that I may speak plainly,
and name things as they are, Scapham, Scapham) a pure pang mixed of Pride and
Ignorance. It appears by the whole Tenor of your Letter, that you are
affected with a strong suspicion, that I am turned Arminian; And you further
guess at the motive, that some sprinkling of Court-holy-water, like an
Exorcisme, has enchanted or conjured me into this new shape: How loath am I to
understand your meaning? and how feign would I put a fair interpretation upon
these foul passages (if they were capable)! what man! not an Arminian only,
but hired into that Faith by carnal hopes? one that can value his Soul at so
poor a Rate, as to sell it to the times, or weigh or sway his conscience with
Money? My good friend, how did you thus forget me, and your self? and the
strict charge of our Master, Judge not? well; you have my pardon, and God
Almighty confirm it unto you with his. But to prevent your error, and sin,
in this kind hereafter, I desire you to believe, that, I neither am, nor ever
will be, Arminian; I am resolved to stand fast in that Liberty, which my Lord
has so dearly bought for me.

In Divine Truths my conscience cannot serve men, or any other Master, besides
him, who has his Chair in Heaven: I love Calvin very well, and, I must tell
you I cannot hate Arminius; and for my part, I am verily persuaded, that these
two are now where they agree well, in the Kingdom of Heaven; whilst some of
their Passionate Disciples are so eagerly brawling here on Earth; I should
honor Truth, if I heard it out of the Popes mouth, or the Devils; nor can I
believe a falsity, though published by an Angel; I prize my soul so dearly,
that I dare not venture it upon any man's credit, or take upon trust any opinion
which may endanger it; nor can the worth of all this world persuade me, in
matters of Faith, to maintain or believe any Conclusion, which I find not to
issue from Premises of Scripture, or Reason; But most especially, I tremble to
think or speak any thing of God Almighty, which has not express warrant in
his own word; and so much the more, if it seem injurious or dishonorable to
that most glorious and gracious Deity. For my life, I cannot obtain of my
conscience to declame, and revile, and cry down an opinion, when I cannot see
any solid satisfying answer to many contrary Scriptures and Reasons; It is a
very easy way which many walk, and if it were as safe, I would be content to
walk it with them; Blind-folded they follow their leaders, and sparing their
own eyes, they presume their guides (so learned, so holy) see clearly enough.
Therefore they believe all their Dictates (as if they were divinely inspired,
and spoke Oracles) without examining, which eases them of much trouble and
difficulty in sifting and judging. For my part, I ever thought it a thing
unworthy of a Christian, (and yet more of a Minister) and full of Danger, to
invassall his understanding to any man, or any men; or to embrace and espouse
opinions in Religion, without judgment, out of fantafie and prejudice, because
they are recommended by some great names, which we have in Admiration. But
because you are my friend, I will yet farther reveal my self unto you; I have
labored long and diligently in these controversies, and I will tell you with
what mind and method, and with what success.

For some years in my youth, when I was most ignorant, I was most confident;
before I knew the true state or any grounds of these questions, I could
peremptorily resolve them all; and upon every occasion, in the very Pulpit, I
was girding and railing upon these new Heretics the Arminians; and I could
not find words enough to decipher the folly and absurdity of their Doctrine;
Especially, I abhorred them as venomous enemies of the Precious Grace of God,
whereof I ever was, and ever will be, most jealous and tender, as I am most
obliged, holding all I am, or have, or hope for, by that glorious grace: yet
all this while, I took all this that I talked, upon trust, and knew not what
they said, or thought, but by relation from others; and from their enemies;
And, because my conscience in secret would often tell me that railing would
not carry it in matters of Religion, without Reason and Divine Authority; that
I might now solidly maintain Gods Truth (as it becomes a Minister) out of Gods
Word, and clearly vindicate it from wicked exceptions; And that I might not
only revile and scratch the adversary, but beat and wound him, and fight it
out, fortibus armis, non solum fulgentibus, I betook my self seriously and
earnestly to peruse the writings of both parties, and to observe and balance
the Scriptures produced for both Opinions.

But my aim in this inquiry, was not to inform my self, whether held the
Truth (for therein I was extremely confident, presuming it was with us, and
reading the opposers with prejudice and detestation) but the better to fortify
our Tenets against their Cavills and subtilties.

In the mean while knowing that all light and illumination in Divine
Mysteries, descends from above, from the Father and Fountain of all light,
without whose influence and instruction, all our studies are most vain and
frivolous; I resolved constantly and daily to solicit my gracious God, with
most ardent supplications, (as I shall still continue) that he would be
pleased to keep his poor servant in his true faith and fear; that he would
preserve me from all false and dangerous errors, how Specious or Plausible
soever; that he would fill my heart with true Holiness and Humility, empty it
of all Pride, Vainglory, Curiosity, Ambition, etc. all other carnal
conceits, and Affections, which usually blind and pervert the judgment; That
he would give me the grace to renounce and deny my foolish Reason in those
holy studies, and teach me absolutely to captivate my thoughts to the
obedience of his heavenly Word; finally that he would not permit me to speak or
think any thing, but what were consonant to his Scriptures, honorable and
glorious to his Majesty.

I dare never look upon my Books, till I have first looked up to Heaven with
these Prayers; Thus I begin, thus I continue, and thus conclude my studies; In
my search my first and last resolution was, and is, to believe only what the
Lord tells me in his Book; And, because all men are liars, and the most of men
factious, to mark not what they say, but what they prove; Though I must
confess I much favored my own side, and read what was written against it,
with exceeding indignation, especially when I was pinched, and found many
objections to which I could find no Answers; Yet in spite of my Judgment my
Conscience stood as it could; and still multiplying my Prayers, and recurring
to my Oracle, I repelled such thoughts, as Temptations: Well, in this
perplexity I went on, and first observed the Judgments of this age, since the
Reformation; And here I found in the very Harmony of our Confessions, some
little discord in these opinions, but generally and the most part of our
Reformed Churches favoring the Remonstrants: and among particular writers many
here differing in Judgments, though linked in affection, and all of them
eminent for learning and Piety; and being all busied against the common
adversary, the Church of Rome; these little differences amongst themselves,
were wisely neglected and concealed. At length some of our own gave occasion
(I fear) to these intestine and woeful wars, letting fall some speeches very
scandalous, and which cannot be maintained. This first put the Lutheran
Churches in a fresh Alarm against us, and imbittred their hatred; and now,
that which was but a question, is made a quarrel; that which before was fairly
and sweetly debated between private Doctors, was now become an appeal to
contention between whole reformed Churches, they in one army, we in the other;
But still the most wise and holy in both parties, desired a Peace, and ceased
not to cry with tears, Sirs, ye are Brethren, why do ye strive? and with all
their Power labored, that both the Armies might be joined under the Prince of
Peace against the Pope and the Devil.

But whilst these labored for Peace, there never wanted some eager spirits,
that made all ready for war, and whose nails were still itching till they
were in the wounds of the Church; for they could not believe they had any
zeal, unless they were furious; nor any Faith unless they wanted all
Charity: and by the wicked diligence of those Boutefeus, that small spark,
which at first a little moderation might have quenched, has now set us all in
a woeful fire, worthy to be lamented with tears of Blood.

For the late Arminians, we say, they are fled, and they say, they are chased
from us to the Lutherans: we accuse them of Sedition, Heresy and Schism;
they often protest deeply before God Almighty (how truly, ipse viderit and
judicet,) that out of mere tenderness of conscience, and zeal to Piety and
Gods Glory, they desired a moderation in some rigorous opinions; But however a
mutual toleration of one another Errors and infirmities, still keeping the
ligament of Christian communion and fraternity inviolable.

They complain, that in the late Synod things were carried very unequally;
That Truth was not sought, but Victory; That their professed enemies were their
Judges; That the Scriptures and Reasons (since published in the Scripta
Synodica) were not thoroughly examined, and so their Consciences convicted; That
they were condemned, but not confuted; That now they rest worse satisfied, than
before; That those, which before were but private opinions, and disputable
Problemes, and so accounted, are now made necessary truths, and Canonized
decisions; And they say withal, that this has been the Prime cause of all
Schisms and ruptures in the Church in all ages, That matters of Faith and
matters of Opinion have not been exactly distinguished, but the one obtruded
with Tyranny upon the Conscience for the other.

They ask whether we think our first Reformers (like the Pope) infallible?
whether it was not possible for them to err? whether it were not ingenuous to
confess and correct a fault, when we are told of it? But, Principally next
after the Bible, they insist with great boldness upon their appeal to
venerable antiquity, which they challenge entirely to side with them. All the
Greek and Latin Doctors for six hundred years after the Apostles, having
expressly declared themselves against us, and many of them in whole Treatises of
Purpose; only Saint Anstine, they say, seems to favor us, with his two
disciples, Prosper and Fulgentius; and yet they only in the first Point,
concerning the Irrespective Decree of Election; yet therein speaking variously
and uncertainly; In the rest, concerning the Death of Christ, and, Perseverance
of all the faithful, they clearly make for them.

You will ask me what I say of this; I must confess these Reasons have
convicted me, not so far as absolutely to yield unto them, or take part with
them in any Faction, (you need not fear me for that) but so far, as not
rashly to censure, damn or Anathematize them, Till I can see their pretensions
voided; But I was especially netled with their confident appeal to Antiquity.
For let me tell you, Nature has planted in me a very great Opinion and
Reverence of those Ancient Worthies, which were as far before us in true
Devotion and Piety, as they are in time: and which the Catholic Church of
Christ, has ever justly honored, as her fathers. And though I know them to
have erred as men, and will never make them the Rule of my Faith, yet I abhor
to think that they should live and die and concur in any dangerous or
damnable Opinion; wherefore I purpose to sift this allegation to the Bottom,
and impartially to enquire into their judgment. Many of my hours for these
many years last past, have been spent upon these venerable Doctors, and I
have with fruit and fidelity, collected out of many of them, many good and
wholesome Observations.

Upon this occasion, I betook my self to my Notes and Exceptions, and, in
truth, found nothing in them that favored those Opinions that I favored; I
observed many shrewd and pertinent passages alleged by the Arminians, even out
of S. Augustine and Prosper, and upon trial found their Quotations very
faithful; Especially Vossius in his Pelagian History, has with great learning
and diligence diduced the judgment of all Antiquity in all these
Controversies; yet I suspected him as a Partisan, till I was better informed by
some that knew him well; and particularly, by your own most worthy, learned,
godly and reverend Father, the late Doctor Carleton.
Bishop of Chichester, with whom having some private Conference in London, some
two years since, at his Lodging in Westminster, among other good Discourse we
fell in talk of that man, and I humbly desired his Lordships judgment,
whether he were an Arminian or no? He answered me, that he was no Arminian,
but a very honest man; and among other Synodists he bestowed a Copy of his
Book upon him: Since that, himself has assured me, that the good Bishop
spoke true; for he has declared himself in his last Book, De Scriptoribus
Latinis, to be of Saint Augustines mind in these questions, and is allowed by
the States public Professor at Leyden, where no Arminian is tolerated; of him
I will say no more but this; They that know the reading and judgment of that
man, by his works, will confess that there lives not this day in Europe, any
one more learned; and by the relation of some Persons of credit, and since
that, by himself, when he was with me of late in Oxford, I knew, that when
the miserable Schism was at the hottest in those Countries, he never sided
with either Faction, but would repair to both their Churches and Communions,
to testify that he meant to keep Peace with both.

But now you long to hear what is the issue of all my study and enquiry, what
my resolution; why? you may easily conjecture; finding upon this serious search
that all doubts are not clearly decided by Scripture; that in the ancient
Church, after the age of S. Augustine, who was presently contradicted by many
Catholics, (as you may see in the Epistles of Prosper and Fulgentius to him,
upon that very occasion) they have ever been friendly debated, and never
determined in any Council; that in our age, whole Churches are here divided,
either one from another, as the Lutherans from us; or amongst themselves, as
the Romanists, amongst whom the Dominican Family is wholly for the Remonstrants;
that in all these several Churches some particular Doctors vary in these
Opinions. Out of all this I collect for my Part that the Points are no
necessary catholic verities; not essential to the Faith, but merely matters
of Opinion, Problematicall, of inferior moment, wherein a man may err or be
ignorant without danger to his Soul, yet so still that the glory of Gods
Justice, Mercy, Truth, Sincerity and Divine grace be not any ways blemished,
nor any good ascribed to man's corrupt will, or any evil to Gods Decree or
Providence; wherein I can assure you, I do not depart from my ancient
judgment, But do well remember what I affirmed in my Questions at the Act,
and have confirmed it I suppose in my Sermon.

Efficacia gratiae pendeat a libero influxu arbitrii? neg. An Christus Divinae
justitiae, vice nostra, proprie and integre satisfecerit? aff. Quaestiones
inceptoris Christopheri Potter. 1627.
Ipse actus fidei ((...) credere,) imputetur nobis in justitiam sensu proprio?
neg.

So you see, I am still where I was; If I can clearly discover any error or
corruption in my self or any other, I should hate it with all my might; But
pity, support and love all that love the Lord Jesus, though they err in
doubtful Points; but never break Charity, unless with him that obstinately
erres in fundamentalls, or is wilfully factious; and with this moderation, I
dare with confidence and comfort enough, appear before my Lord at the last
day; when I fear what will become of him that loves not his brother; that
Divine precept of love being so often ingeminated, why may I not when the Lord
himself has assured me, by his Beati Pacifici? you tell me of a Deane, that
should say, Maledicti Pacifici; but you and he shall give me leave in this
contradiction, rather to believe my Savior.

My loving friend, I do very much esteem your learning and judgment, and am so
much the more confirmed by your Letter, in my moderation; for you do oppose it
with a very good courage, but not with so good success; All the Reasons, which
I have couched in my Sermon, stand still very firm, all unshaken, and almost
all untouched; For my part I honor Truth with all my heart, next after God, or
rather as I do God himself, who is the God of Truth; and I shall esteem him
my dearest friend, that shall at any time conquer my errors with evidence of
Truth; for that conquest shall be my happiness and victory. Any error abuses
the understanding, but an error in Religion corrupts it, in Faith poison it;
How happy and glad shall I be to be purged of all such rust and poison! But I
am a Christian, and rational, and still I must repeat it, I cannot be
convicted but with Scripture or reason; either of these (the latter being
grounded on the former) will command my assent; but I cannot be chidden, or
frighted, or forced into an Opinion; one good Argument swayes me more, than
twenty Declamations.

Falsehood is fearful, and loves to go disguised, to walk in a mist, and
because it smells ill, to be trimmed with all the flowers of Rhetorique: Truth
hates nothing more than Masquing; she loves and longs to appear in her naked,
native Beauty; and after the most rigorous, scrupulous examination, remains
still the same. Let me entreat you to look over again that Passage of my
Sermon, which offends you; mark well what I say, and upon what grounds. See
whether my Margent do not make good every Particularity in the Text (where it
is doubtful) by particular and pertinent authorities. After trial, if you
please to inform me where I have faulted, I do here seriously promise you,
to cast the first stone at my self, and to publish my own Retractation, after
the most imitable pattern (but never yet imitated) of the most learned and
modest Bishop of Hippo; But if you will without Reason, S. Augustine.
without fault reject and reprobate my Opinion, Ex mero beneplacito, ex
absoluta voluntate, (as you know who says, that God Almighty did with the most
part of innocent Mankind) this I cannot think of you my Learned, Wife, Just
and Merciful Friend.

You say the Arminians are Heretics, we may not be at Peace with them; The
matters controverted are fundamental, essential: To this I need say no more,
for I have said enough in this Letter, and in my Sermon to prove the contrary;
and I doubt not, your second thoughts will persuade you to unsay it; If you
persist, then let me tell you, all the Learned in Christendom of our own
Party, even the late Doctors of the Synod, are your Adversaries; and very
lately (as I have heard) in the Low Countries, a learned Synod of
Contra-Remonstrants, did purposely dispute this Point, and conclude with my
assertion; giving other reasons, why the Remonstrants remain banished; And
instead of many Arguments, I will leave you one, whereon to meditate, which
likewise makes very much for my maine intentions. The Arminians dissent from us
only in these four questions: The Lutheran Churches maintain against us, all
these four questions, and moreover a number of notable dreams and Dotages,
both in matters of ceremony and doctrine; amongst others, you remember their
absurd ubiquity, and consubstantiation; Now, notwithstanding all their foul
corruptions, yet I presume you know (for its apparent out of public records)
that our better-reformed Churches in England, France, Germany, etc. by the
advice of their worthiest Doctors, Calvin, Bucer, Beza, Martyr, Zanchus,
Vrsin, Pareus, have still offered to the Lutherans, all Christian Amity, Peace,
and Communion; and desired them, conjured them, to join all together the right
hands of Fellowship; though those virulent fiery Adders of Saxony would never
give ear to the voice of those wise charmers; But profess to this day, a
perpetual foehood, and immortal Hostility against us; Although in Polonia,
the Lutherans, and Calvinists, being of a better Temper, have long lived in a
heavenly and brotherly concord and communion, both of them retaining their old
opinions. Now say good Master V. what think you? do the Lutherans err
fundamentally, or not? if so, then they have no union with God, nor connection
with Christ the head; with what Conscience then could our Churches and
worthies, offer them their Communion, and desire it? If not, how then does the
Arminian err fundamentally, since the Lutheran maintains the same Opinion
with many more and worse? And again, with what Conscience can the Arminian
(properly qua talis) be rejected out of our Communion, when the Lutheran (who
is as bad, and far worse) is invited to it, and would very joyfully be
admitted? Solve me this Riddle, but Solve me it substantially and Solidly, Et
eris mihi magnus Apollo. You tell me Beza calls Origens error turpissimum
errorem, (but by the way, that's not latin for a damnable Heresy) and that
Sixtus Senensis when he had mustred his Fathers, rejects their Opinion, and you
ask me what I think of True and Careless in the book of Martyrs; All this
very impertinently; In that place I enquire not what Beza, or Calvin, or Sixtus
senensis thought, nor whether the old Fathers were deceived; these enquiries
were not to my purpose; But can you deny but that these writers testify, that
many learned, pious, catholic Bishops of the old Church taught
Praedestination for foreseen faith or works? And suppose them herein to have
erred (as for my part I doubt not but they did, though upon other grounds, than
the bare assertion of Calvin, Beza, or Senensis,) yet can you deny that
notwithstanding this error and others, they were then, and still since,
accounted holy catholic Bishops? Do you not believe them to be with God? and
think you not, as I do, that whosoever should involve them in a capital
censure, (as none of your Authors do, but speak reverently of them all,)
should be grossly and wickedly uncharitable? Grant me but these things, which
none can deny, and I desire no more, I have enough to make good my words.

For True and Careless, it seems you think True was Careless, and Careless was
True. And to tell you my mind, I think so too. But remember this, that both of
them were Martyrs (or Confessors,) and so neither erred fundamentally. By
consequent, my discourse is true, yours again impertinent; But the Arminians
conspire with the Romanists; Ergo, no Peace, no truce with either; I will
plead for neither of them, but for my self. First, the ground of your
inference is weak. Excuse me, if I cannot reject an Opinion, eo ipso (without
farther conviction than only) because they of Rome approve of it; For what?
do not they, and do not we with them anathematize the Anti-trinitarians,
Arians, Nestorians, Eutichians? etc.

Secondly, if you look again into your Books, and consider well, you will
confess that the Church of Rome makes more against the Arminians, than for
them. The prime controversy, (on which all the other are but Appendences) is
that touching the Absolute irrespective Decre^; In which point, if you collect
and number the suffrages, ten for one against the Arminians; Tho. Aquine, you
know, was a great Schoolmaster, and had man Scholars, observe and See,
whether they all (and many more) do not strongly swim in the stream after
Austine; And the truth is, our first reformers did herein but say over again
those Lessons, which they had learned in the Roman Schools; And the hardest
passages that have fallen from Calvin, or Piscator, may easily be Paralleled
with others, as Rigorous, in many Romish Doctors; especially of late years,
the whole Dominican family have been zealous and voluminous in these
questions, which they call, de Auxiliis; wherein though they sweat to sever
their Opinion from the Calvinists (as they call us) yet some Jesuits tell them
(and very truly) that their labor is very vain and ridiculous; Among the
Jesuits themselves, the more Ancient, Tollet, Bellarmine, Valentia, Suarez,
do not in effect dissent from the Dominicans: only some few new ones, Molina,
Lessius, and take up the Bucklers against them, and bid them Battle, but in
very fair and friendly manner; for they try it in a manly conflict, not as we
do, with Passionate and mutual revilings, but with reasons and arguments, and
Salva semper charitate; For so they are commanded by their great Dictator at
Rome, who indeed dares not otherwise decide the Doubts, lest the grieved party
raise another more dangerous question, Whether his Judgment be infallible? In
like manner the Council of Trent, if you mark it, cunningly here declines the
decision, and lurks in such general terms (like him that was called (...) in
the old Oracle) that both sides confidently avow the sentence to be given for
them, when indeed it is given for neither.

It is high time to ease both you and my self (for surely we are both weary)
of this tedious Letter; I will draw to a conclusion; I hold all necessary
verities to be clearly revealed in Gods divine Book, and therein abhor all
Pyrrhonian suspension: For he is an Atheist, that will not believe God Almighty
when he speaks; I constantly believe all Scripture to be an heavenly Truth,
though I cannot comprehend it with my Reason; I Believe likewise we shall know
much more in Heaven, than we can do on Earth; I resolve never to be an
Arminian, and ever to be moderate. Howsoever some thoughts or perplexities may
trouble my own conscience, yet I resolve never to trouble the Church with
them; They shall die in silence with me; Errare Possum, haereticus esse nolo;
Reason shall drive me from any opinion (for I will espouse none out of
obstinacy) and truth ever command me; I shall labor effectually as I can in
the service of my Master Christ, and preach him crucified; I shall deplore with
a bleeding heart the Schisms of the Church, and ardently pray for her Peac and
prosperity; I shall study more to live, than to dispute, for none but the
Devil gains by these contentions; Who keeps men's heads thus busied whilst he
seizes upon their hearts. For these questions the next age may see their issue:
For me I rest in that of Gamaliel, If this Counsel or work be of men, it
cannot stand, if it be of God, it cannot be destroyed.

For my Sermon, I shall desire you to give a fair and benign interpretation,
and to take it no worse, than I intended it, when it was Preached; It and I had
many more thanks than we deserved, from the best of my Auditors, among others
from the Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, from the Deane of Winchester, the
Deane of Gloucester, Doctor Goad, Doctor Harris, and how think you of these?
are they Arminians? Do not help to cast upon your friend an odious and
ungrounded imputation, from which he is yet, and ever will be free; If you have
any more to say, yet write no more; for I shall answer all your Letters in this
kind with silence. When you and I next meet, we may more freely and safely
communicate our thoughts. If I have been vehement, excuse me, and blame your
self; my Reputation is dear unto me, and I could not be patient in the
reproach and suspicion of Heresy; In the mean while continue to love your
poor Friend, but especially to assist him with your Prayers; I shall retaliate
in both; and so commending you with all that are dear unto you, with my loving
good Cosen, Mr. Benson, his Wife and Family, to the rich Mercies of God, in our
Lord Jesus, I cease to Write, but never to be

Your most affectionate true Friend and Brother in Christ Jesus. C. P.
July, 7.
FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 34. l. 18. r. Events. p. 42. l. 19. r. which in. p. 48. l. 14. r. in
case. l. 22. r. there. p. 51. l. 3. r. word. p. 77. l. 22. r. race. p. 86. l.
5. r. we. p. 88. l. 24. r. after himself, insert rather purchased by Christ,
than merited by himself. p. 89. l. 24. r. conversion. p. 116. l. 2. r. feria
4. p. 126. l. 3. r. thanks to Christ. l. 5. r. exhibit so. p. 128 l. 7. r.
mertriculam. l. 8. r. quam. p. 230. l. 4. r. art. p. 233. l. 18, 19. r.
corroborating to good. p. 236. l. 4. r* perficit. p. 239. l. 10. r. their. p.
240. l. 8. r. some men. p. 242. l. 10. r. usual. p. 253. l. 18. r. arripiens.
p. 268. l. 17. r. due. p. 276. l. ult. r. in. p. 292. l. 1. r. no. p. 313. l.
9. r. nine. p. 321. l. 12. r. nine. p. 334. l. 5. r. he is about to condemn.
p. 359. l. 8. r. preserves.


