The Title of KINGS PROVED TO BE JVRE DEVINO.

AND ALSO That our Royal Sovereign King CHARLES the II is the Right and Lawful
Heir to the Crown of England. And that the Life of his Father Charles the first
was taken away unjustly, contrary to the Common Law, Statute Law, and all other
Laws of England.

Wherein is laid down several proofs both of Scripture and Law, clearly and
plainly discovering, that there can be no Full and Free Parliament without a
KING and House of LORDS.

By W. P. Esquire

LONDON, Printed for Nehemiah Price, and are to be sold at the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. 1660.

THE TITLE OF KING CHARLES Proved by LAW.
1. Pet. 2. 17. Fear God, Honor the King.


KINGS are Jure Divino, by Divine Right to be obeyed, and not by violent force
of Subjects to be resisted, although they act wickedly, Prove. 8. 15. By me
Kings Reign, Dan. 2. 21. He removes Kings and sets up Kings, Prove. 16. 10.
A Divine sentence is in the lips of the King. Prove. 21. 1. The Kings Heart is
in the hand of the Lord. Job 34. 18. Is it fit to say to a King thou art
wicked, and to Princes, ye are ungodly, Prove. 24. 21. Fear thou the Lord and
the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. Eccl. 8. 2. I
^oun^el thee to keep the Kings Commandment, Exodus 22. 28. Thou shall not speak
evil of thy Prince, nor detract the Magistrate. 2. Pet. 2. 1^. Fear God, Honor
the King. Eccles. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, 1 Samuel 24.
6. The Lord forbid that I should ^o this thing unto my Master the Lords
anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is the Lords anointed.

From which premises none unless those who deny the Scripture, can deny these
consequences, that the Jura, regalia of Kings, are holden of Heaven, and cannot
for any cause escheat to their Subjects: that active obedience is to be yielded
to the King as Supreme, in omnibus licitis, in all things lawful. But if God
for the punishment of a Nation, should set up a Tyrannical King, Secundum
voluntatem pravam non rationem rectam regentem, Governing by his depraved will
against reason, and commanding things contrary to the word of God, we must not
by force of Arms Rebel against him; but rather then so (if not prevailing by
Petition unto him, or escaping by flight from him patiently subject to the lost
of out lives and Estates, and in that case, arma nostra sunt preces nostrae,
nec possimus, nec decemus aliter resister, our Prayers and tears should fight,
and not our swords: for who can lift up his hand against the Lord anointed, and
be guiltless? this in Scripture we find practiced, by Gods people to Pharaoh,
Exodus 5. 1. and the same People to Nebuchad-nezzar, a Tyrant, were commanded to
perform obedience, and to pray for him, though there was no wickedness almost
which he was not guilty of, his successor Darius, Daniel obeyed, and said O
King live for ever, Dan. 6. 21. for now no private person has with Ehud, Judge.
3. 31. Extraordinary commandment from God to kill Princes, nor no personal
Warrant from God, as all such persons had who attempted any thing against the
Life even of Tyrants, nil sine prudenti fecit ratione vetustas.

2. The King has His Title to the Crown, and to His Kingly Office and Power,
and by way of trust from the People, but by inherent Birthright, immediately
from God, nature and the Law, 1. Reg. Ja. 1. li. 7. 12. Calvin's case.

3. The Law of Royal Government, is a Law Fundamental, 1. Pars Just. fo. 11.

4. The Kings Prerogative and the Subjects liberty are determined, and bounded
by the Law: Bracton, fo. 134. Plowden, fo. 236. 237,

5. By Law no subjects can call their King in question, to answer for his
actions, be they good or bad, Bracton, fo. 5. 6. if any one has cause of
action against the King (because there is no Writ runeth against him) his only
remedy is by supplication and Petition to the King, that ye would vouchsafe to
correct and amend thatwhich he has done, which if he refuse to do, only God
is to revenge and punish him, which is punishment enough, no man ought to
presume to dispute the Kings Actions, much less to rebel against him.

6. The King has no superior but the Almighty God; all His People are
inferriour to him, he inferriour to none but God.

7. The King is caput reipublicae, the head of the Commonwealth immediately
under God. Finch. 81.

And therefore carrying Gods stamp and mark among men, and being as one may say
a God upon earth, as God is a King in Heaven, in a similitudinary sort given
him. ( Bracton, fo. 5. Cum fit dei vicarius, evidenter apparet ad similitudinem
Jesu Christi, cujus vicesgeret in terris) that is to say -- 1. Divine
perfection: 2. Infinitness. 3. Majesty. 4. Sovereignty and Power. 5.
Perpetuity. 6. Justice. 7. Truth. 8. Omniscience.


1. Divine perfection in the King no imperfect thing can be thought, no folly,
negligence, infamy, stain or corruption of blood can be adjudged in him; So
nullam tempus occurit reg^^.

2. Infiniteness, the King in a manner is every where, and present in all
Coutts, and therefore it is that he cannot be nonsuit, and that all Acts of
Parliament that concern the King are general; and the Court must take notice
without pleading them, for he is in all, and all have their part in him. Fitz.
Urb. 21. H. 8. Br. tit. nonsuit. 68.

3. Majesty, the King cannot take nor part from any thing, but by matter of
record, and that is in respect of his Majesty, unless Chattle or the like;
because, deminimis non curaet, lex, 5. Ed. 4. 7. 4. E. 6. 31. 2 H. 4. 7.

4. Sovereignty and Power, all the Land is holden of the King, no action lies
against him, for who can command the King, he may compel his Subjects to go out
of the Realm to War, has absolute Power over all; for by a clause of non
obstante, he may dispense with a Satute, though the Statute say, such
dispensation shall be merely void, 7. E. 4. 17. ^. 1. Calvin's case.

Bracton; Rex habet potestatem Jurisdictionem super omnes qui in regno suo sunt
ea que sunt Jurisdictionis, and pa^is ad nullam pertinent nisi ad regiam
dignitatem, habet etiam certionem, ut delinquentes paniat and ^^^^^at; And
therefore ought to have the Militia.

5. Perpetulty, the King has aperpetual succession, and never dies; for in
Law it is called the demise of the King, and there is no Inter-regnum, a gift
to the King goes to his Successors, though not named, for he is a Corporation
of himself, and has two capacities; (to wit) a natural body, in which he may
inherit to any of his Ancestors, or purchase Lands to him, and the Holes of his
body, which he shall r^tain, although he be afterward removed from his Royal
Estate; and a body Politic, in which he may purchase to him and his Heirs
Kings of England, or to him and his Successors, yet both bodies make but one
individual body. Plomden 213. 233. 242. li. 7. 12.

6. Justice, the King can do no wrong, therefore cannot be a disseisor, he is
all Justice, veritas and justitia, says Bracton, circasolium ejus, they are
the two supporters that do hold up his Crown, he is medicus regni, pater
patria, sponsus regni qui per annulum is espoused to his Realm at his
Coronation, he is Gods Lieutenant, and is not able to do an unjust thing. 4. E.
4. 25. Potentia injuria est impotentia natura, his Ministers may offend, and
therefore to be punished if the Laws are violated, but not he.

7. Truth the King shall never be stopped, Judgment final in a Writ of right
shall not conclude him. 18. E. 3. 38. 20. E. 3. Fitz. Droit. 15.

8. Omniscience, when the King licenceth expressly to aliente an abbot, etc.
which is in mortmain, he needs not make any non abstante of the Statutes of
mortmain, for it is apparent to be of the Law, and therefore shall not be
intended misco^^sant of the Law, for praesumitur rex habere omnia Jura
inscrinio pectoris sui. 2. Just. 99. and therefore ought to have a Negative
voice in Parliament, for he is the Fountain of Justice from whence the Law
sloweth.

High Treason can be committed against none, but the King, neither is any thing
High Treason, but what is declared so to be by the Statute. 25. Ed. 3. c. 21.
to leavy War against the King, to compass or imagine his death, or the death
of his Queen, or of his Eldest Son, to counterfeit his money, or his great Seal,
to imprison the King until he agree to certain demands, to leavy War to alter
Religion, or the Law, to remove Counselors by Arms, or the King from his
Counselors, be they evil or good by arms, to seize the Kings Forts, Ports,
Magazine of War, to depose the King, or to adhere to any State within or
without the Kingdom, but the Kings Majesty, is High Treason, for which the
offender have Judgment.

First, To be drawn to the gallows.

Secondly, There to be hanged by the neck, and cut down alive.

Thirdly, His intrals to be taken out of his belly, and he being alive to be
burnt before him.

Fourthly, That his head should be cut off.

Fifthly, That his body should be cut in four parts.

Sixthly, That his head and his quarters should be put where the King the Lord
pleases.

Postscript.
REader, take notice that in many places of this Brief Collection of the Laws
of England, touching the power of Kings, and their just Prerogative, by the
word Parliament is meant the Rump, who have unjustly taken to themselves the
name of Parliament contrary to the known Laws of the Land, for there can be no
full and free Parliament without a King and House of Lords.

FINIS.

