(...) OR, JESUS CHRIST Given of God the Father FOR OUR Justification.

Explained, Confirmed, and Applied (very briefly) in one Sermon to the
Satisfaction of some judicious Hearers, for whose sake chiefly, and at whose
earnest Request, it is made Public.

Jeremy 23.6. And this is His Name, whereby he shall be called THE LORD OUR
RIGHTEOUSNESS.

2 Cor. 5.21. For he (that is, God the Father) has made him (that is, Jesus
Christ) to be sin for us (that is, a sacrifice for sin) that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him.

London, Printed for Thomas Passenger, at the Sign of the Bible on
London Bridge. 1667.

1 Cor. 1.30. But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
Wisdom, and Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption.

-- And Righteousness. --


AT the Request of some serious Friends, I have Adventured to make this
Discourse public, which otherwise (for ought I know) had never seen the light.
If any Illumination, Satisfaction, Confirmation, Consolation, or any spiritual
Good any way shall accrue to them that read it: I shall, and will rejoice,
Bless, and praise the Father of Lights for it.

This Argument of Justification is as substantial, necessary, comfortable, Ac
primum quidem de justificatione peccatoris little Deo: qui locus in Theologia
facile primarius, nobisque maxim salutaris est: quo obscurato, adulterato, vel
everso, fieri nequit, ut puritas doctrinae in aliis locis retineatur, aut vera
Ecclesia Consistat. Synop. Pur. Theol. P. 434.
and sweet a Doctrine, as any in the whole circuit of Divinity; for, whom he
has justified, them he has also glorified, Romans 8.30. that is, they are as
sure and certain of Heaven, Christus factus est nobis sapientia, justitia,
sanctificatio, and Redemptio, hoc est, sapientes, nos and justos, and sanctos,
and liberos effecit. Theophylact.
as though they were already in it; Justification being the next step, the next
immediate link in that Golden Chain to Glorification.

Who of God is made unto us Righteousness, (...), righteousness in the
Abstract, that is, (says Theophylact), who has made us righteous: who is made
unto us righteousness, etc. He is made to us (says Pareus) not by Creation, but
by Ordination: for Christ is not created or made as to his divine Essence, as
Heretics deprave this Scripture: but he is ordained, and bestowed upon us to
confer these benefits; he is therefore said to be made to us, according to
those expressions, Isa. 9.6. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given; And
Luke 2, To you is born a Savior, that is for our good.

He is made of God to us, etc. that is, (says Factus est nobis, non creatione,
sed ordinatione neque enim Christus creatus aut factus est, quoad Essentiam
divinam, ut haeretici depravant scripturam hanc: sed ordinatus, and donatus
nobis, ad haec bona conferenda, ideo discitur factus nobis: sicut Isaiah 9.6.
puer natus est nobis, Luke 2. vobis natus est servator, id est, nostro bono.
Pareus in loc.
Beza) who is given to us of God, that we might obtain all wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, etc. in him, and by him. All these interpretations,
are significant and proper enough, but the last I best approve of, as the most
genuine and consonant to the scope of the Text, and to the sense of the
Apostle: only by the way note thus much, that by righteousness Factus est nobis
sapientia a Deo, etc. id est, qui datus est nobis a Deo, ut in ipso omnem
sapientiam Consequeremur, etc. idem de justitia, and sanctificatione statuendum
est. Beza in loc.
here, is, and must be meant the righteousness of justification; for the
Apostle immediately annexeth to (...), importing the Righteousness of
Sanctification, which is the very next word. My observation shall be this:
Jesus Christ was given of God to be our Righteousness, (or for our
justification.)

In the prosecution of this precious and weighty Doctrine. I shall endeavor,
1. To prove the Point. 2. To open the meaning of the word Justify. 3. To show
what the justification of a sinner before God, is. 4. What are the essential
parts of our justification. 5. The several Causes of our justification. 6. The
Fruits and Consequences of our justification. 7. And lastly, Close all with a
brief Application for proof.


1. Jesus Christ was decreed, designed, ordained, and determined to be his
peoples righteousness, propitiation, and redemption: the justification and
redemption of a sinner is according to Gods purpose, and grace, given us in
Christ Jesus before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. which according to the
immutability of his Counsel was in the fullness of time accomplished. That in
Daniel is very emphatical, Dan. 9:34. To bring in everlasting righteousness;
it is in the original, a Righteousness of Eternities: So in Heb. 9.12. it it
said, that Christ obtained eternal Redemption for us. Our Redemption, Eternal a
part ante, and a part post.
or Righteousness may be called Eternal, upon a double account:

1. Eternal, in reference to the eternal Decree of God, and so a Righteousness
from Eternity.

2. External, in reference to the everlasting duration of the virtue of it; the
great and glorious Benefits that accrue to Believers by virtue of this
Righteousness, extend their virtue, continue their influence throughout the
endless duration of Eternity. It Is a Righteousness from all Eternity, and a
Righteousness unto all Eternity, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth (from
everlasting, or fore-appointed) to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, (...). quem proposuit Deus propitiationem. Montan.
to declare his righteousness, etc. Christ was A. Lamb slain from the beginning
of the world, Rev. 13.8. (viz.) in the eternal purpose and Decree of God.

2. Consider Christ's glorious Name. This is his Name wherewith he shall be
called, the Lord our Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. This is like his other Name
Jesus, the same in substance with this, Matthew. 1.21. by the Oracle of an Angel,
his Name must be called Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins,
(i. e.) from the power, guilt, and condemnation of sin.

3. It Is the office of Jesus Christ as our High Priest, to be our
Righteousness. Jesus Christ was (...): he was our Redeemer, the price of our
Redemption, a Counter-price; our Redemption and revocation from Captivity, he
was both the propitiatory and propitiation; he was Priest, he was Altar, he was
Sacrifice, he was All in All, Jam fructum ostendit quem ex Christi sacrificio
consequuti sumus, nimirum ut justi coram Deo essemus, qui natura impuri, and
sumus. Marlorat. in 2 Cor. 5.21.
to make us the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. ult. that is, that we
who are impure sinners by nature, through the sacrifice of Christ, might become
righteous before God.

He is our Advocate, 1 John 2.2.
and propitiation Jesus Christ the Righteous; yea, he is our (...), our
propitiatory, or placatory, Romans 3.25.
alluding to the Mercy-seat. 1 Cor. 5.7.
He is our Passover sacrificed for us; he is the Lamb of God slain for us,
that the wrath of God might pass over, 1 Pet. 1.18.
and pass away for ever from us, and not fall down upon our heads: if your
hearts and Consciences are sprinkled with the blood of Christ, as the
Door-posts of the Children of Israel were with the blood of the Paschal-lamb,
Exodus 12.7
the wrath of God will for ever pass by you, and not pass upon you. Thus Jesus
Christ is a merciful and faithful High Priest, Heb. 2.17. merciful to us in
misery, pitying us in our guilt and blood, faithful to God, and to us also in
the faithful discharge of his Priestly Office for us; in being our Price, our
Ransom, in discharging our Bond, in pacifying the Fathers wrath, in satisfying
divine Justice, in finishing Transgression, in making an end of sin, in
bringing in everlasting Righteousness, and so in bringing us to God. 1 Pet.
3.18.
Now as he is our merciful and faithful High Priest: Justitia, hoc est,
justificator noster, donans nos vera justitia coram Deo per fidem. Ad
sacerdotale munus Christi hoc pertinet. Pareus in 1 Cor. 1.30.
so he is our Righteousness, (1) our Justifyer, endowing us with a perfect
Righteousness before God through faith; this belongs to the Priestly Office of
Christ.

Jesus Christ is the Author, or the procuring cause of our justification, as he
is the Author of our eternal Salvation. Heb. 5.9.
And this he does two ways:

1. By making an Atonement for us on Earth.

2. By making intercession for us in Heaven: He has made reconciliation for us
by his blood upon the Cross, Romans 5.1^. and he does continue to make
intercession for us by the prevalent and loud cries of the same blood in
Heaven, Heb. 12.24. He is gone up to Heaven to appear in the presence of God
for us; Heb. 9.24.
just as Aaron (a type of Christ) Exodus 28.12, 29. and 30. verses, was to bear
the name of the children of Israel (a figure of all the Elect of God) engraven
in precious stones upon his Shoulders, and upon his Heart, when he went into
the holy Place, for a memorial before the Lord continually. So our Lord Christ
is entered into the Heavens, with red and glorious Garments, to appear in the
presence of God for us: there is not the least Believer but his name is (as it
were) engraven upon the Shoulders, Breast Plate, and Heart of Christ. Of all
cries the cries of blood are the strongest, the loudest, whether for, or
against a guilty person. Abels blood cried aloud to God for vengeance, Genesis
4.10.
but this blood of sprinkling speaks better things than that of Abels: it
pleads, sues, presses hard for a discharge from all thy sins, and enemies: it
cries aloud for mercy, peace and pardon. Lord (says Christ) here is my price,
and my purchase, my Redemption, and my redeemed Ones; here is my Righteousness,
and here are the persons justified by it: whatever charge or guilt lies upon
them, here are the shoulders that have sustained the weight of thy wrath, which
was their due, upon these shoulders, and in this heart, thou may behold all
their names engraven, acquit and absolve th m for my sake; Father, I will that
they be righteous by my Righteousness, and glorious with my Glory; My tears, my
stripes, my wounds, my groans, my anguish, my Blood, the tortures of my Body,
the torments of my Soul do all pray, and plead prevailingly, that all believing
sinners be justified, and saved. Thus Christ appears in Heaven, with red
Garments, with Garments rolled in blood, and with the whites of peace, pardon,
justification, and absolution upon the red: with all the names of his
justified, sanctified ones engraven upon his shoulders, and upon his heart
before the Lord continually, to present his everlasting Righteousness to the
Father for us, to present our persons as righteous, and spotless, enwrap'd in
that glorious Robe of Righteousness, and to impropriate and apply his
everlasting Righteousness. to us.

Thus I have proved, that Christ is our Righteousness.

Vox justificandi (...) and inde justificationis, (...), proprie, and fere
semper forinseca, and forensis actio est, judicis, and judicii, scilicet in rei
absolutione, condemnationi opposita. Synop. Pur. Theol. p. 434. Justificare
absolvere a est, morte, non condemnare. Syntag. Polan. p. 455.
2. We come in the next place to open the meaning of the word (justify.)

Justification is a Law-state, and the words (...), and (...) (from (...)) are
verba forensia, or judicial, or Court-Terms, taken from Courts of Justice: It
imports the absolution of a guilty person, the word justification, is in holy
Writ opposed to condemnation. To justify, says Polanus, is to absolve from
death, not to condemn.

Though justificare sometimes may note as much as justum facere: if you respect
the notation of the Latin word, as magnificare imports to magnify, or make
great; neither is it to be doubted, but that the Lord does constitute, or make
those just, whom he justifies, they are just, both by the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, which is out of them in Christ, as being his personal
righteousness, and by infusion of righteousness, as it were by influence into
them from Christ their Head; to the faithful belongs a twofold Righteousness,
the one of Justification, the other of Sanctification: Reverend Downam's
Treatise of Justification. p. 2, 3.
I shall make it evident (says the learned Bishop Downame) that the Hebrew
Hitsdiq, and the Greek (...) is, verbum forense, a judicial word taken from
Courts of justice, which being attributed to the Judge is opposed to
Condemnation, and signifies, to absolve, Justificare est justum reputare,
justum pronunciare.
or to give sentence with the party questioned. Thus far he. So that to
justify both from Scriptures and the writings of the Fathers, is as much as to
absolve, or acquit a believing sinner from guilt, and condemnation, and to
accept him as righteous through the righteousness of Jesus Christ. To justify,
is to repute, and pronounce a man just or righteous. Justification is opposed
to Condemnation, Romans 8.33. it is God that justifies, (...) not one
condemnation to them that are in Christ J sus. Romans 8.1.
i. e. acquits, absolves, who shall condemn? so the word is taken, Deuteronomy. 25.1.
The Judges are commanded to justify the righteous, and to condemn the wicked:
l^kewise, Prove. 17.15. he that justifies the wicked, and condemns the
righteous, they are both an abomination to the Lord. So also is this w^rd taken
in a Law sense, Psalm 143.2. Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant,
for in thy sight shall no man be justified. Romans 5.16. Judgment was by one to
condemnation, but the free Gift is of many offenses to justification. Now the
Scripture speaks of a righteousness of the Cause, and of a righteousness of the
Person.

1. Of the Cause, 1. Justitia Causae.
When a man in other respects sinful, may be said in this, or that particular
cause, or matter to be innocent, or just: as in the case of Abimelech, Genesis
20.5.
touching the matter of Sarah; he pleads the integrity of his heart, and the
innocence of his hands, etc.

2. Of the Person. 2. Justitia Personae.
That is the universal conformity of the whole man, and of all his actions to
the holy Law of God, and this twofold: 1. Legal. 2. Evangelical.


1. Legal, By the Law and the works thereof, Hac justificatione Angeli sancti
fruuntur. Polan. Mat. 3.15. Romans 8.3, 4.
hereby the Man Christ Jesus, and none but he on earth, was in a strict sense
legally just and righteous, he only fulfilled all righteousness, even the
righteousness of the whole Law, and the Holy Angels are thus justified.

2. Evangelical, That (in short) is this: through faith in Christ's
righteousness a believing sinner is justified before God, in foro coeli, in the
Court of Heaven: Romans 5.1. Finis perficiens non interficiens.
And Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that
believes, Romans 10.4. we ought directly to go to Christ for justification, and
not to go back to Moses; by him all that believe, are justified from all
things, Acts 13.38, 39.
from which ye could not be justified by the Law of Moses; a sense whereof a
believer has more or less, in foro Conscientiae, in his own conscience: Romans
14.17. The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace,
and joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 5. from the 12. to the end, proves at large our
sole and whole justification by the righteousness of One, even Jesus Christ. In
a word, the Lord accepts, and reputeth a guilty unworthy sinner (yet
believing) as righteous, by the free imputation of the righteousness of Christ
unto him.

Thus much for the Terms (Justify) and (Justification.)

3. We come in the third place to the definition of Justification. I am not
ignorant, that the definitions thereof are many, but the most clear and
comprehensive I take to be this: What is Justification?

Answ. Justification is a most merciful and righteous Action of God as Judge,
whereby, Definition of justification.
imputing the righteousness of Christ to a believing sinner, he absolveth him
from his sins, and accepts of him as righteous in Christ, and as an heir of
eternal life, to the praise and glory of his own mercy and justice. All which
(at leastwise for the most part) is comprehended in, Romans 3.23, 24, 25, 26.

I do not intend at this time to prosecute the parts of this Definition at
large, but only speak to two things in transitu:

1. The justification of a sinner is an Act of God, as Lord Lawgiver, and
Judge, Romans 8, 33. it is God that justifies, the whole Trinity, Opera
Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa.
Father, Son, and Spirit, Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver, who is able to
save and to destroy: none but the offended Majesty can pardon man's offenses;
It Is the injured Deity that says, I even, I am he, that blotteth out thy
Transgressions, for mine own sake, and will not remember thy sins, Isa. 43.25.
O glorious and gracious Word! He that will by no means clear the guilty,
having received satisfaction in his Son, by the imputation of his Sons
righteousness justifies the ungodly, acquits them from the guilt of sin, Romans
4.5.
and accepts them as righteous in his sight.

2. The righteousness of justification ( quatenus justification) works not a
real inherent change in us, which is done in sanctification, but makes a
relative change without us, and upon us, as it is a judicial act of God, an act
of God as Lawgiver and Judge, in opposition to Condemnation. Justification
makes a relative change or mutation, in respect of a man's estate or condition:
a guilty person is pronounced righteous, the sinful Debtor is discharged; an
Enemy is now reconciled, a miserable captive is redeemed, a child of wrath is
made a Son of God, and an unworthy worm an heir of Glory. These are relative
mutations, though they that are justified, are also together sanctified; in
order of Time these acts of grace are wrought together, but in order of Nature
justification is the Antecedent, and sanctification is the Consequent; and mark
it, where justification changes a man's Relation (to God, and Eternity) there
sanctification changes a man's disposition, and renews the soul with inward
holiness: both are the sacred effluxes from Christ's righteousness; the first is
wrought by the righteousness of Christ imputed, the other by the righteousness
of Christ imparted; one by Christ's personal righteousness, the other by way of
influence, Christ is both caput eminentiae, and caput influentiae.
and infusion from Christ as Head. We ought to take great heed least we
confound justification with sanctification, as Bellarmine, and the Papists do.

4. In the fourth place, we come to show the essential parts of our
justification, and these are two: 1. Absolution from sin. 2. Acceptance as
righteous in Christ.


Both which, the Lord grants by the plenary, and perfect satisfaction made to
his Law and justice by Jesus Christ, both our Surety, and Mediator: by which
he satisfied the Law in both parts:

1. He satisfied the Law in respect of the penalty, by his Passion, or passive
righteousness, undergoing the Curse for us, Gal. 3.13.

2. He satisfied the Law in respect of the Precept by his perfect active
righteousness, habitual and actual: but neither of these can be severed any
where from the other: Rom 3.4.
And these which God has so indissolvably joined, let no man put assunder,
each has its proper interest in, and respective contribution toward the
satisfying the injured honor of Gods Law; for the honor of Gods Law is the
equity of both its parts, its Command, and its threatening. Christ's active
righteousness, the obedience of the Great God-man, has honored the equity of
the first, (viz.) repaired the honor of Gods Commandments, broken by sinful
man. And his passive righteousness in like manner, honors the equity of the
Threatening; Christ himself dies, to justify that the sinner is worthy of
Death; and by offering up himself as a sacrifice on the Cross, he proclaims to
all the world, that sin is exceeding sinful, and that God is exceeding jealous.
Again, Consider, See Wallebius his Body of Divinity, with the Notes of Mr.
Rosse p. 109.
Christ's active Righteousness was every where passive, (the distinction of
active and passive is needless) and his passive righteousness every where
active.

1. His active Righteousness was every where passive, because all of it was
done in the form of a Servant: Christ's obedience is an active Passion, and a
passive Action. ibid.
in our nature he obeyed the Law, in his very incarnation he was passive, for
therein he suffered an e^clipse of the glory of his Godhead.

2. His Passive Righteousness was every where active; because what he suffered,
was not by constraint, or against his will, it was his own voluntary act and
deed, all along he eyed his Fathers Glory, and the good of mankind; Ah! take
that instance, the Greatest of his sufferings, his very dying was the product,
both of the freeness of his love, and of the majesty of his power, John 10.17,
18. Revel. 1.5. Read those melting Texts, and chew the Cud upon them. But to
return. The Law has two branches: 1. The Commination, or the Curse. 2. The
Precept, or Commandment: so there are two parts of justification.


1. Absolution from the Curse of the Law, this is done by Christ's sufferings:
the Prince of Life dyed, the Lord of Glory became a Curse for us.

2. Acceptance as righteous in Christ, this is done by the imputation of
Christ's perfect righteousness to us, Romans 8 3, 4. Romans 5.17, 18.
both habitual and actual. Thus Jesus Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes, for to them that believe in him he
has fulfilled all righteousness: but I must confess, by reason of the most
strict Connection between these two, (viz.) imputation of righteousness and
remission of sins, the one does comprehend or conclude the other: Propter
arctissimam (...), una alteram Complectitur (...); quamvis, justificatio (...)
in peccatorum remissione Constituatur. Synop. Pur. Theol. p. 436. justificatio
peccatoris, est remissio peccatorum, sigurate nimirum and metonimice loquendo,
quia remissio peccatorum est causa sormalis justificationis peccatoris, etc.
Syntag. Polan. p. 445.
as Romans 4.22. and justifification, (...) is oftentimes placed in the remission
of sins: as Psalm 32.1. Romans 4.7.

We are justified by Christ's obedience, both active and passive: but I confess
chiefly by the latter: The Scripture in many places seems to lay the stress
principally (or at least synechdochically) upon the Blood, the Death, the
Cross of Christ, Ephesians. 1.7. Heb. 9.12, 14. Romans 5.10 Ephesians. 2.13. Col. 2.13,
14. Revel. 1.5, 6. Romans 5.8, 9. Cum multis aliis, etc.

Before I proceed to the fifth General propounded to be spoken to, I think it
not unnecessary to enquire, Forma dat esse.
what is the form of Christ's satisfaction, which renders it satisfactory to
God, and justificatory to man? I answer, The infinite merit of what he did and
suffered: which infinite Merit stands.

1. In the dignity of his Person, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him
bodily, Col. 2.9, 14. Now for the work of a servant to be don by the Lord of
all, renders his active; and for him to suffer as a Malefactor between
Malefactors, who was God blessed for evermore, Renders his passive
righteousness infinitely meritorious; Acts 20, 28. 1 John 1.7.
No wonder the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, for it is the blood of
God, by the figure, called by the Ancients (...), Communication of properties:
the blood of the Man Christ Jesus, is called the blood of God. And this is the
reason, why the righteousness of one, redounds to all (the Elect) for the
justification of life, Romans 5.18, 19. The doings and sufferings of this
Glorious Person the Lord our righteousness, (though for a few years) were
infinitely (...) more value, than all, that all the creatures in Heaven or
Earth could have done or suffered to eternity; Heb. 1.6.
the very Man Christ Jesus is above all the Angels, for he is the Man Gods
fellow, an high Word. Zech. 13.7.
And this infinite worthiness of the Redeemers Person ye have excellently
described, as the irradiating and infinitely exalting all he did and suffered.
Consult these Texts, Heb. 1.1, 2, 3. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

2. The righteousness of Jesus Christ is of infinite merit, and a mere
supererogation of an infinitely Glorious Person.

1. His active Righteousness stood in his obedience to the Ceremonial and Moral
Law.

1. His obedience to the ceremonial Law, was a mere supererogation; What? for
the substance to comply with the shadows? for the Antitype to do homage to its
own Types? besides, he submitted to those Ordinances, the end and institution
whereof supposes Guilt; what foreskin of iniquity had he to be cut off by
Circumcision? what filth to be washed away in Baptism? Luke 1.21.22. Luke 3.21.
yet he was circumcised and baptized, and his Mother offered for her
purification.

2. His obedience to the moral Laws, Although it must be granted as man, it was
his duty, yet it was not his duty to become man; Gal. 4.4.
his incarnation was a work of supererogation, the Law did never command that
the eternal Son of the living God should take upon him the form of a Servant,
keep the Law, suffer and die. This cond scention of his was wholly free and
arbitrary; what but his own infinite love could move the eternal Word to pitch
his Tent in our Nature? What else could move the Lord of the World to become a
servant? the Ancient of Days to become a Child? or the Son of God to be the
Son of Mary?

And as his Active, so also his passive righteousness was a meet
supererogation. What had divine Justice to do with the holy Child Jesus? Had
it not been for his own eternal compact with the Father: he was a sinlesse
Person, the Lamb of God without spot; he suffered not for himself, Dan. 9.26.
he that knew no sin was made sin for us, (i. e.) a sacrifice for our sins,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

3. The stamp of Gods Appointment highly dignifies (as to us) Christ's
righteousness, and renders it acceptable to God, and meritorious for our
benefit. The Assignment and appointment of God the Father sets a great value on
it; God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing to men
their trespasses, a Cor. 5.19. the reconciliation, or justification of a
sinner, is as much the Fathers as the Sons Act. Christ frequently declares in
the Gospel of John, John 6.
that he came into the world, to do the will of him that sent him. Christ
received his mission and Commission from the Father for our justification. Mark
that notable place, Heb. 10.6, 7, 9, 10. In burnt-offerings, and sacrifices for
sin, thou have had no pleasure (the Lord did not delight in the blood of Bulls,
Goats or Calves, those brutish sacrifices): verse. 7. then, said I, (the words
of Christ) Lo I come, (in the Volume of the Book it is written of me) to do
Thy Will, O God. Mark that, ver. 9. Then, said he, lo, I come to do thy will:
(O God) He takes away the first, the first sort of sacrifices, that he may
establish the second, (viz.) -- sacrifice of his Son, verse. 10. by the which
Will, we are sanctified, (i. e.) saved, through the offering of the body of
Jesus Christ once for all. Dr. Owen, in his Death of Deaths: and Mr. Caryl, in
his Lectures on Job.
Some of our Great Divines judiciously judge, that much of the merit of Christ's
Passion does arise from the eternal Compact, and assignment of the Father, (not
excluding the other considerations). Now we pass on.

5. To the fifth Query, and that is this, what are the several causes
concurring to our justification?

A. I answer, The causes of our justification are these four chiefly: 1. The
Efficient. 2. The Material. 3. The Formal. 4. The final Cause.


1. The Efficient cause, and that is twofold, either principal, or
instrumental.

1. The principal. God, the whole Trinity, Father, Son, and Spirit.
Justification being an outward action, ad extra, respecting the creatures, is
the common Act of the whole Trinity. God, (the whole Trinity) does justify as
Lawgiver, and Judge, Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver able to save, and to
destroy, he is the Judge of all the Earth; by sin we became Gods Debtors, and
owed him many thousand Talents, Christ our Surety pays our Debts, and God
discharges us; by sin we were enemies and ungodly, Christ our Mediator
reconciles us enemies, In summa, nemo ad fidei justitiam perveniet, nisi qui in
se erit impius. Calv. in Romans 4.5.
and justifies us, by Nature ungodly, yea, God in Christ reconciles us to
himself, not imputing to us our trespasses, a Cor. 5.19. And this is both a
gracious, and a righteous Act of God;

1. A gracious act, Romans 3.25. we are justified truly by his Grace, 2 Timothy
1.9. Ephesians. 2.5. we are saved by Grace.

2. A righteous act of God: hereby he eminently declares his Righteousness,
Romans 3.26. the Apostle brings it in with an ingemination, to declare, I say,
his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him that
believes in Jesus; the righteousness of Christ making plenary, yea redundant,
and superabundant satisfaction to offended justice; his justice being
satisfied, yea, honored with Christ's righteousness. Now, he is not only
merciful, but also faithful and just to forgive us our sins, 1 John 1.7. Now
there is a blessed Harmony between the divine Attributes: righteousness and
mercy do sweetly embrace and kiss each other, the Glory of both shine forth
most illustriously in, and by the bloody passion of the Son of God.

Now the Acts of God, the principal Efficient cause are to be distinguished
according to the distinction of the three persons.

1. The Father justifies, as the primary Cause and Author: he gave his only
begotten Son for our justification and salvation, John 3.16.

2. The Father justifies as Legislatour, enacting by his Sovereign Authority,
that sweet Law of the New Covenant, by virtue whereof, every believing sinner
is justified from the guilt of sin, from which he could not be justified by the
Law of Moses. Acts 13.38.39.
This Law of justification by Faith is Gods own act and Deed, the great
Instrumentum pacis between God and man: the Tenor of the Gospel (our Magna
Charta) runs, that he that believes shall be saved.

3. The Father justifies as a Judge, in absolving those that believe, and in
pronouncing them just in Christ, and that in three respects:

1 God justifies upon believing actually.
1. God justifies a believing sinner upon his believing actually: by Faith we
are thus justified, Romans 5.1. Gal. 3.8. By believing he has a Title good in
Law, an indefesible right to all the promises of the Covenant, God then owns,
and approves of him as a person justified.

2. Particularly at Death. Heb. 12.23.
2. At the moment of dissolution God justifies a Believer particularly. (as the
Judge of all, and the Judge of all the Earth); passing a particular private
Sentence of everlasting life upon every believing Soul.

3. Eminently at the Day of Judgment, 3. Eminently at the day of judgment. God
justifies at the last day, by the man Christ Jesus. Act. 17.31.
when the Ancient of Days shall take the Throne, when the Son of Man appearing
in power and great Glory, shall in open Court before all the world by public
Sentence, for ever acquit and discharge Believers at that solemn and Great Day.

Thus the Father justifies.

2. Jesus Christ the Son justifies, as the Mediator and meritorious Cause of
our justification, and that in two respects:

1. As our Surety he paid our Debt, Christ is both: (...), and: (...), a Surety
and a Mediator. (...), redemptionis precium.
and as our Redeemer he laid down the price of our Redemption, Romans 3.23. we
are justified freely by the Grace of God, and yet through the redemption that
is in Christ. His blood was the (...), the price of our redemption, Ephesians. 1.7.
in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins,
according to the riches of his Grace; he is the Mediator of reconciliation
between God and Man.

2. Christ justifies as our Advocate and Intercessor, presenting our persons,
pleading our cause, prevailing with his Father by the speakings of his blood,
that the virtue of his merits may be applied to us, Romans 8.34. It is God that
justifies, who shall condemn? it is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen
again, who also makes intercession for us: there is a rather put upon the
resurrection, and ascension of Christ, 1 John 2.2. we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Thus Christ justifies.

3. The Spirit justifies as the Applicatory Cause, he does reveal and apply to
us the righteousness of Christ for our justification.

1. The Spirit, as the Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation reveals, and discovers
this Robe of Glory to us, this Garment of Salvation: Though the Father has
given the Son, and the Son has given himself for our righteousness, yet it is
the Spirit that applies this righteousness: Revelation and Application is his
peculiar Office.

2. As the Spirit of Regeneration working in us the grace of Faith, Directly.
which is one of the fruits of the Spirit, Causa Causae est ociam, causae
Causati.
whereby we receive and apprehend Christ the Lord our righteousness, unto our
justification in the Court of Heaven: the Spirit justifies as he is the cause
of the cause the Author of Faith that justifies.

Reflectively.
3. As a Spirit of Adoption, by confirming our Faith, by working in us the
assurance of our justification, by sealing us up unto the day of Redemption,
the Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the children
of God, Romans 8.16, 17. Thus the righteousness of God by the revelation of the
Spirit is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17.

Thus much for the principal efficient cause.

2. The instrumental or ministering causes are the Word of God, and Faith.

The Gospel is manus Dei offerentis.
1. The ministry of the Word, is the instrumental cause on Gods part, faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word, Romans 10.17. and in Gal. 3.2. the
Gospel is called the hearing of Faith. God in his Word by his Ministers, does
as it were beseech sinners to be reconciled to him, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. The Word
of God is the vehiculum spiritus, the Chariot of the Spirit, wherein he rides:
the Word is the Wardrope, Isa. 61.10. Matthew. 14.44.
wherein this glorious Robe of Righteousness is laid up, it is the goodly Field
wherein this heavenly treasure is to be found.

2. The second instrumental cause is Faith: Faith is manus accipientis.
Faith is the hand of the Soul, whereby we receive Christ, and apply his
righteousness, Non (...). 1. Primo, and per se, ut qualitas proprie aut motus,
actio vel, vel passio, aut opus aliquod bonum, and eximii precii, quasi ipsa
sit justitia, aut ejus pars, aut etiam justitiae loco, ex censu, and
estimatione Dei, sed (...), secundario, and secundum aliud, nempe ut modus
medium and instrumentum ceu oculus and manus qua Christi, ejusque participes
reddimur, adeoque relative ad objectum Iesum ipsius justitiam, and promissiones
gratiae. Synop. Pur. Theol. p. 442.
John 1.12. Faith justifies, Romans 5.1. But how does faith justify? Faith
justifies, as one expresses it vi legis latae, as it is our evangelical
righteousness, or our keeping the Gospel Law; Faith pretends to no merit, nor
virtue of its own, but professedly avows its dependence upon the merit of
Christ's satisfaction, as our legal righteousness, on which it lays hold; its
excellency arises from Gods Sanction, who made choice of this act of Believing
to the honor of Justification, because it lays the creature low, and so
highly exalts Christ. The Act of believing is as the Silver: Gods Authority
in the Gospel-Sanction, is as the Kings Image stamped upon it; which gives it
all its value as to justification, without this stamp, it could never have been
current. Faith does not justify as an habit, act, work, or quality, (as the
Papists say) but as an instrument or hand to receive Christ and his
righteousness; Unde fides imputatur ad justitiam, ut Paulus loquitur. Rom 4 5.
Non quatenus est qualitas nobis inhaerens, nec quatenus est opus, multo minus
quatenus est meritum, sed metonymia adjuncti correlative intellecta per vocem
fidei justitia Christi, quam fides apprehendit, ut patet ex eodem. cap. 4. v.
11, 13. And again, nec quatenus est cultus Dei, and radi^ omnium aliorum
bonorum operum: sed quatenus nos Christo conglutina: and un^m cum illo facti,
partic pati^ne justitiae ejus f^uamur. Polan. p. 456
Faith is an empty and a naked thing without its Object. Faith puts on this
Robe of Glory, and wraps the Soul in it; but it is this glorious Robe, Christ's
righteousness that justifies. It Is very certain, that the (...) credere cannot,
does not justify, as Socinus, and Arminius teach, it does: It Is true, 't s
said, Romans 4.5. Faith is imputed for righteousness, and is accepted of God
through Christ for the performance of the whole Law: but this is to be
understood metonimically, and relatively in respect of Christ the object of
faith, who is the end and perfection of the Law to them that believe, by
fulfilling the righteousness of the Law for them. Faith invites a Soul to
Christ, brings it into Union with his Person, and so into communion of his
righteousness.

And then for works: what shall we say of them? The Apostle is peremptory and
absolute in his Conclusion Romans 3.28. Therefore we conclude, that a man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the Law. So also, Gal. 2.16 Knowing
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ, etc. that is, by the works which Christ has done in our stead, by the
obedience of Christ, which we apply to our selves by Faith alone: says Polanus.

(...) scripserit Paulus pro (...) sicut etiam accipitur. Matthew. 12.4. 1 Cor
7.17. Beza in loc. sed tantum per fidem Jesus Christi: hoc est per opera quae
Christus loco nostro fecit, per obedientiam Christi quam sola fide noble
applicamus. Polan
Faith justifies a sinner before God, and works justify Faith, and demonstrate
to the world, and to our own consciences that our faith is not dead and barren,
but ( Jam. 2.4.) Living, because fruitful; faith as working, does not justify,
but found justifying faith is a working faith.

2. We come to consider the essential material cause of our justification,
that very thing, which is our righteousness, which God imputes to us, and
accepts on our behalf.

To this I answer. 1. Negatively, 1. Negatively.
what it is not.

1. It cannot be our own righteousness inherent in us, because inchoate and
imperfect, Justitiam, qua-coram Tribunali Dei Consistimus, perfectam omnibus
numeris partibus, and gradibus esse necesse est. Quid enim ex se agere poterat,
ut semel amissam justitiam recuperaret, home servus peccati vinctus Diaboli?
assignata est proinde aliena qui caruit sua. Bernard.
and the righteousness of justification, must be most absolute and perfect, by
the works of the Law shall no flesh be justified, (1) no mere man, Romans 3.20.
We may therefore cry out with Bernard; what is man that is a servant of sin, a
Bondslave of the Devil, able of himself to do, for the recovery of
righteousness once lost? there is therefore the righteousness of another
assigned to him, who has lost his own.

2. Nor secondly is it the righteousness of Christ, merely and solely (as man)
considered: though that was pure and spotless, yet it was not infinite, and
meritorious; for Christ taking upon him an humane nature, was bound to keep the
the Law, being made of a woman, he was also made under the Law; under the
Covenant of Works: Gal. 4.3, 4.
the obedience of Christ merely as man, had been no work of supererogation as
to us, it would have served to justify himself; but without the personal Union,
there would have been no redundancy, or overflowing of merit in it, to justify
those millions of guilty miscreants, Non propter scipsum, sed propter nostram
salutem, and ^b demolitionem mortis, and Condemnationem, Christus Advenit.
Athanas. Orat. Tertia contra Arrian.
who through the infinite grace of the Father by the blood of the Son are
justified. Wherefore Christ came not for himself, but for our salvation, etc.
says Athanasius.

Non est essentialis justitia Dei, ut Andreas Osiander contendebat, cujus
errorem refutavit. Calvin. Institut. tertio libro.
2. It is not the Essential Righteousness of the Godhead, not that
righteousness wherewith God is righteous, it is not the righteousness of Christ
as God solely, though it is called the righteousness of God, 2 Cor. 5.21. Romans
1.17. and so called, because it is the righteousness of him, who is truly God,
as well as truly man, in one person: and it is the righteousness which God
appoints, and accepts for our justication. But it is not the Essential
uncreated righteousness of God, which being the Essence of God, cannot be
communicated to any creature, much less can it become the accidental
righteousness of any creature.

2. Positively.
2. Positively, that which is our righteousness for justification. It is the
most Adequate and perfect obedience of Jesus Christ the Mediator God-man to
the whole Law of God. Consisting in a most exact conformity of his whole humane
Nature with all its actions and passions thereunto: whereby, Justitia Jesus
Christi, per quam justificamur coram Deo, est perfectissima totius legis
divinae obedientia, consistens in exactissima totius naturae Humanae Christi,
omniumque Actionum, and passionum ejus internarum, and externarum conformitate,
cum tota lege Dei, quam loco nostro persectissime implevit, ut nobis a morte
aeterna liberationem, and jus vitae aeternae acquireret. Syntag Polan. p. 457.
both actively, and passively he fulfilled the Law most perfectly.

For proof you may please to read, Romans 8.3, 4. Gal. 4.3, 4. Romans 5.16, 17, 18,
19. For as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience
of one shall many be made righteous, verse. 19. O Believers, this Garment of
Sunbeams wrought out for ye by the Sun of righteousness, must needs be
glorious: if ye consider,

1. That Christ's humane Nature was never stained neither with original, nor
actual sin: for by his divine Conception by the Holy Ghost, he received of his
Virgin Mother, a pure un-deflowred, Virgin Nature, which all along he kept
immaculate.

2. The Humane nature in him is dignified with Union to the Divine, to the
second person in the Trinity, in which it does subsist; as God descended to the
lowest to become man, so now man, (viz.) the humane Nature ascends to the
highest, to be personally one with God. It Is the righteousness of Christ the
Mediator (...) God-man, in one person, though inherent in the Humane Nature,
and performed by it. And this is that which, by communication of properties,
gives infinite value, virtue, and eternal efficacy to the obedience of Jesus
Christ; wherefore it is called the righteousness of God. This I must profess to
be the chief stay of my faith, and the principal foundation of my comfort, that
He is Jehovah our righteousness, Jer. 23.6. that he who is God blessed for
ever, Romans 9.5.
is the root and off spring of David; that it is the Prince of Life that died,
Acts 3.15. that the Lord of Glory was crucified, 1 Cor. 2.8. that, that blood,
which is the price of my redemption and justification is the blood of God; that
he that was in the form of God, Acts 20.28.
and thought it no robbery to be equal with God did humble himself, and became
obedient to the death of the Cross for me, Phil. 2.6, 8 Gal. 2.20.
which whole humiliation of Jesus Christ God-man, from his conception to his
crucifixion, Some say, it consists both in applicatione and pronunciatione
ipsius Dei. Justitia Dei est non peccare: justitia bominis, est non imputari
peccatum. Bernard Sermon 23. ^ Can^c.
especially his bloody passion, is the material cause of our justification.

Thus much for the essential material Cause of our justification.

3. What is the formal Cause of our justification?

I answer, It Is the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, because by imputing
and applying it to us, he is pleased to justify us, Romans 4.11. Psalm 32.1. Romans
4.8. 2 Cor. 5.19. Acts 10.43. Acts 13.28, 29. St. Ambrose, Bishop Downame and
others do express it by this simile; When Rebecca clothed her son Jacob with
the garments of her elder son Esau, the matter of the action, was the garment
of Esau, which being applied to him did cover him; but the form of the action
was the applying it to him, the indution, or putting it upon him; so the matter
of our justification is Christ's righteousness, the formal cause of our
justification, is the Fathers imputing, or applying Christ's righteousness to
us. The Apostle most clearly argues, by way of comparison between Adam and
Christ; Romans 5.17, 18, 19.
how could the disobedience of Adam be made ours for condemnation? or the
obedience of Christ be made ours for justification unto life? but only by
imputation, seeing they are both transient Acts. A learned Philosopher tells
us, Motus non est, nisi dum fit, postquam factus est. non est. Jul. Scaliger.
That a motion, whether action, or passion, has no being, but while it is in
doing, or suffering, but after it is done, it has no being: the disobedience
of the one, and the obedience of the other; the transgression of Adam and the
righteousness of Christ, can be no way conveyed to us, but by imputation: which
term of imputation of Christ's righteousness, (notwithstanding the Papists
scoffing at it, and calling it putative righteousness) is used ten times in
Romans 4.

4. The End or final Cause for which God does justify a sinner by imputation
of Christ's righteousness, and that is either supreme, or subordinate. Utriusque
enim, and misericordiae, and justitiae admirabile hic temperamentum relucet.


1. The supreme End, is the manifestation of the Glory, both of his justice and
mercy, as both which concur in all his works: so chiefly in this great work of
Justification; The Lord is righteous in all his works, and holy in all his
ways, Ps. 145.17.

1. That his Justice might be fully Glorified: God sent and set forth his own
Son to be a propitiation for our sins, and has punished them in his humane
Nature; I say (says the Apostle) to declare his righteousness, Romans 3.25, 26.
that he might be just, and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus. 2.
That his grace and mercy also might eminently be magnified; he has sent his
only begotten Son into the World, that we might be justified freely by his
Grace, through the redemption that is in Christ, Deus Pater nos justificat, ut
judex quidem, sed sedens in Throno Gratiae, etc. Synops.
Romans 3.25. and that we should be to the praise of the glory of his Grace,
wherein he has made us accepted in the Beloved, Ephesians. 1, 6. Wherefore, not
unto us, not unto us, not to any works of righteousness that we have done, but
to the Father of Mercies, the Lord God omnipotent, and to the Lamb that sits
upon the Throne, be all Honor, and Glory, Blessing and praise for evermore,
Revel. 5.13. 2 Timothy 1.9.

2. The subordinate end is our Salvation, Romans 8.30. whom he has justified,
them also he Glorified, Tit. 3.7. That being justified by his Grace, we should
be made heirs of eternal life Though our salvation be our particular proper,
Our (...).
supreme end, or chief good, to which both justification, and sanctification
are referred; yet it is subordinate to Gods Glory, as to the Sovereign and
universal End: for such is the infinite goodness of God to believing sinners,
that he has subordinated their salvation to his own Glory.

The precious properties of this Righteousness; how it is a divine
righteousness, a temptation vanquishing, and a World-overcoming righteousness,
a Law fulfilling, and a justice satisfying righteousness, a most perfect
righteousness, a Glorious Robe of righteousness, an everlasting righteousness,
etc. Ye have heard at large discussed from another Text, therefore I shall
forbear to enlarge herein.

Lastly, What are the blessed fruits and consequences of Justification?

I answer, 1. Sanctification inherent, with good works apparent, which non
praecedunt justificandum, sed sequuntur justificatum, as Austin speaks; they do
not go before, but follow after a state of justification.

2. Peace with God; that is an holy Tranquillity, and sweet serenity of
conscience, Romans 5.1.

3. A free Access to God, Romans 5.2.

4. Certain hope of Glory, Romans 5.2, 5.

5. Consolation, yea Gloriation in, and over afflictions, Romans 5.3.

6. The shedding abroad the love of God into the hearts of the justified, Romans
5.5.

7. Conservation from wrath to come, To. 5.9.

8. Glorification and eternal life, Romans 8.30. Romans 5.21. that as sin has
reigned unto death, even so might Grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

A word or two at parting to the Justified, by way of Application.

1. Walk up to your Duty. 2. Live up to your Comfort.
1. Walk up to your Duty: Ye that are the redeemed of the Lord, the children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus, walk worthy of him who has called you to his
Kingdom and Glory; As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in
him, Col. 2.6. Receive not this Grace of God in vain: this is a certain
evidence of your freedom from Condemnation, if ye walk not after the flesh,
but after the spirit, Romans 8.1. and herein is your father glorified, if ye
bring forth much fruit, John 15.6. As your Receipts are great, so give me leave
to tell you, your duty is, and your Account will be great also: so live, so
act, so work, that ye may give up your account with joy.

2. Live up to the Comfort of your state; ye are already the sons of God, and
it does not yet appear, what ye shall be, 1 John 3.1. who shall lay any thing
to your charge? (whether men or Devils) it is God that justifies, it is Christ
that died, etc. To. 8.33. Behold thy Treasures, thy Comforts, thy Joys, thy
Portion, thy Privileges, laid up for thee in that precious Cabinet, Romans 5.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. Wherefore feed, nay feast thy Soul by faith upon them: wherefore,
in the worst of times; the righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and all the
upright in heart shall glory, Psalm 64.10.

Thus, so far as one Exercise would permit, I have endeavored to give some
satisfaction in the great Argument of Justification. Consider what I have said,
and the Lord give ye understanding; 2 Timothy 2.7. (...).

FINIS.

