THE PROTESTATION OF THE LORDS Upon rejecting the Impeachment of Mr.
Fitz-Harris. March 28. 1681.
BEcause that in all Ages it has been an Undoubted Right of the Commons, to
impeach before the Lords, any Subject, for Treasons, or any Crime whatsoever;
and the reason is, because great Offenses that Influence the Parliament, are
most effectually determined in Parliament.

We cannot reject the Impeachment of the Commons, because that Suit or
Complaint can be determined no where else: For, if the Party Impeached should
be Indicted in the King's Bench, or in any other Court, for the same Offense,
yet it is not the same Suit; for an Impeachment is at the Suit of the People,
and they have an Interest in it, but an Indictment is at the Suit of the King:
For, one and the same Offense may entitle several Persons to several Suits; as,
if a Murder be committed, the King may indite at his Suit, and the Heir, or the
Wife of the Party murdered may bring an Which is always to be preferred, and
upon notice thereof, all Prosecutions at the Suit of the King is to stop, till
the Prosecution at the Suit of the Party be determined.
Appeal; and the King cannot release that Appeal, nor his Indictment prevent
the Proceedings in the Appeal; because the Appeal is the Suit of the Party, and
he has an Interest in it.

It is, as we conceive, an absolute Denial of Justice, in regard, as it is said
before, the same Suit cannot be tried any where else. The House of Peers, as to
Impeachments, proceed by virtue of their Judicial Power, and not by their
Legislative; and as to that, act as a Court of Record, and can deny Suitors
(especially the Commons of England, that bring Legal Complaint before them) no
more than the Justices of Westminster Hall, or other Courts can deny any Suit
or Criminal Cause, that is regularly commenced before them.

Our Law says, in the Person of the King, Nulli negabimus Justitiam, we will
deny Justice to no single Person; yet here, as we apprehend; Justice is denied
to the whole Body of the People; this may be interpreted, an Exercising of
Arbitrary Power, and will, as we fear, have Influence upon the Constitution of
the English Government, and be an Encouragement to all inferior Courts, to
exercise the same Arbitrary Power, by denying the Presentiments of Grand Juries,
etc. for which, at this time, the Chief Justice stands impeached in the House
of Peers.

These Proceedings may misrepresent the House of Peers to the King and People,
especially, at this time; and the more, in the particular Case of Edward
Fitz-Harris, who is publicly known to be concerned in vile and horrid Treasons
against his Majesty, and a great Conspirator in the Popish Plot, to murder the
King, and destroy and subvert the Protestant Religion.

Monmouth Kent Huntington Bedford Salisbury Clare Stamford Sunderland Essex
Shaftsbury Macklesfield Mordant Wharton Westmorland Paget Gray of Wark Herbert
of Cherbury Cornwallis Lovelace Crew
LONDON, Printed for Francis Smith, at the Elephant and Castle in Cornhill.
MDCLXXXI.


