THE SIEGE OF Constantinople; A TRAGEDY Acted at the DUKE'S Theater.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Dring, at the Harrow over against the Inner Temple
Gate, Fleetstreet, 1675.

PROLOGUE TO THE Siege of CONSTANTINOPLE.
POets and Duellists have the same Fate;
The bravest man may be Unfortunate:
You that resolve to rail at every Play,
Like pious men, worldly delights betray;
But if you will never please your selves you may.
So mirth is lost, whilst Fools dispraise the Wine;
So Punk is dangerous be she never so fine;
Thus subtly you against all your joys ^ombine.
And warily by Arguments destroy
Those very pleasures which you should enjoy:
Love Crowned with Beauty and Success can cloy.
Since at the best, your pleasures are so few,
Make your selves any where you find'em new.
Be kind to us; and she who faild to Night:
This Play, if praised, to morrow will invite
To meet you here, and your lost time requite.
It Is true, of late you justly have complained:
But thank your selves for what your Niceness gained;
When you before were such high Critticks grown,
As if Wit only were by Censuring known
In praising, where it is due, Wit may be shown.
Severity does modest Authors fright
Self-prizing Fops with French Assurance write.
Those who have Wit, like wary Gamesters fear
To hazard sums, where but small gains appear.
Whilst empty Fools more briskly do expose
A Reputation, which they can not Lose.
The Persons Names.
Emperor of Constantinople. Thomazo His Brother. Lord Chancellor Cardinal.
Justiniano General. Theophilus L. Chamberlain. Dorello Friend to Thomazo.
Michael and Lorenzo
The Chancellors Secretaries. Andrea Lionello
Two Captains. Sinan. A Turkish Bashaw. Mutantrope Messenger. Servants. Calista
Chancellors Daughter. Irene Chamberlains Daughter. Idoxia. Several Christian
Soldiers. Several Turkish Soldiers. Mutes.
Scene Constantinople. The SIEGE of Constantinople.
ACT I.
The Curtain drawn, discovers the Emperor, Thomazo, Theophilus, and Dorello on
one side of a Table, the Cardinal, Chancellor, and Justiniano on the other, as
at Council; they arise and Exeunt, all with great reverence to the Emperor,
except Thomazo and Dorello, who stay with him. Thom. SIr, they have carried it,
and you agree,
It is by strength of Argument and Reason;
Since they have the major part: yet I Will confess
I Am unconverted still. This Rule of most
Appears to me stark madness; when that most
Are plainly prejudiced, and led by faction,
In that case be they never so numerous,
All should be counted nothing that they say,
For such arn't Counselors but Advocates,
And plead the cause of their own Interest.

Emper. But Brother say, how Princes like my self,
That circumscribe our actions by our Laws,
Can steer through all the Labyrinths of state,
Shun Rocks and sholes hid under sinoothest brows;
Meet and despise cross Tides, and adverse Winds;
That run and blow from several States-mens heads,
More various in their Changes far than those
That puzzle able Pilotes on the Sea;
What way I say, but by these major Votes.
The true Magnetic needle of the States.

Thom. Sir, I Will allow Councels the perfect compass,
And major Votes in that the needle too.
But yet true Pilotes still observe, the Causes
Often make that vary from the polar Star,
Which when they see it does, let that point on,
They mind it not; but to observe its error;
And what loved Headland it would guide unto;
And he that does not this, though he may make
One Voyage safe, must not be called a Pilate;
And this is your case now. Your this days council
That rashly have advised you Sir for War,
Have several private reasons for that Vote,
Besides the specious ones they back it with.

Emper. I cannot think it Sir: They Are all wisemen,
And honest I believe; but were they not,
The grand concern this Council has debated
Affects no less than all the Christian world:
It is indeed, choose Christ or Mahomet,
Whose Law shall have the universal sway,
And can a Christian think that Christians would
Give selfish Councels in their Saviors cause?
It is not charitable; it is not Brother
Now by my Crown you're too too positive,
And to no purpose neither. I Am resolved --
[Exeunt.
Thom. Resolved! on your own Ruin Sir I fear.
Christian! Ay, that is the word; but Interest
Is the thing. That Damned Chancellor,
Romes Pentionary lately, now the Turks --

Dorel. Nay, may be both's Sir still --

Thom. Most likely so.
H'has Province after Province, sold the Realm
To this one Town almost; yet now forsooth
It is below our Honors to pay Tribute,
Alas that may make a Title; as if a Turk
Regarded any Title but Possession;
Whilst we were able, I still pressed a War,
To keep the danger further from our Home,
Or drive it over the Hellespont again,
But then 'twas wisely urged that my Ambition
Aimed to be popular amongst the Soldiers;
And this my Brothers jealousy gave ear to;
As if a Brother that would ba^ely aim
At Empire by Disloyalty and T^on,
Would stand upon the way to compass it;
No, they mistake my temper: All I seek,
Is bright unsullied glory: I Would not be
Sole Monarch of the world by one base deed;
No, by my great and everlasting hopes
I would not, my Dorello.

Dor. Sir, they know that too well, they durst not else
Play with the fire that might perhaps consume 'em;
But it is their sole Advantage you are honest.

Thom. And mine too; for the horrid pangs of guilt
That hourly torture them, and make 'em watch
The small and busy Whispers of the Crowd,
That buz in Courts, and make the thing called State
Never trouble me; I can undiscompos'd
Receive some ill-taught, rugged man oth'Guard,
Rudely advancing to me from his place
To ask some Boon; when they at such a time
Boggle, and stand amazed, expecting from him
The guilty, tho the well deserved blow:
Their Dreams too I Am assured are all composed
Of Prisons, Axes, Daggers, and sudden Stabs;
Flight aster Battle, or such dreadful things,
When mine are made of sweet and pleasant walks,
By Crystal streams, set all with Bays and Mi^tle;
Or else in Fields, where every step I take,
I meet a Love, or joyful Victory.
And who would have the best part of his life,
Sweet sleep so spoild, and lose its name of rest
By ills, whose ends obtained, are far less sollid.
Come then; whilst these bad men are faintly pleased
At this new Conquest over th'Emperors soul,
And busily are framing Keys and Ciphers
Falsely to give as false Intelligence;
"Let thou and I Dorello, free from care,
"To mirth and love our joyful minutes spare.
[Exeunt.
Enter Cardinal, Chancellor, Justiniano. Card. The Prince Thomazo reason
strongly urged
Against the War, and almost carried it;
He is a Prince of large and steady parts.

Chanc. Ay Sir, the more we justly fear his power;
The Empire dreads not more its foreign Foes,
Then it does him at home; besides, you see
How fiercely he proposes joining with
The Turks themselves, rather than Western Kings.
There Is rooted in his soul the Ancient hate
This Empire showed in the first holy War,
When they betrayed those pious, valiant Knights,
Godfrey of Bulloign, Robert of Normandy,
And all the holy Cruciado'd Pilgrims,
That did accompany or follow them:
But let us no more of him; it is in his blood:
He hates both you and me, nay more unjustly
Envies the Deeds of our brave General,
Great Justiniano here, without whose help
This barbarous Turk would quickly swallow us:
But do not be discouraged Sir; you will find
The Emperor your true and faithful Friend:
And me your Servant, constant to your merit.

Justin. I do not doubt it Sir, nor fear his envy,
The Genowees my valiant Countrymen,
Give them their pay, will fight in following me,
Till they and I perform such mighty things,
Shall turn that envy into admiration.
Envy me! It stirs my rage methinks to hear it named;
That any Greek, though of the greatest blood,
Should so exalt his thoughts to envy me!

Chanc. Your Anger's great, and noble, Sir: but spare it;
'Twas his Ambition to have had your place.
And whilst that hope continued, he was still
Pressing for War, though now what man so Peaceful!
But fear him not; I Will watch the Emperor
That no affront shall e're be placed upon you.

Justin. On me affront! what Prince so hardy dares it?
Let him, that does it, though the Turks were here,
Here close before our Walls, expect and sind,
I Will turn this noble City to a slame,
And then like Zenophon from th'mid'st of Persia,
I Would force my way through all the Turkish Camp,
And carry back my full four thousand men
To Genoa again. This I would do Sir,
And on the least Affront; by Heavens I would,
And tell the Emperor this, and so farewell;
You Have heated me; I am not fit for Council.
[Exeunt.
Chanc. How his brave Rage becomes him! It Is a Crime
In a great Soldier to be Ceremonious,
They that can laugh at Death on days of 's Triumph,
When circl'd round with Javelings, Spears, and Darts,
Arrows, Pikes, Partisans, and battle-Axes;
Mounted on Chariots, armed with murdering Sithes
Mowing down life it self, in fields of men,
And praised by plaudits of the thundering Canon,
Almost annihilating those they kill;
Those that (I say) can meet Death thus and smile,
Need not concern themselves in lesser sears.

Card. He Is of that Country fame has ever courted,
For Arts and Arms, sweet fertile Italy,
And without Arrogance, though I Am its native:
I Will say, no Nation under Heaven comes near it
Now; though its Eagles wings are quite displum'd
For Soldiers, Statesmen, or Philosophers.

Chanc. We need not travel thither Sir for proof
That the true Roman virtue is not spent,
Which civilized the greatest part oth' World,
Since in your self we have full evidence,
Your Eminence speaks Rome in her full Luster.

Card. My Lord, your Complement I Will send to Rome,
It was I know designed his Holiness,
And I Will not rob him of it: It Is too high
For me his poor and humble Immitator.
But my Lord,
All I can say will not heighten his esteem
Of your true Zeal, Wisdom or Piety,
That under Heaven are like to have the glory
Of rooting up this long continued Schism,
And giving to St. Peter's Chair his due.

Chanc. It Is all the honor in this world I wish.

Cardin. I Will not defer my Letters Sir for Rome,
That they may know your pious resolution
Of staking all against this barbarous Turk.

Chanc. I wish your Eminence, would press them hard
For speedy succors, and that his Holiness
Would interpose his sacred admonitions
To reconcile the Kings of France and England,
That private discords, laid by them aside,
They might assist the general Christian Cause:

Card. I shall not fail it.

Chanc. Your Letters writ, the Emperors express
Shall wait upon Eminence for them.

Card. Your Lordships faithful Servant.

Chanc. Your Eminencies Creature.
[ Exeunt Cardinal. Who waits there? Call Michael my new
Secretary to me!
Dance mighty Genius at my growing Fate,
All things as well as Thee conspire my glory:
What a dull Earth-born crowd of grovelling souls
Are all men but my self, I yet could meet with:
This Cardinal, the Cato now of Rome,
How I unnerve his Reason when I speak,
And make his Rhetoric lacqu't after mine.
That Soldier too, the Cethegus of Genoa;
How I can make him by one single word
Rage or be calm, humble or insolent;
These are good Tools to work with, I consess,
But it is in hands, that manage 'em like me,
Not in an Emperors, whose honest soul
Sees not the inside of his own affairs,
But winds and turns, totters, and then grows steady,
Not as his own, but my designs require it.
[ Enter Michael, Michael, my faithful friend, though
Seeming Servant --
Write presently to thy great Lord and mine,
That with all speed that may be, he advances,
And claps before our Walls: I in the Council
According to my promise carried it
For War, and to refuse the Tribute he requires,
The Western Princes the wise Emperor
Relys on, will be long consulting on it
Before that they conclude of our relief,
And longer e're they send it.

Micha. What excuse
Shall I my Lord make unto Synan Bassa,
That you have taken in 4000 men
Under this Justiniano; These recruits --

Chanc. Shall make us far more feeble than we were,
As I will order it; for the Senate,
I Will still possess with jealousies and fears
Of Laws subverting, and religious change,
That they no aid shall to the Emperor give;
Then in due time these men shall mutiny,
And so the Town is his: besides, these Aids
Were the sole argument against Prince Thomazo,
That we would weather out the growing storm
Till larger succors come from Italy.
Inform the Bassa this under your Cipher,
My Letters of the rest shall streng then yours;
And bid Lorenzo come
[ Exeunt Michael. So much for Adrianople, now for Rome.
Enter Lorenzo. Lorenzo! my ever true Lorenzo; prithee quickly,
Prepare a trusty Currier for Rome,
To the Cardinal Patron; let your Letters be
To this effect; That I Have received his Bills,
And thank him for 'em; Tell him too
The Wars decreed in Council spite of Thomazo,
And a Defiance sent to Mahomet,
Who I believe's on's March: Next, that the Ayds
He or his Holiness intends to send,
Let 'em not come, till joined with the other Forces
The rest of the Christian Princes may prepare,
They may prove useless else. So far in yours. --
And mine shall speak the rest.
[ Exit. Lorenzo. I know their minds --
The Turk must take this Town, and then the Pope
Will have no Rival Bishop in the World.
Let them have their design, so I can be
G^and Vizier to this growing Monarchy.
[ Exit. Chancel.
Enter Thomazo, Dorello, Irene, Udoxia, attended by Mutantrope. Irene. Was my
Ambition, but what is Natural,
To our half-witted Sex. your Highness would not
Be troubled to pursue, but to avoid;
But I Will confess before Udoxia here,
And your Dorello too, the more you speak
Of Love to me --
The more I must deny; nay, I shall find
From every new obliging word you utter,
New Arguments to make me obstinate.

Thom. Ah Irene! Can harsh and cruel words like these you speak,
Be prompted by your heart, and yet your brow
Calm and serene, take no Impressions from it.
You deal by me like wanton cruel Judges,
That change a Jest with the poor Criminal
Their next breath must condemn.

Iren. No Sir, rather
Like a just Favorite, who from his Prince
Refuses to accept some mighty Grace,
'Cause it may bring his Masters prudence into question;
I, through your proffered friendship Sir, can well
Discern the Crime of state I should commit
Both against your Person and this Empire too,
If I should suffer you to make me yours.

Thom. Wave these neglected things Empire and State
They Are scarce of Kin to me; but if they were,
Power was designed to make its Owner happy;
Not to confine him Slave to Drudge for it.
A Prince, whose Title's good, never never doubt:
Let him studdy; but his Power is so;
If, (as I never shall wish) a Diadem
Should once adorn this head. No act of mine.
Act said I! not the most minute Expression
Should flow from one restrained; No: all should know
What I said should be, surely should be so.
To one resolved to Reign on Terms like these,
The Empires safe, let him do what he please;
So Madam I desire you would not mix
Affairs of State with my free Love.

Irene. Sir, yo're so great and generous, you teach me
To be so too; therefore I Will plainly tell you
I cannot Marry you, for I already am engaged.

Thom. Ah Madam.

Dorel. Udoxia, Say no more, it must be so!
You hear her own it.

Udox. What is that to me?
Tho I confess I Am very much amazed
To hear her own Passion I never dreamed of.

Dor. As Soon I should believe Thomazo had
A secret, he would not let Dorello know
As that Irene has one you not partake.
But Madam; let me dye in your neglects,
Regarded less than your weak tatling Woman,
To whom I dare be sworn you have told all this.

Udox. Go false Dorello! go false wicked Lord;
I now perceive the end of all your Vows;
It was to mix your passion with the Princes,
Not in esteem of me, but to serve him;
But I Am glad this Secret was not Mine to tell you!

Dor. Udoxia! you do well.

Udox. No more my Lord,
This is an office for your Serving-man. --

Iren. My Love, like Mutantrope, your Highness Boy,
Does now and then make signs, but cannot speak;
This disserence only is, my Love can hear,
Though dumb, like him it must for ever be.

Thom. Let it make signs that are as plain as his:
It Is all I Will ask; I would but know his Name,
Whose mighty merit has obtained your Love:
Come Mutantrope, teach a Dumb God thy Art --
Ah Boy that this was truth!
Thom. Signs. Mutan. answers in signs, all list,
Irene. What is it he says?

Thoma. I shall but mock my self in telling you:
But yet I will -- He says that you Love me --

Iren. Fie Sir! you make me blush. I know he did not.

Dorell. He said it on my life, and swore it by signs.
I Will ask him, Madam, how he comes to know it!

Iren. Know it! good Dorello, say not so,
I know my Duty better -- if you please
Ask him, why he thinks so --
But pray my Lord, tell Truth; what were his
Dor. makes signs; he answers them: Thom. whispers Iren. Signs?

Dorell. He says by This, he is sure you love his Master;
Then, when he brings you Letters, you first Kiss them,
Then thrust 'em in your Bosom; then reading them,
You Kiss at every word; besides, he says
You make so much of him when he brings Letters,
That he is well assured you Love the Sender.

Thom. Do I not tell you, Madam, just the same?

Iren. Come, he is a Wagg; send him no more to me,
He invents all this to please you!

Enter Theophilus. Theo. The Emperor Sir, has Dined!

Thom. What! will he not be at the Mask, my Lord?

Theo. I scarce believe he will; He and the General
Are gone to view theo Wrks -- your Highness pardon!
Daughter, a word with you --

Thom. Ah Udoxia!
Is it not sad to be supplanted thus? --
There, where I thought I Would taken a little root,
Hope in my love, like early blossomed fruit
By one late frost is nipt. --

Udox. Sir, I believe it is a blasting season
Of love and friendship; both this noise of war
Like bitter, black, and rugged North-East winds,
Drives back the merry Spring of all delights.

Dor. Sir, you may trust Udoxia, none knows better.

Udox. Yes, by Experience, you much more Dorello! --

Thom. Is my Friends Fate and mine so mixed together,
That I being wretched, he must needs be so:
I thought to sigh my griefs to happy Lovers,
That free from their own Cares, might pity me!

Udox. I hope your Highness needs it not, since now.
Dorello has left sisting me for Secrets
To quarrel with me.

Thom. I understand not this.

Udox. He will explain it when next he laughs at me.
Irene is going Sir; it is time to dress.
[ Exit. Iron. and Udox.
Theop. The Emperor has given his final Answer
To the Turkish Chiaws -- all Tribute is denied:
So I believe we must expect a War:
And that brought home to us; but 'cis no matter;
Our Walls are strong, our People numerous,
Rich too, beyond Saciety; so that Soldiers
Will find their Pay, and they still follow that:
Besides, our Western Aids, the Cardinal
Does undertake shall speedily be here.

Thom. From whence? My Lord, the Pope, for all his Posts,
I Am sure does wish our Ruin! His help will come
When he has reconciled England and France,
So well to join their Arms to succor us,
That will be never; Spain is still struggling
Against the Moors; and Germany
Is busi'd with Religious Mutineers:
Whence must come Succor then, except from Heaven,
And our own Courages; which could we join
Might do the work: but I do fear that too.

Theop. First humbly craving of your Highness, pardon
For arguing against your Sense; I will remember
The Sultan, as the Chancellor assures us,
For all his braggs cannot be here these five Months:
Then, the Pope has 30 Galleys ready
With 15000nd. men: These Succors will
Within Six weeks be here; or there is no Faith
Left amongst Christians; for the Cardinal swears it.
Then Sir, the States of Genoa and Venice
Will send us 40. more; It Is their own business:
These helps are certain Sir --

Thom. Ay; when they are here! --

Theo. Sir, you are all composed of Unbelief;
The Council doubts, the Emperor fears it in you,
And I in humble Duty tell you this.

Thom. I know your hearty love does prompt these words;
And I am not angry at them; but my Lord,
The Court or Counsels doubts, nor Emperors fears,
Shant make me silent, when I see my Prince betrayed,
My Prince and Brother too; could I do that
With Justice, then they might say I was guilty
Of those Ambitious projects that they dream of;
But the false Chancellor with all his tricks,
His little purblind tricks of cokesing parties,
Shall never gain me to be a property
For him to stalk withal --

Theo. I hope your Holiness
Will easily believe I had no design
To put you into passion; but my Lord,
'I is time to change the subject -- Sir, the Court
Does come in Masquerade tho'tis by daylight,
To avoid the Danger that some fewds may bring.

Thom. Then it is not a set Masque.

Theop. No, nothing but a Dance, or so
Mixed with all freedom, for the Court Spectators
To mend the Sports themselves by their own Dancing.

Thom. Dorello come! Let you and I go dress --

Theop. Your Highness humble Creature.
[Exeunt.
Enter a Servant, Andrea and Lionello. Andr. Surely the General will come see
these Sports.

Lionel. No doubt on it, let us stay for him.

Serve. Noble Captains!
All persons will be here incognito,
It is the orders of the Entertainment,
And you must needs comply, or go away.

Andr. Must! to a Soldier; Sawsy Groom, we will not;
Let the Court-Butter-slies come how they will,
We are resolved to show our faces here.

Serve. My Lord Chamberlain will be angry Sir: These
Are his Lodgings.

Lion. We care not whose they be, nor for his anger;
Our Swords will find an universal freedom
In spite of your Court-tricks -- then hold your prating --

Serve. Well Gallants, mark the end on it.
[Exit.
Enter Irene and Eudoxia Masqu'd. Andr. These are Women Lionello sure --

Lionel. Ladys, The number's equal, and the field clear,
Why should we not engage?

Andr. Ha! Dumb! these sure are moving Statues.

Lion. But of Pigmalion's making, fit for Man.
I Will feel if this be warm; how! Coy, Lady!
Not a sost touch go down; it is pity Faith
I have not you singly here; we would sure feel out
A better understanding e're we parted.

Udox. How got these rude men in I wonder Cozen?

Iren. Never mind them Madam, the Officers will come
And send 'em hence anon.

Andr. No Demi-treble, there is none so bold that dares it:
Therefore good Queen of the Diamonds, let me try
How the Cherries of your lips taste.

Iren. Insolent Baffoon! stand off.
[Strikes him.
Andr. How Is this? So nimble with your upper tire,
I Will try what bore your nether Quarters carry.
Come, at 'em Lionella.
[They ruffle them.
Enter Theophilus. Theo. Ruffians! what rudeness is this? Know you this place?

Andr. What an old Fool it is to ask that question.
Old men are silly things: but Lionello,
That shall not spoil our sport.

Theop. Sure Gallants, these
Are no becoming actions in a Court --
Such places should be Sacred.

Andr. Ay so are Churches, yet some are so wicked as to appoint
Bawdy Meetings there --
Sacred -- a pretty word! Alas, my Lord,
Your Dancing-days are done; all places now
Are Sacred where you come, except for spitting.

Lionel. Sure this old Lord Andrea has been right
When he was young; he now does so contrive
To bring young things a clicketting together.

Theop. Since you are Strangers, I forgive your rudeness;
But pray be gone and learn some better manners
Against next time you come; or you will find
This place no Court of Guard --

Lionel. Oh Heaven's Andrea!
How the old Creature raves: Prithee Good man,
Consider Turks are coming. Turks do you hear! --
What place will then be Sacred, if we don't
By our undaunted Courage keep them so!
In fine, do you see my Lord, we know this place
To be our Garrison, where we will be free,
Nay too, without the Laws of Masquerade --

Andr. Ay Masquerade is Sacred too; I Will warrant you
Though to be intended to help folks to do --

Theo. What? --

Andr. It has but an odd name, and fitter it is
To practice, than to speak it. Stand but still
We Will make your old Chops water presently.

Theo. Villains forbear! Ho Azo! Ho Arosto!
Draws; they disarm him.
Lion. Keep your old Chops together, I Will
Cut your Throat else.

Enter Thomazo in Disguise. Thom. What Insolence is this? Villains, Slaves!

Andr. This is some real Devil sure, he fights so.
[Fights: [He throws down one, and disarms the other.
Thom. That needs not be; for you Ladies, you are safe.
What are you, dare do this?
[Unmasques.
Andr. We are Soldiers, like your Highness: Italian Officers:
We were on slight discoveries pickeering a little.

Enter Servants. Thom. Your General shall know this; There, secure them.

Theo. To th'Porters Lodge with them -- ha! Is It you.
[The Ladies Unmaske. What made you out so soon?

Iren. To Avoid being known! for who could think such Ruffians
Could have got in! I hope your Highness has not received a hurt.

Thom. No new one: But I Will go
Out for a little time, and shist my shape, and then return;
I else may spode the Mirth, by being known.
[ Exit Thoma. and Theoph.
Enter Calista; they go to Mask: She unmasks. Irene. It Is our best way to do so
too Udoxia.

Calist. Nay, it is too late Ladies, I know you both;
But I will be so just, you shall know me.

Irene. Calista! It Is a pretty Vest that you have on.

Calist. But I do like your dress much better Madam --

Udox. It Is not the Clothes, but Friendship prompts this liking;
As change, and you will see.

Calist. Withal my heart. --

Irene. I readily consent.

Udox. Come then retire,
You Will see it is not the Clothes you both admire.
[ Music plays; Enter several persons as to Masquerade; amongst them Thomazo,
Dorello, Irene, Udoxia, and Calista.
A Song. After the Song, a Dance led by Ambition, Represented by a Monster with
many Bodies, and but one Head, with a Crown upon it, followed by War, Famine,
Murder, and Death: The Dance brought up by Fame, represented by one Body, and
several Heads and Hands, each having a Trumpet in it. Toward the end of the
Dance Thomazo removes toward Calista, supposing her to be Irene by her Habit.
Thom. This is Irene; I know her by her Dress:
Love, Madam, like to yours, is a worse Monster
Than black Ambition is described to be;
For Fame attending him does always sound
Such loud Alarmes to the drowzy World,
That men to Arms can fly for their defense;
But against silent Love there is no guard.

Calist. Love tells me it is the Prince Thomazo's voice!
But why all this to me? I cannot tell,
Except my heart has taught my eyes to speak
And say that bleeds for him.

Thom. My Mutantrope
Has by his signs, I fear, done me some hurt:
But Madam, be not too severely angry;
He never shall take that liberty again.

Calist. It Is he, the naming of his Mutantrope confirms it.
[aside. Now mighty Love assist me, and I Will be
Thy Voteresse for ever.
Noble Prince!
Your Highness Love has chosen too low an object,
If I be it, as I shall ever doubt.

Thom. Ah Madam, say not so! --
[They Whisper.
Iren. Why should Thomazo single thus Calista.
[A Jigg here.
Thom. You made me Madam, more than happy now.

Irene. What Is this? Cursed be my Ears for hearing it,
And Cursed be all men for Thomazo's sake!
Is he so amorous that Calista can
Possess a place in that false heart of his;
Calista, whom he always seemed to loath
For being Daughter to the Chancellor.

Thom. Madam! I Will keep my word; no trick of State
Shall bar my happiness: At break of Day,
In St. Sophia's Church I Will meet you, Madam,
Just by our Ladies Altar: Bring Udoxia,
I Will bring Dorello, they will be enough
To witness we are Married.

Irene. But false man!
You shall have more, for I Will be there my self
To throw thy broken Vows amongst those you make:
Those shall give Plagues to all your Nuptial hours,
And change the Blessings of the Priests to Curses.

Thom. Let not your Father know the least of this,
That Notice may not be taken of our Whispers.
I Will lead you out to Dance.

Udox. Be not too rash, consider it is your self
Did give him cause for this; you owned you Loved,
And said with all, you never could Marry him.

Iren. In such an Air, and such a Tone I spoke it;
It could not mean him ill.
[Dance of Eight. But see my Father. --

Enter Theophilus, Emperor, Justiniano, Andrea, Lionello, Mutantrope, Guards.
Theop. The Emperor is present, and commands
That all avoid the Room, who are in Disguise,
Except the Prince Thomazo. -- Pray withdraw.
[ Ex. All the Masquers.
Emper. Brother, it is strange you bear no more respect
To our Commands, nor to the General,
But have Imprisoned these two Officers
Without his Privity.

Thom. I know your Majesty did never intend
To exempt them from common Justice,
And make them Lawless. Their Insolence --

Justian. Insolence! How mean you by that word?
I Would have your Highness eat it up again,
And called neglect. --

Thom. How! eat my words my Lord?
The Sacred presence of this dread Majesty
Restraines me, or by Heaven --

Justin. What would you else?
Nay, what durst you do my Lord? my Honor
Full fledged can mount above your weak observance,
Though you're oth'Eagles Brood. --

Emp. How Is this? My Lord, do you our Brother know?
And where you speak this to him?

Just. Yes Sir! or --

Thom. Or what? Let not your Pride profane this --

Justin. Profane a --

Empr. Out of our presence.

Justin. Ay, and your Empire to.
I Will beat my Drums but for an exercise,
And sport my men out of your large Dominions --

Empr. Seize on the Traitor! -- So, convey him hence
To the Castle, Prisoner. I Will never endure this.

Justin. Send all my men to Prison too, else in vain
You hope to keep me here. --
[ Ex. Justin. Guards.
Thom. Your Majesty
May now perceive the Insolence of Strangers,
When once they know you need them: But I am
Too blame to urge this now --

Emp. No, not at all;
By this one hours discourse I have had with him,
I find his Pride to be beyond enduring;
He boasts our Safety must proceed from him,
And quotes the Chancellor for saying this;
I do begin to doubt the Arts of him too.

Thom. Sir, he is a Traitor, or I Am not a man.

Enter Chancellor. Chanc. Your Majesty must pardon this Intrusion,
Your Highness too; my hasty Zeal requires it;
Letters just now arrived bring certain word
The Sultan's on his March, and will this Night
Be lodged before our Walls.

Thom. How Is this my Lord?

Emp. By this Surprizal we are lost for ever.
Ah gracious Heaven, take back this burden, life,
Before I see the Miseries are coming.

Thom. This ill agrees my Lord with your last news
Of five months hence, they could not come before;
But it is what I expected -- This sudden danger
Must prompt your Majesty with double Vigor.
To make sharp opposition -- Sir, arrest
All Ships are in the Harbor, sieze their stores
Of Guns and Ammunition -- with the Guards,
And some oth' Genoway Foot: I Will out and meet 'em --

Emp. No! I am resolved
To Head our first attempt with my own person.
The Turks shall find it is not our want of Courage,
But factions in our State that makes them be
Successful still in all their Wars against us.

Tho. Good Sir be pleased to trust me with this Sally:
Your presence is most needful in the Town;
At such a time as this you will find the people
Prompted by fear too apt for all sedition;
May be the Soldiers too may take advantage
Of the first uprore which this news will bring,
And fall to doing mischief; besides great Sir,
You Will find new Orders every minute needful,
Which none but your Authority can give.

Emp. Your reasons shall persuade me, go Thomazo,
And may Heaven Crown thy Sword with Victory.

Thom. Good Sir be strong
To your Imperial self, that is all I Will say;
If so, I make no doubt by th'help of Heaven
To drive this Sultan back with as much shame.
As once his Father found when he besieged us.
[ Ex. Thomaze.
Chanc. The Prince does show a great and generous Soul,
And will no doubt perform all that he speaks;
But give me leave to think he has his ends
In all he does or says -- Sir, this advice
Of seizing all the Ships, the Senate sitting
With wonted freedom, I must boldly say
Shows he would put you on ungrateful things,
Whilst he pursues the popular himself.

Empr. My Lord, your Circumspection wears a Cloud
I cannot well see through; and I must tell you
Your salse Intelligence and close intriguing
Give me some hints for doubts; but let your actions
Wear a more candid outside, it is not else
Your Interest in the Senate shall protect you.
No Sir! it shall not! but no reply my Lord:
As for my Brother, I am sure he loves me;
I Have found he has, and cannot now suspect him.

Chanc. Do not Sir; but yet I must attempt
T'unloose one charm h'has placed upon your Soul.
That Is Sir, about the General -- It Is not a time
To stand on slight punctilio's with such men
As understand them not: This his restraint
May chance endanger all; grant Sir, his freedom.

Empr. I cannot do it, and Majesty be safe:
His Insolence both to the Prince and me
Was more then Brutal --

Chanc. But your Majesty
Should well consider leading Circumstances
That did provoke him to it: The Prince you know
Had against conditions of his Entertainment
Imprisoned two of's Captains --

Empr. Speak no more on it;
"I Will not release him till my Brother please;
"Contempt of Power is a State's worst Disease.
[Exeunt.
End of the first Act.
ACT. II.
SCENE The Palace. Enter Emperor and Chancellor discoursing. Emp. THese
doubts of theirs concerning such wild things,
That Sovereign Power may do, amaze me;
Because it is possible we may do harm,
Will they conclude we certainly do it?

Chanc. Your Majesty
Has had no cause to doubt their steady Loves
To your Imperial Interest and Person.

Emp. It Is true, my Lord, nor can my memory
Prompt me with want of care of them or theirs:
None of my Predecessors ever were
More careful of Propriety than I;
Therefore I cannot choose but take unkindly
Motions, like these, just on the Neck of War.

Enter Theophilus. Theop. Our Scouts are beaten in; the Turks Vanguard
Are easily discerned from off the Steeples,
Which does all the Streets produce the Cries
Of Women, Children, and the heartless Crowd
That nothing but Confusion fills the Town.

Emp. It cannot be helped; my Lord, we must endure it.
These Noises fill the Streets of every place,
When they are first besieged; a day or two
Will quiet all their minds.

Theop. I hope it will; but, my Lord Chancellor,
The short five months, since morning, makes me doubt
I have unknown unto my self been sleeping;
Or else that your Intelligence deceives you:
Or if not that, then you deceive us all.

Chanc. Methinks, my Lord, the liberty you take,
Does scarce become this Presence.

Theop. Why, my Lord,
I Am sure his Majesty will pardon me,
Since it is my plain and honest heart that speaks;
And I must own, it was your bold affirming,
That we had full five months for preparation,
Which got my Vote for War. But now I fear
The Rumour's true, that you have got a Turk
To manage your Intelligence.

Chanc. How Is this?
Your Majesty, I hope, will do me Justice
Against this Calumny?

Emp. Lord Chamberlain,
What grounds have you for this?

Theop. Truly no more
Than half the Lords of the Councels just suspicion;
Nay, the better half; but they perchance may err,
It is not the first time, witness the approaching Siege.

Chanc. My Lord, you would have done more like a Friend
IN have told me of such Rumors privately.

Theop. Good my Lord, is not this Presence private?
Who Is here but's Majesty, and you, and I;
As I am a Privy Counselor I speak it.

Chanc. Explain your self; who, and what is it you mean?

Theop. I mean you have a Secretary called Michael. --
Some say he is a Turk;
Enter Michael. And this Sir is the Man.

Chanc. What causes this Intrusion?

Micha. I come in haste
To give you notice all the English Ships,
And the Venetian too, are under Sail;
Except they be arrested presently,
They will get past the Forts.

Emp. Is not the Warrant issued for their stay?

Chanc. A Broad-Seal-Warrant too.

Mich. That Sir they slight.

Emp. They might slight Death as well.

Mich. Sir, they pretend
The Senate says it is against the Law,
That they should be Arrested.

Chanc. Think of that Sir;
If they resent the deed, it is not the stores
Of those few Ships can recompense the loss
Of their affections.

Emp. Nor can their best Zeal
Find such another timely succor near
To draw to our supply.

Chanc. Do as you please,
But I dare pawn my life that they will be troubled?

Theop. At their departure most, I Will warrant you;
At nothing else, my Head on it.

Emp. But what then?
Shall I neglect my duty to the whole
For private men's resentments? Come, my Lord,
I Will see it done my self.
Ex. Emp. and Theop.
Chanc. Michael! how is it?

Mich. Gone Sir; beyond Redemption; both the Consuls
Were at your House but now: There I advised them,
With all the haste that might be, to set Sail,
Whatever Orders they should see to stop them.

Chanc. It Is very well; then you are sure they are gone?

Mich. My Zeal had never seemed so earnest else.

Chanc. That happened well though: 'twill clear a late suspicion
That you're a Turk. --
But more of that anon -- You sent the Warrant.

Mich. Aye Sir; but gave command to him that went
To say you sealed it much against your will:
Besides, I spread it every where abroad,
That 'twas against the Law; so none would act by it.

Chanc. That is a certain Method to confound things;
And it is the way I Will take; for I perceive
I Have lost some ground in the Emperors affections,
And now must keep my Power more by the Vogue
Of The Senate, than his love; but let us go out,
And view Thomazo's Actions in the Field;
It Is to his Genius only mine does yield.
Exeunt.
SCENE. A Field. Great Shouts and Noise of Fighting: Enter Thomazo, Dorello,
Officers with Swords drawn. Thom. These Turks are less than Women in our hands;
Where e're we show our Faces, still they fly;
If but the rest of the Forces sallied out,
This Night would make a perfect end of the Siege.

Dor. Their great Forlorn is routed totally,
And their Main Body staggar'd, five thousand more
Would have persorm'd the work. -- In all the Fight
I met but one brave Foe that durst make Head;
And when my Sword had made him Prisoner,
He proved a Genowees.

Thom. What did you with him?

Dor. Clapped my Sword through him Sir.

Thom. You did do well;
A Renogado Dog is ripe for Hell.
A Shout.
Dor. See my Lord, they are marching on again --
Will you to Horse?

Thom. The Hedges make them useless;
I Will Charge in the Head of yonder Stand of Pikes.
Exeunt.
Shouts. -- Enter Turks drove in by Synan, Mustapha, and other Bassa's. Synan.
What wretched fearful Slaves! dare you not die?
Can you forget the Laws of Destiny?

Musta. Fight; or the Death you would shun, you will sooner find;
Our Swords give Death to all who seek to fly.

Shouts. -- Enter Thomazo, Dorello, and Christians: They sight a while, the
Turks retire sighting. Thomazo, Dorello, re-enter in haste. Thom. To Horse, to
Horse, the Genoway Body shrinks. Let Us
Presently relieve them.
Exeunt.
Enter Synan. Synan. These Christians fight, as if the General Cause
Did wield each Sword. -- Curse on our wretched Slaves, --
How fast they Rout! -- Lead on the Grand Reserve
To succor the Main Body. -- Now by my Fathers Soul,
Morat's strong Troop of our best Spahi Horse,
Fly like loose leafs before the Autumn wind:
We 're betrayed by that Damned Chancellor:
Their strength's the Flower of all the Christian World,
They could not fight thus else. -- Oh mighty Prophet!
Protect our Sultan's Glory. --
Let not a Cheating Gown-man boast he had
Great sums from us for nothing else but shame.
But yet it will be so; our great Reserve
Under the Grand Vizier does stagger too: --
Draw up our Guards, let us save or ruin all;
It Is better much to die than wear the shame
Of be^ (...) defeated by a handful.
Exeunt.
SCENE. The Town. Enter Emperor, Cardinal, Chancellor, Theo. Attendants.
Cardin. The Prince I swear performed prodigious things!
They Would be incredible but that we saw them.

Chanc. Accursed sight!
The Turkish Army's sure composed of Women.

Emp. Theophilus, Command that all the Forces
Do presently draw out; I will my self
Share part of the Glory in the Turks Defeat.

Chanc. Good Sir, consider
What it is you mean to do? Will you expose
Your Sacred Person amongst the Genoweese,
That openly avow their discontents?

Emp. No, let them stay behind; I am satisfied
That our own Forces are enough without them,
To second this Success, and Rout the Turks.

Chanc. But say Sir, when you're out with all your strength,
That they should seize the Town.

Emp. They dare not sure. --

Chanc. It is but ill to try enraged Strangers;
Besides the Night comes on.

Theo. Good Sir, send out, and do not go your self.

Chanc. The Prince I Am confident will take that ill.
'Twill seem to doubt his Courage, or his Conduct.

Emp. His Soul's above all Envy I am sure:
But I Will go try the temper of the Soldiers,
Then either back the Sally, or go meet him.
Exeunt.
Enter Irene, Udoxia, Calista, meeting the Emperor; they Salute, and part.
Iren. She triumphs in his Love, and makes me Mad.

Vdox. Conceal your anger Madam, it is too clear.

Iren. By Nature I am temperate as Day;
When gentle Western Gales blow in the Spring;
But now I could grow rugged like the North,
And in a Tempest of my Fury tear
Those Eyes out that have thus bewitched my Prince.

Vdox. Bear up; my mind persuades me he is not salse,
Though she invites me for her Bedfellow.

Iren. But will you go?

Vdox. Aye, with design to serve you,
By putting him in mind of^ Vows to you.

Iren. Do not do that; no, let her take his heart;
But yet I know not why: I Will meet you there.

Calist. Oh that the Prince would come, I long to see him --
I hope he is not hurt.

Iren. What if he be?

Calist. I would not for the world he should methinks.

Iren. Nay, sure in the world there is many better Princes.

Calist. No, I believe not one, if we consider
His most Heroic Courage, and wise Conduct.

Iren. Besides his Faith in Love; pray name that too.

Vdox. Irene --
[Whisper.
Calist. Sure she does guess at something that has past
Between the Prince and me, which stirs her Envy.

Enter Emperor, Thom. Cardin. Theop. Dorell. Mutantrope, Attendants. Thom.
This is the Cause of our too quick return;
The Genoway Body did betray the Field;
And now do seem to threaten Mutiny:
They bring indeed the War within our Walls:
Had I been seconded with the like number
Of our own Nation, we had done the work.

Emp. To the specious reasons of the Chancellor
I must impute the loss of this Days Triumph;
I did my self intend to second you.

Chanc. Great Sir, blame not that Counsel did proceed
From Zeal to the Princes Glory, and your safety.

Thom. I beg, my Lord, you would spare your daily pains
In serving me in these unthankful ways.

Chanc. It Is my misfortune Sir, they always prove so.

Emp. Brother, you had these Ladies hearty wishes
For good success and safety, I am sure.

Thom. 'Twas those, next to your Fortune, did preserve me:
But Lady, may I think I was so happy
To have my share in the last Prayers you made?

Iren. I should have lost my Sense of Duty else;
You are a Mighty Prop of the Empire Sir,
And so, and no ways else I prayed for you.

Thom. How Is this? -- She does dissemble to extremity.

Calist. He casts not the least glance on me! -- it is well,
He strives to keep things secret.
Noise without. One and all, one and all, etc.
Enter Michael.
Mich. The Genowees are in Mutiny,
And swear they will have their General set free,
Or else they will fire the Town.

Emp. What Is to be done?

Thom. Sir, I advise to hang their General,
That will soon quiet them; but if it don't,
Then let the other Soldiers fall upon 'em,
And knock 'em all of the heads; -- if they hold on
As they have begun, they will do but little service:
Those Thousand I had with me first did rout
With all the men I had. -- Sir, there is no way
But sudden Execution, or good words;
Hanging or granting still, quells Mutinies.

Emp. Well, draw up the Court-guards about the Palace,
Then act as you see cause.
Ex. all but Thom. Dor. and Mutantrope.
Thom. I find the Chancellor by little Arts
Prevented our Relief with greater Succors:
But I perceive my Brother so suspects him,
He Will scarce prevail again.

Dor. I wish he don't;
But you have heard the Shipping all are sailed?

Thom. Aye, there is another Trick of his contriving;
I Would almost pawn my life. -- But we must play
The Cards we still have lest, or lose the Game.
But all discourse of State and War apart,
Let Us talk of Love a little now Dorello;
In what condition's yours and fair Vdoxia's?

Dor. Just as your Highness left it, full as bad
As yours with fair Irene.

Thom. If it be no worse,
It Is as you would wished I Am sure; for to be short,
To morrow Morn before the Sun does rise,
I meet Irene in S. Sophta's Church,
Where you are to be witness of our Marriage.

Dor. Can this be so?

Thom. Vdoxia will confirm it, -- for she is to be there.
Come let us away,
A Noise again, One and All. And quell these Mutiniers. They fright the Town.
Exeunt.
Enter Justiniano, Andrea Lionella, and Soldiers. -- Shouting. Just. I thank
you Fellow Soldiers for your love,
I Would rather have my Liberty by you,
Than by their slighted favor.

Andr. See the Prince!
Enter Thomazo, Dorello, and Guards.
Thom. What means this Tumult? Ha! Justiniano Head it!
What are your Demands?

Sold. Our Pay we'd have. --
[ Thomaz. runs the Sold. through, they all hang their heads.
Thom. There Is thine. -- Now, what the rest?
Then worthy General yours.

Justin. Revenge for late affronts given me by thee.

Thom. Dorello -- I Command -- that word's not usual;
But I Command not a man stir to help me,
Except oppressed by Numbers.
They fight, Thomazo disarms him.
Justin. I the same.
Then take my Life, for I despise to beg it.

Thom. Or I to take it; no, the Law shall do it.
All to your Quarters; I Will procure your Pardons:
If not, fall on, and kill 'em every man.
Convey him back to'th' Castle where he was.
Exeunt.
Enter Chancellor and Mutantrope. Chanc. To morrow, sair Irene, to morrow morn!

Mut. Aye Sir, I heard him tell Dorello so.

Chanc. In S. Sophia's Church by break of day,
Near to our Ladies Altar; is it not so?

Mutan. Aye, my Lord, so the appointment's made.

Chanc. Well, my good Boy, watch close upon his actions,
And bring me word of every thing thou gain'st.

Mutan. I shall my Lord.
Ex. Mutan.
Chanc. Marry Irene! -- no, it must not be, -- it shall not:
But how shall I prevent it? there is it! -- To tell
The Emperor, would but betray my self!
For I Have no proof to vouch, but this same Boy,
Which I presented him as a choice Mute,
To be a Spy for me on all his actions --
But yet I must prevent it, that is decreed --
His two last Actions show he is a Prince,
Not of a common Fortune,
To shake the Turks whole Army with a handful,
And quell that Mutiny in half a Minute,
In which I placed my hopes; were things prodigious,
His Mighty Genius has a strong Attendant
Over all my Fortune. -- I must remove him --
It Is no matter how, so I can do it. --

Enter Michael with Letters. Mich. Amongst Thomazo's Soldiers, there got in
Two Spies from Synan B^ssa, both with Letters,
I have deciphered them. -- The first, it seems,
Were writ before the Fight, and only speak
The Numbers that besiege us, and require
An hourly intercourse during the Siege:
The second are pursuant to the Sally writ in heat,
And there, my Lord, they are. --
Chancellor reads them.
Chanc. O Michael! I am lost to all my hopes;
The Sultan frowns, it seems, and doubts my Faith.
He says the Sally had liked to have proved the loss
Of their whole Army. -- What shall I do?
This Prince Thomazo does,
Like some tall Cedar, blast my Underwood.
I must destroy him. Find me out some Jew
That studies Physic -- No, I Have another way --
Write Letters to the Bassa that may speak
What I Have done this day toward the Service.
The Christian Ships are sailed, and I prevented
More Forces that were going to the Sally,
Besides the Mutiny Lorenzo stirred
Amongst his Countrymen -- and all things else --
O the doubts I raise in the Senate -- remember all --
But here is a Sacrifice of Peace I Will make,
Pulls out Irene's Picture. This is the Picture of the fair Irene;
I got it from my Daughter; send it him,
And tell him, that the Original shall be
Lodged in his Masters Arms to morrow night.
Prepare a score of Ruffians with a Barge
To carry off the Prize; it shall go hard,
But I Will send off the Prince Thomazo too:
You know the way of holding Correspondence;
I Will say no more of that -- go, haste your Letters,
And send Lorenzo hither.
Ex. Michael. I Will go meet
In some disguize the discontented Captains.
Enter Lorenzo. Lorenzo! I am resolved to laugh to night,
And spend some hours with frolic Womankind.

Loren. My Lord, you know your old house, Mother Somelies,
You know she always fits you with fresh Girls.

Chanc. Aye, there we'll be; but then for Company,
Get your two Friends, the Captains, if you can,
I mean those two that were made Prisoners.

Loren. I Am confident with joy they will meet my Lord.

Chanc. I would be thought some wild loose Friend of yours
That mean to treat.

Loren. I understand your Lordship.

Chanc. Some two hours hence. Till then I will to Court.
Exeunt.
Enter Emperor, Thomazo, Cardinal, Dorel. Theophilus, Mutant. Irene, Udoxia,
Calista, Attendants, as at Court. Thom. Pray Madam, how seems Time to move to
you,
To me it does appear extremely slow.

Iren. It may be so, my Lord, but unto me
He keeps his usual pace.

Thom. Madam,
Your coldness now surprises me as much
As did the Larum of your Love to day.

Iren. Good, my Lord, you will make Calista jealous.

Thom. You are too cautious, Madam.

Iren. She Is not so.

Thom. I understand you not.

Iren. My Lord, Goodnight,
I am a bad Dissembler of Passion,
I find it will break out; therefore I Will go
And waste this Night in Tears.

Thom. Why so Irene?

Iren. My Lord, no more, I still must wish you well.

Thom. Remember six a Clock.

Iren. I shall have cause.
Ex. Irene.
Enter Chancellor. Chanc. I shall bring Company will spoil the Sport; --
Your Highnesses Boy I see waits very close:
I never see him from you.

Thom. No, it is a pretty Spaniel,
He Is always diligent to Fetch and Carry.

Chanc. I Am glad I did present him to your Hig! ne's,
Since he is so acceptable.

Thom. All Favors
That I receive from you must needs be so.

Chanc. My Lord, I am sorry my Duty to my Master,
Should make me doubt my Service unto you,
As your words hint.

Thom. No Argument in the Presence;
I think you for my Boy, that is all my Lord.
[ Whisper the Emp.
Vdox. It cannot be, my Lord, the Prince and You
Are both (I Will say no more) but you're both men;
And what h' has promised is not to Irene,
But to Calista there.

Dor. You do amaze me:
This wild discourse has no Connection in it.

Vdox. A great deal more than has your wilder Action.

Dorell. I Will call the Prince to hear you.

Calist. Vdoxia --

Vdox. Calista calls, I cannot stay my Lord. --
Ex. Ladies.
Chanc. Sallies will spend our men to little purpose.

Thom. 'Twill rather make us Soldiers; every Sally
Made with fresh men will soon experience.
Had all men Courages but like your Highness,
Experience then, it is true, was only needful;
But most by Nature are unfit for War.

Thom. My Lord, you are mistaken; I affirm,
There Is not a man of able Bulk and Strength,
But may be brought to fight proportionably,
At least in Crowds they may.

Chanc. Admit it so:
But will the Emperor, or Senates Prudence,
Suffer your Highness still t'expose your Person
To hourly danger; when the Empires Hopes,
Is next his Majesty, all placed in you.

Emp. Aye, now you have touched the String that hits my Fancy;
Your Personal safety Brother; Surely that
Ought to be all our care, and shall be mine;
I am confident no Sally can be safe
Without you Head it, nor you in any one;
Therefore we will rely on future Succors.

Card. Those from his Holiness will soon be here,
Besides the Rhodian and Venetian Forces,
I Am confident will not be long behind.

Thom. These are mere Dreams of Safety.

Emp. Wait a little;
We have an open Port to Asia-ward,
And cannot want Provisions. Goodnight Brother.
Ex. all but Thom. Dor. Mut.
Thom. You see Dorello, this cunning Gown-man
Is grown so tender of my Persons safety,
That to keep me well, the Turk must not be Beat.

Dor. I blame him not, now you're to Marry his Daughter.

Thom. I Marry her! --

Dor. So Vdoxia tells me,
And that to morrow morning.

Thom. It Is short warning;
But who has made the Match?

Dor. I know not that;
But she says this you promised at the Mask.

Thom. Pish! she mistakes, it was the Fair Irene
I only spoke to there.

Dor. How Is this? there is some mistake: Was it the Lady
That you Danced with you made the Promise to?

Thom. Aye, what of that!

Dor. Then Sir it was Calista.

Thom. It is impossible, her Dress was that
Irene had on, when the Soldiers ruffl'd her.

Dor. Sir, that may be, but yet it was Calista,
I saw her after when her Mask was off,
And had a Complement from her.

Thom. But why should she accept my first Address?

Dor. That her Ambition taught! But will you meet?

Thom. I would meet Death much sooner. -- You shall go
And undeceive her, if it is She that comes;
But I Will be near, in hopes 'twill prove Irene.

Dor. Those hopes will quickly vanish in your Highness.

Thom. This Chancellor, like some unlucky Star,
Does interpose his Direful Influence
Through all my Happiness in Love or Honor.
How strangely
Wise Heaven with unseen Links makes Chains of Fate,
This Hawks good Fortune that is unfortunate.
Exeunt.
Enter Chanc. Loren. Andr. Lion. with 4 Wenches, and Fiddles. 1 Wench. You are
the Maddest Man I ever met with,
SONG.
Now Fruition has empti'd our Bottles of Love,
Let the Bottles of Wine fly about;
The heat of that Fire,
Shall inflame our desire,
And Phlegmatic Dullness remove.
A Health to the best,
A Pox of the rest,
And hey for the t'ther brisk Bout.

Chanc. Come, Faith Madam, once again.

1 Wench. Pray Sir stay, I am not in the humor.

Chanc. See, see, here is Gold; will this exalt thy humor?

Lion. See there! You Scurvy Queans, did you fear Sconces?

1 Wench. I hope, my Dear, you will give me some Silk Stockins.

Chanc. Aye, and rich Garters too; there is twenty Pieces,
Rig thy whole Vessel! what, have found thy humor?

1 Wench. Aye, my Dear, you are such another man.
Ex. Chancellor and Wench.
Andr. Signior Lorenzo! your Friend's a Man of Mettle.
What does he give all that?

Loren. Alas, that is nothing.

2 Wench. My Dear, will you give me some?

Loren. Aye, there -- there is 20 Pieces for thee.

Lion. But you Inhance the Price most damnably,
I Have had a better Whore for half a Crown.

2 Wench. Whore! you foul-mouthed Fellow.

Lion. Aye Whore, what came we for but Whore?

3 Wench. But, my Dear.
The other two Wenches Dun the Captains round the Stage.
2 Wench. My Dear, why would you bring such Shabby Fellows
With you?

Loren. They Are honest Gentlemen, though they want Money.

2 Wench. Honest, faugh! A poor Rogue cannot be honest;
But you are the Goodest Man. Prithee, my Dear,
Lend me but 10 l. more, and you will make me. --

Loren. Ten pound, what is that! here it is for one bare Kiss.

Andr. Hold Signior, for half that I Have compounded;
I want it but to pay, pray lend it me.

Lion. And me the rest; I shall not have time to drink else.

Loren. I beg your Pardon, I must not starve my Love.

3 Wench. Your Love, it is a fine one, she plied in the Town
Seven years before I knew it.

Loren. That Is no matter;
She has the more experience. I am constant.

2 Wench. So I will be my Dear, for all their Malice.

3 Wench. I will not loose my time thus.
Exit.
4 Wench. Faith, nor I; I could 'een cry my eyes out.
Exit.
Lion. Now we have time to drink to thee Andrea;
A Pox on High-priz'd Whoring.
Chanc. and Wench re-enter.
Chanc. What Is here, two Turtles pining without Mates!

Loren. Their Girls went crying ripe for what ours got.

Chanc. That must not be Ladies; go setch 'em in,
I Will see them paid, but bring no Tears amongst us;
No weeping Cupids here, we are for the Boys
That Caper and show Tricks in Ladies Eyes.

Andr. Before Heaven, the merri'st Greek I ever met with;
Is he a Servant of the Chancellours?

Loren. Aye Sir.

Lion. Faith you are Princes by your Places.
Here Is your Lords Health for your sakes; he is a Master
The best in the Empire, all men say that.

Chanc. Pox o'Great Men, and great things; they both devour
All that one gives without the least delight;
I Am for the Soldiers Health.

Andr. Then we are your Men:
We two to night did pay the Turks away.

Lion. Each killed his Bassa; though Thomazo Huffs,
As if he had done all: but time will come.
I Will say no more, -- our General must not lie thus.

Andr. No, by my Sword, -- I Will fire the City rather --
But let that pass, I Will sing a Song I made
Since we returned from killing the Bassa's.

Chanc. Rogues! that were both in Prison. But the bette^, --
A Huffing Coward always proves a Villain.
I Will taste them by and by. --

Andrea sings. SONG.
They come, they come;
Hark, do you hear that Drum?
It is an Alarm to War;
To Love it does Beat,
A Fatal Retreat:
See, see, where our Enemies are,
A Noise, a Noise,
Of Shouts and Dreadful Cries
Has frighted our Scouts, they come in:
Then farewell delight,
Till after the Fight,
We'll Rout them, and at it again.
They Fly, they Fly,
Hark how they Quarter cry;
Their Valor lies now in their speed:
Their Bassa's in vain
Would Rally again,
But a Turk delights not to Bleed.
Bring Wine, bring Wine,
What do you still repine?
To trust a brave Soldier for drink;
The Enemy's run,
Then Soldier be gone,
He Will never return you do think.

Chanc. The Wit and Courage of these Gentlemen
Deserves the World Lorenzo should be theirs.

Andr. Ah Sir! had we our Pay, we'd be contented:
The Emperor owes us near six Weeks Pay.

Chanc. You never shall sigh for that; I Will send it you.

Lion. You shall have Impressed Bills that will secure you.

Chanc. That needs not, one flight favor you may do
Pays me, and trebles that unto your selves.

Andr. Ask any thing in the compass of our Swords.

Chanc. It Is to prevent a Wedding two would steal
In S. Sophia's Church by break of day:
A quiet time, you know; if you will seize them,
And carry them to the place I shall appoint,
Lorenzo will see you paid a 1000 Ducats.

Loren. You Will take my word for this, will you not Signior?

Lion. Aye, were ten times as much -- but we must have
Some of our Men to help us, must we not?

Chanc. Aye, that you must.

Andr. I have a Faithful Servant, I Will send for him,
And he shall pick some Men fit for the Work.

Lion. We'll not to Bed to night.

Andr. No, no Sleep
Till the good work be done. But more Instructions. --

Chanc. We shall have time for that. But where is these Women!
I cannot live an hour without a Woman;
Oh they are the useful'st Creatures: --
Come, let us go search, we must mix Love with Wine*
A Wise Man thus still Revels with design.
Exeunt.
ACT. III.
Enter Mutantrope peeping about. Mutan. MY Lord is not come; What shall I do?
These are Calista's Lodgings: Oh that I could
But meet her -- I Would venture being known
To be no Mute to her, rather than she
Should be deluded thus. I see her coming;
But there is Vdoxia too -- I must not speak
Except I get her single.

Enter Calista and Udoxia; the Boy makes Signs to get Calista alone. Calist.
How think you now Vdoxia?

Vdox. I Am convinced;
His Boy confirms your words. Ah poor Irene!

Calist. See but what Tricks he plays to get me with him.
Come Vdoxia -- nay, she must go with me.
Ex. Call. and Udox.
Mutan. There is no separating them. Where should her
Father be? But I must follow. --
Ex. Mut.
SCENE. A Church. Enter Andrea, Lionello, Lorenzo, and Soldiers. Loren. This
is the place they meet at: Seize all that come,
The Barge lies ready for you. I Will retire.
Exit.
Andr. Down all upon your Knees; devoutly Rogues,
To Prayers, to Prayers!

1 Sold. That Is no usual word of Command Captain.

Lion. Silence, and to your Beads; Knock 'em apace.

Enter Dorello. Dorell. Ha! such a Crowd of Soldiers: Sure it is Devotion
To Rob our Lad^ Altar draws them hither
So early in the Morning. Ha! who is here?

Enter Calista, Udox. Mutantrope. Vdox. The Boy is like his Master, sure run
Mad.
Aside.
Calist. The Boy grows troublesome: but where is his Master?

Dorell. Not far off Ladies; but he will be much surpised
To meet you two I know.

Enter Lorenzo. Loren. Hist, hist, it is they
They muffle Dorello in his Cloak, and carry him, Mut. and the Ladies out.
Dorell. Ha! what is? --

Enter Priests and Ex. running. 1 Priest. Hoe there! Sacrilege, Sacrilege,
The Sanctuary's violated.

Enter Irene. Iren. I am come time enough; I Am confident
The East Door did just open: I Will to Prayers
Till they arrive.
Kneels.
Enter Chancellor. Chanc. I must needs see how this Affair succeeds;
Who Is this? Val'd! It is some Curtezan,
Whose hot Devotion has bin up all Night;
My Prayers will suit with hers --
Kneels by Irene, she pulls off her Glove to feel for a Book; he rises. Ha!
it is the Fair Irene! that hand betrays her,
I know it by the Locket. -- Lady, your Saint
Is not stirring it -- But where are all my Rogues
Drinking their Morning's Draught, I Will be hanged else,
Though they have bin up all Night; my Secretary
Does use to play me those Tricks.
Enter Priests.
1 Priest. Here has bin sad Disorders in the Church,
A Gentleman, two Women, and a Boy,
(...) ^ook away by force, and clapped on Board:
A Barge lay at the Key; I ran and called,
But all in vain, for none did dare to stop them;
Their Genowees's did it.

Iren. Reverend Sir,
What sort of Persons were those carried hence?

Chanc. It Is She.

1 Priest. Persons of Quality I Am sure.

Chanc. They are my Dogs have lit' upon wrong Game --
I Will place them in Retrieve --

Iren. Pray Heaven they are not
Some Villains that have seized on Prince Thomazo,
I cannot with his Falsehood that hard Fate.

Enter Thomazo Muffl'd. Thom. My Patience is quite lost by lingering doubt.
What Lady's this?
Kneels.
Iren. Ha! here is the Prince Thomazo.

Thom. May I presume to ask a Question Lady?

Iren. What Question Sir?
In a feigned Voice.
Thom. Know you the Fair Irene?

Iren. Yes; and Calista too; but good Sir, peace.

Thom. Your words make me half think you know my business.

Iren. I know 'em both too well.

Thom. Ha! it is Irene!

Enter Chancellor, Andr. Lionel. Soldiers: They seize Irene, and convey her
out, whilst the Captain engage Thomazo. Chanc. There Is the Woman.

Iren. Help me Thomazo! help!

Thom. Villains unhand her, she is worth your lives.

Andr. And Livelihoods too boot: Therefore no passing.

Thom. I Will give you double Hire, and Pardon too.

Lion. Ha! Prince Thomazo, I Will keep my double distance.

Enter Priests and seize on Thom. Captains run away. 1 Priest. Sacrilege,
Sacrilege! Murder, Murder!

Thom. Unhand me Fools -- your Sanctuary's broke;
The Fair Irene is forced away by Villains.

1 Priest. We beg your Highness Pardon.

Thom. Spare your Complements, and make pursuit;
The Fair Irene is lost else.
Exeunt.
SCENE. The Chancellours House. Enter Chancellor, Irene, Loren. Captains
Soldiers: The Chanc. discovers himself. Chanc. To show you whom you served;
behold, it is me:
Despair not of full Recompense -- Lorenzo,
Go Treat the Noble Captains like themselves,
And give the Soldiers Belly-fulls of Wine.

1 Sold. We humbly thank your Lordship.

Iren. Villains! tell me!
How did you leave the Prince?

Andr. Truly, Madam,
We left him in the hands of Ghostly Fathers.

Iren. Oh Heavens! the Prince in danger.

Chanc. Madam, don't
Afflict your self, for you will find a Prince
Of far more Power to Court you to his Arms.

Iren. Pernicious Traitor! what is thy Damned Design?

Chanc. I mean to make you Queen of large Dominions.

Iren. Oh Heavens, the Villain does deride my griefs:
But if Thomazo's dead, I Will not survive;
There Is many ways to Death, and I Will find one.

Lion. Madam, on that account you need not do it,
For Prince Thomazo's well.

Iren. O! tell me Friend,
One Truth before you die, how did you leave him?

Lion. Why truly then, we left him just as fast
As Heels could carry us! Faith, there is no coming
Within the length on's Sword: yet this I Will boast,
Though he out-fights us, we outrun him much.

Iren. Is the Prince safe then?

Andr. Yes, but I ly'd not,
For Ghostly Fathers laid hold on him,
And so we got the start.

Chanc. You're honest men!
Lorenzo! Treat them first, then pay their Money --
But, do you hear -- be sure you Spice their Cups --

Loren. I shall, my Lord.

Chanc. Give them double Doses.

Andr. Your Lordship is too bountiful.
Ex. Loren. and Sold.
Chanc. Madam, the Mighty Sultan is your Slave:
To the Exalted State of Turkish Queen
My care is to advance you, think of that.

Iren. Sure thou art not half the Traitor thou would seem.
Ex.
SCENE. The Town. Enter Synan Bassa, Dorello, and Mutanuope. Dorell. My
Conversation ever was at Court,
Though not in the highest Sphere, and Prince Thomazo
Has often honored me with his Commands:
But he is a Prince of such a steady temper,
It Is not the Sultans Empire would Bribe him
To one disloyal thought, much less Morea.

Synan. I do believe you Sir; and that is the cause
I cannot find one man that dares attaque him,
Nor do I hope Success, if you shall do it;
I only by it seek to gain some proofs
May show my Prince my care has not bin wanting.

Dorell. Upon the word of a true Gentleman,
I Will break the matter to him -- and return,
My Life and Liberty continuing safe,
To give you his full Answer.

Synan. Sir, pardon me,
You have some Secrets gained of the Chancellor
Must be kept private too. --

Dorell. From all but him,
With whom I mainly treat, they shall, my Lord;
Nor shall he know them but on faithful promises
Of being private, and you may trust his word.

Synan. No generous mind can well suspect another
Without some cause, and I see none in you;
And as a proof of my esteem, I Will trust you.

Dorell. Your Frankness binds me more than Sacraments,
And makes me bold to ask one Favor more,
That as you would send the Prince this Boy again,
He did esteem him much.

Synan. Sir, I am sorry
I must deny you this -- But Sir, believe me,
This Boy is worth my Life; you do not know
Our Sultan -- the least breach of his Commands
Is Death inevitable. You heard him say
He Would have him made an Eunuch; I must do it,
Or never see his Face in safety more.
He likes him 'cause he is a Natural Mute;
He Is properer for Secrets than the other.

Dorell. No, not at all my Lord, for I will tell you --
Whispers.
Mutant. Make me an Eunuch! before I will be that,
I Will own I have both Tongue and Ears to boot.

Synan. It Is strange observance this you tell me of;
It Is pity he was Mute -- but come poor Child --
How Is this?
Mutant. will not follow, Synan takes hold of him.
Dorell. I thought he guest at our Discourse.

Syn. This mu^ not save you Sir.

Mutant. O good my Lord.

Synan. Ha! do you delude me Sir?

Dorell. No, on my Life!

Synan. Sirrah! who taught you to dissemble Dumbness?

Mutant. I was a Spy, placed on Thomazo's Actions
By my Lord Chancellor.

Dorell. O Monstrous Subtilty!

Synan. Then as thy punishment, I will assure thee,
Thy Tongue shall keep an Everlasting Silence;
For I will ha'it cut out. Sir, follow me.
Exeunt.
SCENE. The Chancellours House. Enter Andrea, Lionello, Soldiers poisoned --
doing mad things; some Cuffing, some Singing. Enter Chancellor, Irene above.
Chanc. Observe this sight, you will say I am in earnest,
When I declare I mean to make you Queen.

Iren. What, you have made the Ruffians Drunk, 'it seems!

Chanc. Aye, Dead Drunk; pray mark'em Madam.

Lion. To be poisoned thus! to be sent out of the World like
A Rat, by a Politic Whoremaster. -- Oh -- oh --

Andr. Was this the double Dose the Devil meant?
Sure 'twas a Cup of Wildfire mixed in Hell.
Such Drink as this would make Damnation double.

1 Sold. Pray, pray Captain! Good Captain let us to prayers.

Andr. It is too late for prayers -- ten thousand Devils
Are in my Entrals, tearing out my Soul.
Water! Water! to quench this Hellish Fire.

Omn. Water, Water, Water, etc.

Andr. See Lionello! See, the Devil's there.

Lion. Where? Where? I see him grinning now in the Shape
Of The Chancellor.

Andr. Look! how he Laughs and Snickers; Ha, ha, ha,
A Woman-Devil too -- there is Whores in Hell.

Lion. Aye, Whores! abundanee!

Andr. Let me have one then;
They Are Coolers Lionello! Excellent Coollers,
And I Am exceeding Hot.

Chanc. Ha, ha, ha; what Crotchets come into their dying Pates?

Iren. How, dying Sir! in this Dispairing State!

Chanc. Yes truly, Madam. I take care they shall not
Spoil your Advancement by their future Prating.

Iren. I Have heard and seen too much, and will no more.
Ex. Irene.
Andr. A Whore! a thousand Whores, good Lucifer,
For our Great Chancellor! Some Whores, I say.

Lion. I Will Pimp no more for him! I Will see him first:
Let him be Flog'd, let him be Flog'd. Whips, Whips,
Let him have Whips of Fire to Lash his Soul.

Andr. The Stinking Lord grows dry, and needs Whips;
Then lend me one, good Devil, I will tear him.

Mich. My Lord!
Enter Michael with Letters. These Letters come from Synan Bassa.

Chanc. See there! the Christian Slaves are paid their Wages.

Lion. Give me my Gold, give me my Gold, Gold, Gold;
I Will Rob the Church no more else. Give me Gold.

Andr. Aye, give me Gold! I Will pay my Whores most bravely,
She shall wear Smocks well Laced.

2 Sold. Oh Heaven!

1 Sold. If there be Heaven!
Which is the way, good Captain; I Will go thither.

Andr. Right before your Nose.
All die.
Chanc. O Heavens! my Daughter, and Vdoxia both,
Are in the Turkish Camp -- surpised by these
In a mistake. Ten thousand Torments more
VVrack your Bodies here, and Souls hereafter.

Lion. What Screech-Owl's that? ha! what a sight is this?
Then I am dying too! My Lord, look down,
All these lost Souls will be required of you;
They will, my Lord; and I can this foretell,
In The midst of all your hopes you will find Death,
By Tortures worse than ours. Some Mercy Heaven.
Dies.
Chanc. Hell take thee for thy News; it meets an hour
Of such Calamity, it makes Impression;
See that their Bodies safely are bestowed.
Ex. Michael. Would I had never begun to be thus ill,
It had been better much. Then I Would best change!
But how? I am gone too far to do that safely:
Then farewell Virtue, since it is too late,
By Ills on Ills I Will 'mount above my Fate.
Exit.
Enter Emperor, Thomazo, Theop. and Attendants. Noise of a Storm. Emp. This is
Prodigious! 20 great Ships
To Sail over Land eight Miles, this threatens more
Than all they did before.

Thom. This Storm was made
Only t'amuse us whilst they lodged the Ships
Above the Chain; So to Besiege us round
And cut off all Relief.

Emp. That they will now do;
Never 'till now we truly found the want
Of The Christian Ships I ordered to be stopped;
There was some Practice, which I shall find out,
Procured that disobedience to those orders;
All I find guilty certainly shall dye for it.

Theop. He that advised their Sailing must be one then.

Emp. I do suspect him most, but yet I cannot
Safely, without clear proof, Arrest his Person;
The Senate would Resent it if I did.

Thom. My Lord, No news of the Soldiers, or your Daughter?

Theop. No, none at all.

Thom. Surely they have conveyed 'em to the Turk?

Emp. I fear that most -- But come, Let Us go to Council.

Thom. Council may Cure the State; but cannot me:
This Loss foretells my endless Misery.
Exeunt.
Enter Chancellor, Lorenzo, Boy. Loren. Thomazo makes the Guards so Vigilant,
Her least Resistance, Sir, would Ruin all.

Chan. Then She must be deluded by this Boy!
Think you he will do it well?

Loren. Never doubt, my Lord,
He is by Nature framed for Roguery.

Chan. Instruct him well; But to avoid detection,
Send him along with her -- I must to Council.
My pretty Child, Do what Lorenzo bids thee
And thou shall have my Favor.
Exit Chanc.
Loren. Come Kecko --
Exeunt Lor. Boy.
Enter Irene Sola. What a sad life is this to be confined
From Friends, or sight of any Humane Creature,
But Cruel, unrelenting Murderers;
And never to change this Goal but for a worse:
A Sultaness -- a Strumpet -- Ah Thomazo,
Had thou been true, this Mischief never had happened.

A Song without, after which Kecko comes in Playing. VEnus chanced to Love a
Boy,
Young Adonis was her joy;
He once lept from off her Knee
To hunt and take an Humble-Bee,
Then the Bagg to her did bring,
She sighed, and asked him for the Sting.
2.
When he looked on, saw her Eye
Drop a Tear, he strait did cry,
Oh! forgive me, I will bring
A bigger and a longer Sting.
Smiling, she cried, pretty Lad,
When that time comes, I Will be glad.

Irene. I see there still is left some Innocence
To keep the World from sinking. Pretty Boy,
Which way did thou get in?

Kecko. I Will show you Madam.

Irene. This Child may prove an Angel-Guardian to me.
Exeunt.
Enter Emperor, Thomazo, Cardinal, Chancellor, Theoph. as from Council. Emp.
This Insolence of the Soldiers so debated
By the Senate first, and now by us in Council,
Does spend that time might better be employed
For the safety of the whole, -- first let the Senate
Provide but Money speedily to pay them,
Strickt Discipline will follow that of course.

Chanc. Your Majesty however may consider
That these Debates are not without all cause,
I wish to Heaven they were, with Tears I speak,
To have our Children ravished from our Arms;
Nay, torn from Altars in despite to Heaven,
And all things, Sacred Law, Nature, and Religion,
To be made Prostitutes to their vile Lusts!
To have a Lord of the Senate and the Council,
Conveyed away and Murdered; This brave Prince,
Forced to desend his Sacred Person daily
By his own Courage, against their Insolence,
Not to speak of Prisons broke, or rescues made,
And all the lesser mischiefs hourly done!
If this be not worth a Senates grave advice,
What can be Sir?

Theoph. My good Lord Chancellor,
I do believe all men will think my griefs
Must equal be to yours, the cause being so,
I Am sure this wretched Life I would give up
To see my Daughter and her honor safe:
But yet I think her yours, and hundreds more
Not worth the time we vainly spend about them:
My Lord, by your advice amongst the rest
The Empire lies at stake: first think of that,
And money it is, if any thing can save it,
All Councels that retard that, scarce are honest.

Chanc. Honest! 'twas scarce well, said the Senate sitting,
I Am sure of that, for they are of other minds,
And it is but fit we wait their Resolutions.

Card. Certainly your Majesty cannot do better
Then follow their advice; they are the great Council,
They represent the whole, what they conclude,
You may without the least fear of blame pursue.

Emp. Blame! my Lord Cardinal, you are not my subject,
And so perhaps do err through Ignorance;
But good my Lord, learn this, -- I give account
To none but Heaven for any thing I do:
I take advice it is true, but still am free
To act as I see cause, -- Council does cease
To wear that name when it can be Coercive;
So know my Lord, I fear no Earthly blame,
No, not the Popes. Then use some other word.

Card. Sir, I ask Pardon if that word offended,
I can be sorry too, but yet that shant
Make me neglect my Duty to the Pope,
Whom you were pleased to name with too much heed;
As I conceive, I have no business here,
Except you think his Holiness on Earth,
Heaven's Deligate.

Emp. In Heavenly things I do;
In Earthly, though he has no more Dominions
Than what our Royal Predecessor gave him;
And if he seeks more here, it is Labor lost.

Thom. I Am glad his Eminennce hears this I ruth
From your own Sacred Mouth; he still believed
None but my self durst boldly urge the Point,
My Enemies I Am sure made him believe so.

Chanc. Your Highness I Am afraid mistakes your friends,
Your best and truest Friends, for Enemies;
I humbly am afraid, I say, you do;
For I believe there is not a Grecian breaths,
But does admire you justly for your Virtues,
Your sollid Prudence, Constancy and Valor.

Thom. Spend not your breath my Lord, in long harangs
Of me, for all you can say, wont
Make my Opinion jump with yours
In your this Days debates. --

Emp. No certainly,
To urge the stop of the Empires main concern
For private Grievances, as if you did
Design the Turk should win it, -- this is Truth.

Chanc. I Am sorry that your Majesty thinks so;
But I have hopes the Senate yet will clear me.

Thom. Those hopes are Insolent! I said it Lord --

Chanc. I hope, my Lord, my candid Actions will
Set me in former favor with my Prince,
And clear to all the World my Innocence;
So humbly begging Pardon, I Will retire.
Exit Chan.
Card. I wish your Majesty may do the best.
Exit Card.
Theop. This Chancellor, your Majesty does sind,
Disturbs, if not betrays your weightyest Councils.

Emp. He plainly does them both; yet at this juncture
It is not safe to take the Seals away,
For fear the Senate think their love to him
Does move me to it.

Thom. Let him keep them,
Without the Princes favor those are useless.
But Sir, the time requires, that with resolves
Becoming Majesty, you press the Senate
For speedy Aid, and till that is done, command
That no debate beside be entered on.

Emp. No Emperor, ever Reigned, had a less mind*
To place harsh Rules on Councils than my self;
The Freedom of Debates should be preserved
If it were possible in every Council,
Much more in that of highest Dignity;
If not in time we never should hear the Truth,
As these common Rules must be laid by;
New Exigents must make new Presidents,
And ignorance only still Cries out for old.

Thom. Sir, your affairs are at the last extreme;
The Senate if they please may help you much;
And I am confident the major part
Would singly quit their lives to do you service;
That which prevents them, are some subtle heads,
By specious doubts and questions puzle them.
Your Resolution must undo this Charm.

Emp. Brother, in this I do concur with you,
Nothing but their extremes shall make me so,
They Will either guide or force all I shall do.
Exeunt.
ACT. IV.
Enter Irene in Man's Clothes, with the Boy. Irene. THus far we are well; we have
past two Courts of Guard:
Dear Child, how many more do think there is?

Boy. There Is but one more before we get toth' Court.

Irene. Sure this is not the way; although't be dark,
Yet I Have some little guess, and think these Lanes
Do rather lead toth' harbor then the Court.

Boy. No, I Will warrant you, do but follow me,
I soon will make you safe.
Enter Lorenzo, and Michael dogging.
Irene. It Is so; that is the end of St. Sophia
Street. Child, thou mistakes, this is the way I Am sure.

Lorenz. That must not be -- who goes there? --
Exiturus. None speak, who are you there I say?

Mich. 'Twas no body.

Loren. I Am sure there was, it seemed a Woman's voice,
And coming from my Lord, I hope it is not
The beauteous Lady we had Prisoner there,
Her loss would ruin him.

Mich. Come, come, there is no body; let us have home to bed.

Loren. No, I will watch this Street for half an hour,
I Am sure 'twas some body designed to pass.
Exeunt aside.
Guard without. Who goes there?

Loren. Friends.

Guard. What Friends?

Loren. Friends to the Guard and Servants to the Lord Chancellor.

Guard. Come before the Captain of the Watch.

Boy. The Grand Round's coming; haste! we are undone --

Irene. I Will follow thee -- but know not what I shun.

Enter Thomazo and Soldiers as in a Grand Round, with them Michael and Lorenzo.
Lorenz. Our Lord's not come from Court, and we were going
To wait upon him there.

Thom. The Council did sit late.

Mich. Your Highness has no commands to honor
Your humble Servants with.

Thom. No, none at all.
Exeunt Severally.
Enter Irene and Boy. Irene. Where are we now? I Have followed thee so fast,
I had not time t'observe which way we ran.

Boy. Nor I, I Am sure, nor know I what to do,
I Have lost my self, and shall be Ruined by it,
I wish I never had medl'd.

Irene. What say thou Child? Come, I will save thee harmless:
Let Us knock at the next house and take a Guide.

Boy. No, no, they all know me, that were the way
To be Surpised, and carried to my Lords --
Stay you here, I Will search about for the way.
Exit.
Trene. How terrible to me this darkness seems!
That and this Habit both do give me fear,
And yet they both must prove my greatest Friends.
Unusual things, though Innocent, amaze us.
I Am near the Strand: I hear the Water roar
As if the Waves sought to overcome the Shore;
This joined with Solitude, the Night and Fear
Makes all my Danger double to appear;
But who are these?
Hides her self.
Enter Michael and Lorenzo looking about. Lorenz. If she be gone, we will use the
Boat our selves,
It is no staving, she will betray us all.

Mich. It Is a strange Diligence in Prince Thomazo,
To walk the Round himself.

Lorenz. To meet with us in St. Sophia-street was damned
Unlucky too.

Michael. Would that was all,
But thus to lose our prize, makes me stark Mad,
Let Us to the Barge, perhaps they may inform us.
Exeunt.
Irene. These are the Villains that the Round did stop,
And Prince Thomazo too it seems was there:
Oh! my unlucky Fear that made me fly
From such a Sanctuary that was so near me,
Their words seemed darkly to reflect on me,
And on a Boat; I hope I am not betrayed.
But where should be the Boy, he stays thus long?
I am afraid, in seeking out his way,
He Is slipped into the Sea: Heavens guard him from it.

Enter Boy. Boy. Hist! hist!

Irene. Here, here! oh, there has bin two men
Came talking by: Two of the Chancellors Servants,
They seemed to speak of me and of a Boat.

Boy. Which way went they?

Irene. Down this Street.

Boy. That Is our way; I now have found it out,
Come, let us make haste --

Irene. No, let us go any way rather than that.

Boy. We must go that, there is no other truly.

Irene. I tell thee, Child, I Will rather seek Thomazo,
He Is on the Round, I wish I had not shunned him;
Come, let us up this Street.

Boy. Stay a little!
What shall I do? how unlucky 'twas I went
That they should miss us thus, -- I Would better kill her,
I Am sure, than she should meet Thomazo,
That must not be then: but I will trifle time;
Perhaps they may return.

Irene. Come Child, what look thou for? Prithee let us go,
This way I Am sure does lead to the higher street,
And that way to the Sea.

Boy. No, I Am confident this is our way,
And I must go no other; Pray come then.

Iren. This Boy Surprises me, -- I will go this way.

Boy. You shall not take my Clothes along with you,
Draws. I am sure of that, if you will needs be going,
Strip and deliver them first.

Iren. Prithee Child, let me persuade thee.

Boy. No, no, give me my Clothes, and go where you will.

Iren. You know I want my own, and they are much better;
Put up thy Sword.

Boy. No, no, go back toth' house, and take your Clothes,
But on you shall not go if I have not mine.

Iren. I have a Sword too, and sure, methinks his strength
Should not be more than mine; Come, Prithee
Be ruled, and go this way, I have a Sword else,
And twice the strength of thee; but I am loath
To do thee hurt, if thou will put up thine.

Boy. No, I will not, except you will go this way.

Irene. Nay, then there is more than Childish thoughts
Does prompt the Boy: To this a greater sear
Must drive away the less --
Come Child, be ruled, I still am loath to hurt thee.
Draws.
Boy. Nay, if you come to that, do what you can,
You shall not steal my Clothes:
I must gain time, yet I Am loath to hurt her.
They fight aukerdly, and at a great distance.
Enter Lorenzo and Michael. Irene. Boy, you see your Sword can do no good;
Then trust my word, and go along with me.

Boy. If I had thought you would have served me thus,
I Would never have helped you, that I would not.

Lorenz. How Is this! They Are here --
Aside. What, Men a quarrelling?

Mich. No, on my life mere Boys,
Ripe Soldiers I Will be Sworn; what is the Quarrel?

Boy. Let him tell it if he will.

Iren. O! I am lost, these are the Murderers,
The Boy will certainly discover me.

Loren. Young Gentlemen, here take your Swords again;
What would your Quarrel be? Rivals in Love!

Mich. Ay, for a Paper Kite, or some such thing:
What, will neither of you relate your Quarrel?

Boy. Our Quarrel was about the way to Court,
He said 'twas that; and I affirmed 'twas this.

Loren. Then he was in the wrong, and ought ask pardon.

Irene. I do with all my heart: Pray, Sir, forgive me;
What a good Boy is this that still conceals me.

Mich. We just came both from Court,
Yet will go back a little way with you
To set you right, that you shall not miss it after.

Boy. I humbly thank you Sir.

Irene. And so do I;
But I still doubt this way, I know not why?
Exeunt.
Enter Synan and Calista. Synan. It was a strange neglect you and your Father
Both made, in not discovering this Dorello
To be a Lord of the Council: I Am afraid
'Twill cost his Head; but I have given him notice,
He is gone back; and on what Errand too.

Calist. I hope his Wisdom soon will find away
To clear himself, and place all guilt on him:
But good my Lord, how stands my great affair.

Synan. Madam, as you would wish to morrow Night,
The Sultan does intend you for his Bed,
Therefore adorn your self with all your Charms.

Calista. My Lord, this Obligation is so great,
That no sufficient thanks can be repaid.

Synan. Yes, Madam, but it may; for tho we Eunuchs
Cannot be Lovers, yet our other Passions
Grow more unruly by our loss of that,
As Deprivation of one Sense, does double
The Vigor of another: so Ambition
Ost gives hopes, fears, fruition, and despair
To us, more violently then Lovers feel them,
Then when you shall possess the Sultans heart,
This passion of my Soul you may indulge.

Calist. Next pleasing him, it shall be all my Study,
And let me be despised by the Great Sultan
That hour I fail to be your faithful Creature:
Thus I must talk till I possess my power,
Then I am free to act as I see cause.
Enter Mutan with a Letter which Synan reads.
Synan. Go, bring that Person in that brought this
Letter; Madam, it is from your Father.
Enter Messenger. Tell me Friends! how did the Youths you brought
Behave themselves?

Messeng. One Sir was quiet, to'ther showed a sorrow
Approached near Madness, often, if not prevented,
He had leapt overboard to drown himself;
Thus he continued 'till our Boat was boarded,
By one went hence to Town; in that there was
A Christian the Boy knew, and whispered with;
On which he did produce a large Commission
Under the Sultans Seal, and signed by you,
Pretending he had power to take him from us,
But all in vain; our Orders were too strict,
So we resus'd obedience, and have brought him.

Synan. You have done well, keep them without a little,
Ex. Mess. and Mut. This desperate Youth he talks of is Irene,
And he that would have seized her, is Dorello,
None else have had my pass: What Is to be done?

Calist. Sir, if the Sultan sees her, I am despised:
Her charming Beauty will eclipse mine quite.

Synan. But how shall I prevent it?

Calist. If you would
Oblige me to the full, then tell the Sultan
That she is lost by'th' way: her Sex concealed,
As I perceive it is yet, will make the Story
Above all Contradiction, but by me,
And for my own sake, I shall never clear it;
This way you may secure my happiness,
And place about his Person your own Creature.

Synan. I will devote my suture life to you,
And hazard all my Fortunes on your Game;
But how shall I conceal this charming Beauty.

Calist. Deliver her to me, as a Boy
Sent you by some mistake, her sears will then
Prompt her to keep concealed.

Synan. Well, I Will prepare her --
Exit Synan.
Calist. Now base Thomazo, I Will Revenge thy scorns
Upon the Person of the loved Irene:
She and Vdexia both shall feel the sinart
Of an enraged Love, led by despair,
Yet still my powers secure, I must dissemble:
This Synan Bassa has a Soul too honest
To be Assaulted with my great Designs
'Till I Am above his Arts to keep me out,
But that once brought about; then my great Soul,
Shall freely have it is swing without control.

Enter Synan with Irene Synan. Your Labor will not be much, Madam, this Boy
Sent me, I know not why, here I devote
To do you service --
Ex. Synan.
Calist. My Lord I thank you,
A pretty Boy indeed; your name sweet Youth.

Irene. I had not time to make it! Oh my Fate!
To be condemned a Slave to her I hate.

Calist. What are your Blushes, Fear, or Modesty,
Dispense with both at present; tell your Name:

Irene. My Name's Thomazo.

Calist. Heaven's she mocks me!
But oh my Rage, be still till I can feast Thee!
Where were you Bred? and who did you belong to?

Iren. I Have hardly wit enough to answer; Madam,
My over tender Friends childishly Bred me,
And I Am afraid 'twill Kill my Aged Father,
To find that I am lost: If you have goodness
But equal to your Beauty, it is excessive,
And sure a just Request you cannot deny.

Calist. It may be not, but tell me what it is,
Your Complement does strongly plead for you.

Irene. Madam, it is you would prevent the trouble
An unexperienced Boy will hourly give you,
And send me back again to my poor Father.

Calist. That must not be, you are too fair to part with;
I like these Childish looks; This pretty Face
Must not Adorn it self with Blushes thus,
They do assault a heart too hastily;
Part with such sweetness! Every word that begs it
Strokes and plays with Irene Is a new Charm to strengthen a Denial;
I Will fetch a Glass, we will compare our Faces.
Exit Calist.
Iren. It is no wonder Prince Thomazo gained her
Upon his first address, since she can thus
Court me, yet think me all the while a Boy.
Enter Calista with a glass.
Calist. Come hither pretty Rogue. That Nose of thine
Would match this Face much better, Those Plump lips
Methinks I could Steal too -- I needs must kiss 'em --

Irene. Good Madam, pardon me.

Calist. So very Coy!
That pretty Chin I like -- but for my Eye
I would keep that, my Eyebrows too and Forehead.
Betwixt thy Face and mine might sure be made
A Beauty that would Captivate all Hearts;
Let Us try to make one such. Thy Innocence
Can do no harm in Bed; come thou and I
Wont part till both get better Bed-fellows.
Ex. Calista.
Iren. Prodigious Impudence! This goes beyond
The worst invented Stories of our Sex. Ha!
Enter Calista and Udoxia.
Calist. Perhaps Irene will own her self to you,
To me she seems all man, and Courts me too.

Irene. Pardon me, Madam, that I durst not own
A Person I wished lost to the whole World.

Calist. What to Thomazo?

Irene. Las, that Name I took
In too much haste, I know not what I said.

Vdox. But can this be Irene?

Iren. Dear Friend, it is,
The much surpised Irene to meet you here.

Calist. Did not Dorello tell you of us both?

Iren. How Madam, can you know he met with me?

Calist. I do forget my self, you came but now.

Vdox. But what in this disguise has brought you hither?

Iren. How we are all here, I know not, but Calista,
I fear your Father has been much too blame.

Vdox. But I Will amend his Fault, by keeping you
From being seen by any person living,
'Till you are safe got back.

Iren. If this prove true,
Her worth will my Aversion quite subdue.
Exeunt.
Enter Emperor and Chancellor Discoursing earnestly. Emperor. This to my Reason
seems incredible,
Yet to my sense is plain.

Chanc. Your Majesty
Will sure perceive my Innocence by this,
And what just grounds I had for all my Fears.

Emp. I know not what to think, but sure he cannot
Be so unnatural, as this does speak him:
Ill men begin at first with petty Crimes,
And dare not by degrees lanch forth to great.
But he at one great leap from good to bad,
Seems to love mischief in Extremity,
And scorn to mount it is top by graduation.

Chanc. Sir, to be near, and yet but near a Crown,
In Souls like his move strong Agitations.

Emp. What shall I say to it? -- I cannot think --
But he will soon be here -- Dorello too --
I scarce have Faith enough to doubt of his,
But to believe an only Brother Traitor,
And Traitor to this height -- I cannot do it --

Chanc. Sir, as you please for that. I charge him not --
Alas he is too great for me to Cope with,
But I had rather much his Power should Crush me;
Ay! Crush me into nothing -- then that you
Who are my Sovereign Lord, and such an one
To whom I owe all that is Noble in me,
Should seem to hazard life, and Empire both,
By any fears of mine --

Emp. What shall I do?
Cannot a Prince be merciful and safe?
It Is very hard I find -- this wicked Age
Does almost think there is no such thing as goodness,
And villifie all Persons that profess it;
If Princes pardon Crimes they count it weakness,
And if they punish them it is Tyranny.

Enter Thomazo. Thom. Sir, did you send for me?

Emp. Ay Thomazo!
But it is to tell you that which does amaze
Far more then Anger me; Cannot you guess
At what the matter is, and spare my Tongue
The trouble to declare such unkind things;
I wish you would Thomazo.

Thom. Your Majesty
Shall not find it hard to know the greatest secret
My mind can labor with.

Emp. Then tell me Brother,
Have not some late transactions done by you,
Or by Dorello's Ministry at least,
Bin of that Nature, well nigh cause my Anger.

Thom. Commented on by Enemies they may,
And I suspect no Friend was so officious
To tell you my design.

Chanc. I do perceive
I Am some restraint upon the Princes Candor,
Therefore shall take my leave.
Exeunt Chanc.
Emp. And can you Brother
Wish Empire without Glory?

Thom. Sir, I know not
What it is your words do tend to? All I know
Or have transacted that might trouble you,
Has not the least Reflections toward Empire.

Emp. Then tell your Reasons Brother.

Thom. Sir, the Cause
I kept my Passion secret, was for fear
Some scruples in your own or Senates Breasts
Might have prevented that, which when once done,
I knew you soon would Pardon.

Emp. Pardon Brother,
What, think you I Am so tame to Pardon Treasons,
That ware so black a Visage?

Thom. Sure no Law
Does limit my free choice of any Wife,
Under so high a Penalty as Treason;
But if there was, the Merit of Irene
Would strongly plead I Am sure in my excuse.

Emp. This Love you own, I never did dislike,
Though I suspected it; but it is not that
Has brought me to this Parley, but worse matters.

Thom. Sir, I am ignorant of any thing,
Besides my hopeless Love can move your Anger.

Emp. Nay, Brother, you shall see it is not slight matters
That have obliged me to this unkind Parley.
Enter Messenger. Bring in that fellow there -- friend, tell your Story.

Messeng. Sir, as I said before, being employed
Toth' Turkish Camp about Intelligence,
I there have heard them say, that Prince Thomazo
Must be Morea's King, and that this Town
On that condition, he will soon give up.

Thom. Sir, can you credit Slaves, hired to accuse me,
Of such impossible designs as these?
Villain! who has suborned you to say this?

Emp. Be patient till you hear his Story out.

Thom. I sooner might be patient when hot Pincers
Were tearing off my Flesh.

Emp. But I commend you.

Thom. Then silent Sir as Death, I Will hear my honor
Be blasted by his Breath -- and never murmur,
No Sheep shall fall more tamely Sir then I.
Friend, say all that the Chancellor has taught you.

Messeng. Sir, what I Have said, and what I am to say,
My Senses all must Witness is most true,
Though in the least I do not accuse your Highness;
What I have said, I heard in the Turkish Camp:
I did -- and what I saw there, is to follow --
Which is that often at Synan Bassa's Tent,
I Have seen the Lord Dorello in great favor,
And Courted by the Bassa, but last Night
He did come back to Town in a disguise;
For meeting in their Fleet we boarded Boats,
And though he knew not me, yet I did him;
I saw him there produce a large Commission,
And show it to the Turkish Admiral,
By which he had full power to close with you.
This Sir is true, as I have proof enough.

Emp. Return to your Confinement for a while,
You nor your Fellows shall not be long restram'd;
What think you of this Brother.
Exit Messenger.
Thom. Sir, I think
That Virtue which you Worship proves an Idol,
An empty name, less sollid then a shadow:
Oh deep unfathomed Vilanies of State!
Through what strange Mazes do you wind your selves,
That honest men cannot find Clews to trace you. --

Emp. What a sad Fate have Princes that are born
To bare the Fate of sinking Monarchy;
Those actions which we judge will prop it most,
Produce its speedier Ruin: Faction grows
And spreads it self through Council, Court, and Notion,
And nothing can be heard but accusations,
These when we would Unite for common good,
They say we Cherish for our private safety;
If we believe them all, then none are honest;
If we give Ear to none, all will grow angry;
So whether we are severe or moderate,
Our Glory's hid in the Ruin of the State.

Thom. Sir, I have thought upon it, all this seems false,
But how to prove it so, I cannot guess.

Emp. Brother, I Will say no more but only this,
Act as you please, I n're can be unkind.
Exit Emperor.
Thom. What worth the keeping life for now is left?
I am stripped of all that is Dear, Friend, Mistress, Brother,
And of my Honor too! -- why live I then?
Because I am a Christian! Surely though
That could at the first teach Contradictions,
What were most Martyrs but Self-Homicide?
What severe Hermit too but shortens life,
Why then it is plain I Am Master of my self.
By best Rules of our Philosophy: --
But some will hold it is Cowardice to die
For fear of Misery! -- Why then I Will live;
Yet scarce my self, my self alive shall know:
In strict retirement my few hours will spend,
And by sharp Abstinence my life will end.
Exit.
Enter Emperor, Theophilus, Chancellor, Cardinal, and Justiniano, who kneels
and Kisses the Emperors hand. Just. Sir, I with thanks receive my Liberty,
And shall discharge the Duty of my place,
With all the Zeal that may be since I hear
You have laid by the Prince.

Emp. My Lord, I wish
You Would place a greater Guard upon your words;
It is not I, but my unlucky Stars
Have for the Empires ruin laid him by.

Just. Sir, you shall see it is stronger prop
If you will find away to pay my men.

Chanc. My Lord, you do offend his Majesty,
In speaking of the Prince with such contempt;
You had best attend your Charge, and leave to me
The getting of your Pay: The Emperor
Is put upon a project to get Money
And you shall find your share.

Just. My Lord, my men
Wont Fight one stroke without it, that I tell you.
Ex. Justin.
Chanc. Nay, good my Lord, no more, Your Majesty
Should not regard his Folly but his Courage.

Emp. Courage! Each private Soldier may have that,
It Is Conduct only makes a General;
And I suspect his much, for all your Prayers;
But I Will not long endure his Insolence,
I Will rather hazard all on my own person.

Chanc. What means your Majesty?

Emp. Why Fame does say,
This Sultan Mahomet's a Valiant Prince;
I Will try, if he will on single Combat stake
The Fortune of this War.

Chanc. How Is this?
Aside.
Cardinal. Perhaps
You have not well considered that design;
Your Majesty in such a weighty Cause
Must ask advice of Piety not Passion.

Emp. My Lord, you speak as if strong Appetite
Did make me seek this Combat for a pleasure,
But I Will assure you it is on no such Cause:
Thank Heaven I dare, but do not love to fight.

Card. No Sir, nor must not singly; Heaven's strict Laws
Delivered by the Church, does quite forbid
All Duells under pain of highest censure.

Emp. Surely, when Heaven gave Sacred Characters
To Clergy men; it did not then divest
The rest of Mankind of the use of Reason;
Did it my Lord?

Card. No, not of common Sir.

Emp. Common! I understand no such distinction;
Reason is Reason, and that does plainly say,
If I in the head of Thousands may make War,
And hazard both my own and others lives,
I sure much more, may singly do the same.

Card. Not without dispensation from the Pope,
As humbly I conceive.

Emp. The Pope, good Man!
No Dispensations from his Officers,
It Is they must have a Fee: These tricks of Rome,
Of first forbidding, then dispensing things,
Has Robbed it of the Reverence once it had,
From best Advisers to Men's Consciences;
They now are grown to be their Torturers,
Things in themselves indifferent they make sin;
And real sins they dare give leave to act:
A man may be a Saint and Traitor both,
When Dispensation frees him from his Oath.
But trouble not your self Lord Cardinal,
I Will ask the Sultans Dispensation only,
If he consents, I Will not refuse the Fight.
Enter Dorello like a Doctor. What have you seen him Doctor?

Dorel. Sir, I find,
Except you Majesty in person goes,
His Servants dare not let him be disturbed.

Emp. How do they say he is?

Dorel. They do believe,
As I have said; it is a Lunacy
Sprung from an over-tender sense of Honor;
But still I Would undertake on pain of Death,
Were I but few days with him, I would awe him.

Emp. Come, we will go visit him, his Health would bring
Me Vigor to our never expiring power,
Ex. Emp. etc.
Chanc. Pray Heaven he be but Mad, I Will never fear
This cheating Quack from Persia e're can cure him:
He Will sooner Poison him I Will undertake,
And that part of his Art I Will undertake,
And that part of his Art I Will try him in
If I can fix him well -- but stay this Combat
The Emperor designs, and I do fear
The Sultan may accept in thirst of Glory
Must be prevented; it is too much to stake
My utmost certain hopes upon one Throw
But sure I need not fear, the fair Irene
Will keep him from that Danger.
Enter Michael.
Mich. Noble Sir,
New Letters from the Bassa, say his Master
Does Dote so much, that he forbears all action.

Chanc. How Is this? I fear the Love he bares Irene
May make him raise the Siege.

Mich. I fear it too.

Chanc. Well, something must be done that may prevent it,
Can you learn nothing yet of this Dorello?

Mich. Not any thing, my Lord!

Chanc. Sure he walks Invisible! That Danger
Did threaten most of all, and yet my Stats
Has brought me off with Triumph. --
But stay! -- The Emperor designs to Beg
Something by way of Loan of the Citizens;
He Will find them Cursed free! Ha! ha! ha! a Beggar Prince
Is such a Contradiction -- but I Will go
And see the sport, I hope I shall be able
To keep my self from down right laughing at him.
Exeunt.
Enter Thomazo, Solus with a Book in his hand. Thom. It cannot be but all that
they says Chymera,
There is no sollid Truth in all this stuff;
It Is merely words: They Are Sinowy Sillogismes
By which they puzle both themselves and us,
Are perfect Ropes of Sand: If we will be Fools
To grant their first Conceptions, then they will prove
The Consequence must needs be this or that.
Grant me says one an Immaterial Giant,
That does reside in Immaterial place,
I Will prove he turns the Primum Mobile,
And that turn all things else about the Globe:
Then starts another up, and he conceives,
That Immaterial Being is absurd;
Strait brings his Giant in to do his Tricks
On good Material Legs -- then shows a Storm
Produced by a slight cold matter had got,
Which made it Sneeze -- all comes to such like stuff,
Avaunt substantial thick Egyptian darkness,
Throws away the Book. Rank mist of words be gone; there is nothing true,
No nothing: Good and Ill are only Names
(...) Stamped by our Interests; farewell all Books,
I Will Study nothing but my Misery,
Enter Emperor, Card. Dorello. And how to Die apace. Ah Mighty Sir,
And may I not have leave to do that neither,
It Is all I beg; you once were a kind Brother.

Emp. I Have not a thought but speaks me kind as ever.
Here is a Learned Doctor.

Thom. What to do?
I want no health -- If you have skill, feel here,
Does not my Heart keep it is Pulsation right,
As right as ever, though it is just a breaking;
Come wave your profit once and speak the Truth.
Am not I well in health?

Dorel. Your Highness is
In what the Bloods concerned.

Thom. Oh, let alone
The inward man: That goes beyond your Tools,
Your Probe's not long enough to Tent my Soul:
Sir, on my Knees I beg I may be private.

Emp. From all but this one man, Brother you shall --

Thom. Then since I must be Plagued with conversation,
I Will ask some questions: How go things in the Senate?

Emp. Their obstinacy forced me to dismiss them.

Thom. That was a prudent step, but how the Siege?

Emp. The Turks like loving Neighbors seem most quiet.

Thom. They then expect some Revolution here!
Lord Cardinal, when come our helps from Rome?
When I go next abroad, -- nay, my good Lord,
I Have answered now my self, -- your Majesty,
I hope, will free me now from all but him.

Emp. Study your health, dear Brother, till you're well,
My Self and Empire both do languish in you.
Exeunt Manent Thom. and Dor. who pulls off his Beard.
Thom. Come Sir, to work, have you a Dose of Opium,
For I want Sleep extremely, -- Ha -- Dorello.

Dorel. Ah Sir! Can you endure a Traitors Breath;
For so State Pamplets, and the Ballets call me;
For what I do not know, except it be,
That I know some are such, I must not name;
But I have secrets Sir that will amaze you.

Thom. Not more then does your Presence in this manner;
Sure I Am deceived, -- on with your Beard again,
So, -- now I see it only was my Fancy:
But where is Dorello gone?

Dor. Ah, Noble Sir,
I fear you are not so well as I did hope.

Thom. It is Dorello's voice too, -- Ah dear Friend,
Wonder not I seemed Crazed: Alas, Irene,
Is Murdered I believe, or lost for ever.

Dor. No Sir, She is not Dead, though I must fear,
That as you guess she may be lost for ever.

Thom. Not Dead! how know you that?

Dor. I Have seen her Sir,
And She Is in the Turkish Camp from whence I came.

Thom. From thence I Will presently go Rescue her.
Exit.
Dorel. He is too near Distraction to be told
Irene's the Sultans Mistress; but I Will go
And humor all his fancies till he sleeps,
Perhaps some rest will make him fit for Council.
Exit.
Shouts without. Enter Emperor, Chancellor, Cardinal, Attendants and Rabble.
Michael. Emp. Their Obstinacy makes things desperate:
What Is to be done my Lord?
Enter Alderman.
Chanc. Try a few more, here comes an Alderman.

Emp. Friend, you are Rich, I Am told, and therefore should
Spare something of it for your Countries safety;
Nay, for your own, your Wife and Childrens too;
For they and all you have lies now at stake.

Alder. Your Majesty is misinformed of me;
I Rich! alas Sir, I am very poor.

Chanc. Consider Friend, who it is that goes a Begging,
Your careful Emperor himself in Person.

Card. Your much distressed Prince, consider that,
Give something Sir, and Heaven will sure reward it.

Emp. Friend, It Is not for my self I ask! Heaven knows
That was it not for you my loving People,
I Would sooner die then undergo this Shame:
Come Sir, be liberal, that others may
By your Example lend their money freely.
That so the Soldiers paid, may boldly Fight,
And here I promise on my Royal Word,
That what you lend I Will faithfully repay
As soon as Peace has opened Trade again.

Alder. This way of borrowing Sir, I fear's Illegal
Without the Senates leave, -- and I Would be loath
To break the Law, and make bad Presidents
That might infringe the Liberty of the Subject.

Chanc. Ay! there is the Argument that choaks them all.

Emp. How strangly Friend you do mistake the Law,
Am I in worse condition than a Subject?
Who wanting money borrows any where;
Nay, what I borrow, I by force might take
At such a time as this -- a Law there is,
A Narural Law of Power it may be called,
Which gives the Prince aright to every thing
He thinks may keep the Commonwealth from sinking,
And this no other Law can Abrogate --

Alder. My Council does inform me otherwise,
And I shall take his word -- Except my Lord,
You Will give your hand upon it he is in the wrong.

Chanc. Good Friend forbear, I am no Advocate
That signs my hand to every Case that is put:
His Majesty expects your answer Sir.
Enter Thomazo and Dorello disguised.
Thom. Ha! what Mock State is this?

Alder. Your Majesty
Must pardon me, for I can spare no Money.
Exit Alder. and Rabble.
Emp. It Is labor lost, Heaven surely binds their Eyes
To their Destruction; but I find, my Lord,
That you concur with their false arguing.

Chanc. The times are dangerous Sir, I dare not speak
Except in private Council --

Emp. Princes may
By me be warned of two much Lenity;
The Rabble is a Jade, must feel her Rider,
It Is not soft taps I see, but whips must rule her,
Humility moves none but generous Souls.
Exeunt Emp. etc.
Thom. Was I not obstinate to see Irene,
I scarce could let this Traitor live a Moment.

Dorel. Good Sir, let me entreat you to desist
From that so dangerous and vain attempt.

Thom. Dorello, say no more, I Am resolved
To show her I was true, though she is not so;
And should Death wait me in the Turkish Camp,
Yet I would go, -- see! how the Traitor laughs --

Chanc. I put him on this project for his Ruin;
It was a subtle Mine, I knew, when sprung,
Would blow up all that little power he had:
An humble Prince makes Subjects Insolent,
Then what does Begging do, -- ha, ha, ha, honest Michael,
Go watch how he succeeds, and bring me word.
Exit Michael.
Thom. I must Alarm him --
His Soul is much too jocund for a Traitors;
My Lord, I have a mind to give allay
To your excessive laughter -- where is Irene?

Chanc. Ha!

Thom. Your Daughter too, Vdoxia and Dorello,
What? you to save their lives, have sent them hence,
What punctual day Sir, must the Town be took?

Chanc. Sure Slave you know me not, you dare talk thus!

Thom. Yes, you are he, that by the help of Soldiers,
Did break the Sanctuary! -- then for Reward,
Bestowed a Dose of Poison on your Slaves;
You thought their Dying too a pleasant sight.

Chanc. What Devil can thou be that dare accuse
Of Crimes so false as these?

Thom. I cannot stay at present now to prove them;
But in good time I may; in the Interim
I Will step and tell your Daughter you are a Traitor.
Have you no service to the Eunuch Bassa,
I Will kiss his hands e're long --

Chanc. Ho! Michael!

Thom. If you would prolong your life one day or two,
You may by being Silent; but if not,
This is your latest Moment.
Exit Thom. Dor.
Chanc. Sure this must be
Some of Dorello's Instruments in Town.
My Ruin is contrived, I plainly see,
And I must be as quick in my preventions.
Enter Michael.
Mich. The Begging Emperor has but ill success.

Chanc. Curse on him, we have worse, all is betrayed;
I Have bin attaqu'd by one that knows Dorello,
And every thing by him that we have done.

Mich. Can this be possible, and we not find him;
I hoped he had bin drowned in his coming.

Chanc. No, all my Stars grow dull of late; I think
They take no care of me, or my designs,
But still my Plots are spoiled by Countermines.
Exeunt.
ACT. V.
Enter Thomazo and Dorello. Dorel. THe Bassa's Kindness to me still Continues,
Nay, rather is increased by knowing me.
But yet I cannot prevail to see the Ladies.
Enter Mutantrope, They sign to one another. But see your little Traitor, -- is
your Tongue
Out out? -- it is no matter, you deserved it --
Nay, you do well, to own your fault,
There is no trusting such a Rogue as you.
If I had any business -- would you indeed --
Then let me see Vdoxia, or Calista --
How! Calista in such favor! where is Irene then*
Thou art a lying Rogue, I still perceive --
Oh Villain, dare thou swear so false a thing?
As that the Sultan does not know Irene? --

Thom. Can only such a Traitor speak the truth?
And all Mankind be liars? yet, methinks
The virtue of Irene, does make me hope it.

Dorel. If this you swear, be true, then bring my Friend
And me to see Irene -- If you're forsworn
Expect a greater judgment then you have --
Well, we will try your faith.
Ex. Mutant.
Thom. The Boy is strangly earnest; sure he cannot
Be such a Villain to invent all this?
It Is possible the subtle Chancellor
Contrived, that Fame might say it was Irene,
Lest his Intelligence might be suspected.

Dorel. I cannot tell, what to think; there is no design
The Boy can have -- is worth his Perjury,
Except he wholly does delight in False-hood.

Thom. To see Irene, and see her true, will be
Some few Degrees beyond felicity.
Exeunt.
Enter Synan. Synan. She threatens now: what a rank Ass was I
To bring ambitious Beauty 'bout my Prince,
This Poison is for Irene --
I Am confident, -- but Lady look about you,
We Statesmen have our tricks; it is well I did not
Inform her Father that it was her self,
And not the fair Irene the Sultan dotes on,
Did he but know it, we soon should have bin here:
His Politic Pate would still Solicit Bowstrings
Might be presented us, that vacant places
Might be disposed by him, -- but to his grief,
Both he and all men else, think it is Irene.

Enter Calista, Irene, Udoxia, and Mutes, one Carrying a Cup of Poison, the
other Bowstrings. Calist. No! I Will cut off my fears, their hopes and thine
All at one blow.

Synan. Consider but the Crime!

Calist. No Synan, you mistake that charming Face
Which in dead colors first bewitched my Lord,
Shall not remain for you to show a line,
From that design Springs all your Piety.

Synan. If you fear that, then spare this other Lady;
Why Madam, must she dye?

Calist. For sweet revenge,
She did upbraid me, with my Fathers Nature
And now she will find I have it thoroughly.

Vdox. I will not lose a Prayer to ask thee Mercy,
Nor will I live after Irene is Dead.

Calist. You shall never doubt it.

Irene. Ah Calista!
Think of the pleasant hours we three have spent
In Childish sports together, -- call to mind
How both of us have strove which most should please you.

Calist. Plead not our wanton Childish Tales to me,
I am a Woman, and do see the Danger
Of that bewitching Beauty you have got,
Therefore make haste and choose your way of dying.

Irene. Save but Vdoxia's life, I Will call that Mercy,
And with my dying Breath beg pardon for you.

Vdox. Irene, never speak of that, give me the Cup,
I do defy all kindness from the Monster
Except you share it too --

Calist. Bravely Res lv'd!
But do not drink it all, one half will serve;
I tried it on a Slave, and he died calmly,
Made no ill Faces as some people do.

Iren. Come then, let us take our everlasting leaves
Of all our Sorrows here, -- my thoughts begin
To prompt me it is brave to leave this world,
And all it is flattering, false, and painted joys,
Which do allure to real Miseries.
Vdoxia, lead the way.

Vdox. Farewell Dorello.
She drinks and gives the Cup to Irene.
Iren. And farewell now for ever my Thomazo.
Drinks.
Calist. Curse on his Name, it staggers me a little;
But Love Adieu! and Triumph my Revenge!
In thy first Conquest -- Farewell Play-fellows.
Exit Calist.
Synan. Sure it is some Bodied Fury this, not Wonman;
Ladies, you will find your Deaths steal gently on you
Like a soft Sleep: but yet to show I would
Do any thing was in my power to serve you,
I Will send the little Traitor, Mutantrope
To find Dorello out, and bring him to you.

Vdox. May Heaven reward your Charity, my Lord,
It is the only thing I Would wish on Earth.

Synan. You shall not fail of that -- now Mustapha,
Our Plot is Ripe to ruin this Medea.
Exit.
Iren. Whither, dear Friend, are thou and I a going?

Vdox. To Heaven Irene.

Irene. Heaven is a great way off,
And though I doubt not, we shall soon reach thither,
Yet Nature shudders at the world of Miles
That Fancy says is thither -- Ah Vdoxia --
I hope we shall know one another there.

Vdox. I hope so too -- yet, what the pleasure is
Which happy Souls enjoy, I cannot guess,
But sure it will not be any thing like those
We do enjoy on Earth.

Irene. Ay, there is the fright;
Methinks we are about to lose our selves,
And change to something else. Though what we know not?
But we shall never be We again I fear.

Vdox. Yet this we are certain of we cannot be worse.
Enter Mutantrope, and observes them, then Exit. Enter Dorello and Thomazo. But
see the Boy! I hope Dorello's coming.

Dorel. It makes me happy I Am in your thoughts.

Vdox. I Will own that naught on Earth could be so welcome.

Irene. Nor to me neither except Prince Thomazo.

Thom. That word in spite of Fortune makes me happy.

Iren. Ah! do I see you Sir? Then welcome Death --
faints away.
Thom. How Is this! Irene! paleness sits on her lips.

Dorel. The sudden Joy o'recame her -- give her Breath,
She Will come to her self --

Vdox. Never on Earth.

Thom. What dreadful word is that? it pierced my Soul!

Vdox. The strange Surprise did make the Poison work.

Dorel. Poison!

Vdox. Ay Sir, Calista Poisoned her.

Dorel. Ah Horrid Deed! but see the Prince Sir, Sir,
I fear his Soul's not proof against this blow.

Thom. Irene so Angry, that she will not speak!
Ha! Poison! Never! I will not have Calista,
Her Father is a Traitor -- but Irene
Is the great Sultans Mistress, -- Is she so?
Then I Will turn Hermit in a Grove of Willows,
Berrys of Baleful Ivy shall be my Food,
And the Drink nothing else but my own Tears!
For fair Irene is false.

Dorel. Ah dire mishap,
His scarce Cured Lunacy again returns:
Great Sir, Irene is Virtuous --

Thom. Then I Will have her.
I will my Self destroy the Sultans Army,
And Rescue my Irene -- to horse -- to horse
--
Draw up the Guards and follow, -- sound a Charge --
What do you Run you Dogs --
Draws and exiturus, is held by Dorello.
Dorel. Oh, good Sir stay --
Discovered once, he will be lost for ever --

Thom. What are you that take me Prisoner?
I will not have Quarter now Irene is lost.

Dorel. Look on me Sir! do not you know Dorello?

Thom. Ha! where is Irene? Oh! there, She Is there --
Have I recovered her? -- I thank you all --
You have Fought bravely -- you shall all be Knighted.
But will not Irene speak to her own Thomazo?
Pardon me, Madam, -- by all my Love I thought
Kneels by her. 'Twas you I should have Married.

Vdox. Ah poor Prince!
Dorello, look to him -- but if you can
Procure our Bodies Christian Funerals,
I know hers does, and I hope mine deserves it.

Dorel. What mean you, Madam?

Vdox. I find the Poison works on me apace.

Dorel. What are you poisoned too!

Vdox. Ay Sir, Calista
Was kind in that, to let us Die together.
I can no more! Farewell, my dear Dorello.

Enter Calista and Mutes. Dorel. I envy not the Prince! why do not I
Learn the same Art to lose my grief in Madness.

Calist. What men are these, seize on them; ha! Thomazo
Dorello too!
They seize them, Thom. stands amazed.
Dorel. Ah thou cursed Monster!
What Devil taught thee all this Cruelty?

Calist. I learned it of that Prince, he taught me first
To find my Nature bad -- I else had lived
A puling virtue, still frighted with tales
Of Hell and Devils, with other silly Bug-bears;
But seeing him the stout and brave Thomazo,
The Wise, Just, Generous, and great Thomazo,
Take pleasure to betray a harmless Maid:
This taught me rage, and raged instilled revenge,
Which made me do this petty triffling mischief;
But that is not half enough, since above my hopes,
You two are fallen thus into my hands.

Dorel. Ay, dare thy worst; as for that noble Prince,
Were he but safe, Death were to me savor.

Calist. Nay, you shall both together! Slaves your strings.
Mutes put Bow-strings on them.
Thom. Though I Am a Prisoner; I Will
Wear no Chains but those of fair Irene!

Dorel. Irene is Poisoned!
Poisoned most Noble Prince, by this damned Monster.

Thom. Ha! it is the Devil Dorello, it is the Devil:
He has Calista's shape, but it is a Devil,
He cannot hurt me though, for I desy him;
Ha, ha, ha, -- see! how the Devil weeps
Because he cannot get his will to hurt us.
We are too honest for his Mischief, -- let me go,
I Will make him vanish with a Vengeance hence.

Calist. Oh! I could chide my Eyes for showing grief,
Though it is a Killing sight. -- Thomazo is Mad!
How came he thus Dorello?

Dorel. Can you ask?
And see Irene lie Murdered there by you?

Calist. Oh I would rail and call him if I could,
Ungrateful, base Thomazo. But this sight
Renews again my Love, and stops my Mouth.

Dorel. Talk not of Love at all, much less for him,
That is too good a Passion for thy Soul,
And he a Cause too Noble.

Calist. Ah Dorello!
Judge but from whence proceeds this Flood of Tears!

Dorel. They Are such as Crocodiles by Nilus shed.

Calist. Nay, rather such as once Medea did,
When she dispersed her tender Brothers limbs;
Love taught her Cruelty, and I perceive
'Twas that, and not Revenge has Murdered these.

Dorel. If cruel hearts, like yours, be capable
Of Love, yet all you have the Sultan claims.

Calist. The Sultans Title sprung from my Ambition,
But now that Passions cloyed, and Love returns.

Dorel. Madam, why do you pause? pray give me death,
Vdoxia chides my sloth for staying thus.
Thom. starts up.
Thom. Ha! Sir! I am no Traitor! I Am your Brother,
Ask Dorello if the Damned Chancellor
Be not the Mighty Traitor of your State --
But see his Daughter -- She shall be Sultaness. --
I will have none of her -- She is a Monster --
See see -- how she is besmeared with Blood,
But where is Irene -- Alas! She Is angry -- Ah me --
I will have none but her --

Dorel. Alas poor Prince!
The fair Irene is Murdered by Calista.

Thom. Ha! Murdered! Irene Murdered -- then Calista
Shall be torn Limb from Limb by horrid Devils!
Her Soul shall turn that fatal Bird of Night,
With Crokes and Crokes for sad departing Souls.
He Sings. SONG.
IN Caves full of Sculls, and rotten old Bones,
She Sighs in the Daytime, and in the Night Groans.
Amongst Ghosts of the Guilty, for ever She Will howl,
And in Beds sill'd with Serpents eternally Role.
But I and Irene will be Merry,
Amongst happy Lovers we will Play,
Ah Charon! make have with your Ferry,
Row hard, and I Will double your Pay.
Irene we will part no more --
Falls down.
Calist. Why do you pause upon it? he in his Madness shows
His lasting hate to me, and Love to her;
Revenge is roused again by Jealousy,
And now I wish him Dead; Passions in me
Like Tides in some great Rivers, flow not in,
But first in heaps of Water take their view,
Then Roar, then tumble in Mountains of Sea,
Devouring Shores almost as quick as thought;
So now your times are come.

Dorel. I do rejoice --

Calist. Your joy shall be but short, pull Slaves!
Enter Synan.
Synan. Hold Dogs! --

Calist. Synan! how is this? dare you control our orders?

Synan. Not but by his; whom you your self obey.
Our Mighty Sultan saw and pitty'd him.

Calist. Oh I am lost.

Synan. No, Madam, I am so without your Mercy;
And it is against me alone his Rage is bent,
For thus deluding him about Irene:
But save my Life since for your sake I did it.

Calist. No Synan, if thy Fate depends on me,
Thou must expect a dreadful Destiny.

Synan. I see my Deaths inevitable now!
But I am glad my life does Ransom yours.

Dorel. You cannot give us life, in them we die.

Synan. That Death will but continue till they wake.

Dorel. How wake! my Lord! do not despise our griefs.

Synan. It Is but a sleepy potion, which they took,
Which I prepared to save them from Calista.

Dorel. My Lord, my Lord, you grieve without a cause
For fair Irene's not dead; This noble Bassa.
Who knows no falsehood says it.

Thom. What is that?

Dorel. Irene is living Sir.

Thom. Ay, but She Is angry,
She will not speak one word to poor Thomazo.

Dorel. Sir! she is a sleep!

Thom. Ah do not wake her then!
Hushed! hushed! no noise, I pray let her sleep --
She will be pleased anon -- steal softly out --
Softly -- softly -- do not wake her for the world.
She Is Dreaming now of poor Thmazo's love.
Exit softly.
Synan. I must admire the ways of providence,
That strangely thus by wicked men's designs,
Does often protect the just -- your Chancellor
To fortify his greatness in our Court
Has caused your being here, where you are safe,
Which else you con'd not be in our next storm:
For then the Town's betrayed: The General
Has promised to march out with all his Soldiers,
And there is a Royal Half Moon Banner sent
To the Chancellor which will protect his house --

Dorel. Good my Lord,
Let not the Prince hear this but by degrees,
His Brother and his Country's loss will be
A Grief his worthy mind will hardly bare,
Should he recover this which now assaults him.

Synan. My Lord, you freely shall command this place
Whilst I have any Breath to give that power,
And after that, you safely may rely --
Upon our Sultans friendship to the Prince,
Which I dare say is real: But I must
Make have and meet that Death now stays for me.

Dorel. My Lord! I hope much better.

Synan. No, my Lord!
Our Sultan's Frowns are Mortal; they are met by this
To be spectators of my Tragedy.
Carry the Ladies in -- when I am dead --
May you, my Lord, and all your Friends be happy.
Mutes carry in the Ladies.
Dorel. My Lord! farewell; may Heaven preserve
You still --
Exit Synan. But yet I fear he is lost: Virtue on Earth
Is like some wholesome Herb over grown with Hemlock,
There is so little, men can hardly find it,
And all that use it are unfortunate --
Exeunt.
Enter Emperor, Theoph. Chancellor, Cardinal, Attendants. Theoph. This
Information puzles my belief,
I sooner should have doubted my own Faith
Then Prince Thomazo's -- sure it cannot be.

Card. The things too evident for any doubt;
Hot spurred Ambition in a Young man's breast
Never boyles at a Crime would give it Checque.

Theoph. But sure the world must end, when Crimes like these
Are boldly Acted by the best of men;
Virtue has spent her utmost stock on Earth; --
Virtue, that Cement of the World, grows loose,
Then Nature sure must shake into its Chaos.
Irene to turn a Strumpet, did Amaze me!
Though she is a Woman -- but for Prince Thomazo
To make a base Revolt, is Miraculous.

Emp. What can an Emperor, bounded and tied
By Laws, Act more than I already have --
But Heaven and all things else conspire our Ruin,
What can we then more but resolve to Die;
Story shall never say I did neglect
My personal Duty to the very last.

Chanc. No, Mighty Sir, had the Revolted Prince,
And others of his Faction, but bin faithful,
You might have shined in History, as great,
As does that Constantine who first Reigned here.

Emp. Heaven strangely brings its great Decrees about
A Constantine, whose Mothers name was Helena,
Began this Empire: The Bishop of this See
Was Theodotius then, so all are new,
Both, and State must sink in the same names
As founded them; but let Heavens will be done.

Card. Despair not Mighty Sir; the ways of Heaven
Are past all finding out, who knows but you
May give a new beginning to this Empire
By driving back this faithless Mahomet.

Emp. I for my subjects sakes, perhaps could wish it,
Though for my self a worthy death is best;
Which I have sought from Mahomets own hand
By single fight; but that he basely waves
With Crowds of bleeding slaves he snatches glory,
Which flies from me, who court it still in person.

Enter Justiniano. Justin. Sir I am come once more to ask our Pay,
Which, if denied, we presently will March.

Chanc. Now it begins to work!
Aside.
Emp. Do as you please,
My subjects obstinate to all entreaties,
Deny me their supplies; and I Am resolved
Rather to perish with them, then extend
My Regal power beyond its usual bounds:
Blinded they are, and blinded let them be,
Since they love Gold beyond themselves and me.

Justin. Bare witness all, that it is no fault of mine
This Empire sinkes: I could have propt it yet;
And with this single Arm sustained it is weight,
Had not affronts upon affronts at first
Disarmed me of the power to wish your good;
But I Will not stay to bury all my glory
Under your mighty ruins; no, my Sword,
When you are nothing but the name of Prince,
Shall give me the full power of being so --

Theop. Sir; will you patiently endure this slight!

Emp. Let him, and all the world grow insolent;
It shall not move my rage: My Brothers Crimes
Have stupify'd my Anger.
Enter Captain.
Capt. Mighty Sir;
The perdues do fly in the Turks advance
As if they did intend a general Storm.

Emp. All that dare not be Slaves, now follow me,
To certain Death, or glorious Victory.
Exeunt.
Enter Thomazo and Dorello. Thom. Dorello! sure I Am deluded still
And this I feel's another sort of madness,
Is it not so, Dorello?

Dorel. No, my Lord;
Your cause of joy is sollid, like those Cares,
Whose unexpected sounds, distempered you.

Emp. Am I then known, and in the Turkish Camp,
Yet free from Chains? and does Irene still live?
Nay, live for Prince Thomazo! this, Dorello,
My sickly fancy would persuade is true.

Enter Synan. Dorel. For all these mighty Blessings, next to Heaven,
We owe our thanks toth' noble Eunuch Bassa,
I wish his safety were as firm as ours.
Enter Mutes with Calista's head.
Synan. Thanks to that hearty wish, and so it is;
See there the head that lately threatened mine.

Thom. Oh wonderful! Calista's head cut off!

Synan. Ay noble Prince! our Sultan has deceived us;
But to our satisfaction, for just now
Mounted upon a Throne in full assembly,
He did expose this Beauty to our view,
Seeming to glory in so rich a Jewel.
And had his praise Echoed back by us:
Then Beckoned me, I went and kneeled before him,
Thinking my self a Victim to her Triumph,
And she believed it too, for big with joy,
Her Eyes rolled Grace to all; but scorns on me,
When in her height of Pride, one sudden blow
Given by the Sultans Sword, took off her Head
So quick, she could not shreek one Prayer for Mercy:
Then throwing me the Head -- cried, Synan take it,
And smiling, bid us see, how much he valued
True Glory above Beauty -- but the Storm
Will presently begin, and I must thither,
And be an Actor in this Scene of Fate
Which will Create our Sultan Emperor.

Thom. Are you assured my Lord the Town will yield?

Synan. Nothing more certain Sir, the Town's betrayed,
But Heaven has so contrived that you are safe:
Farewell most noble Lords; if I am slain --
Think of me -- If I live, I Am still your Servant.
Exeunt Synan, etc.
Thom. Ah Dorello, it is not for us to live
Beyond our Princes Ruin. No, Brother,
Thomazo's Love and Fortune shall give way
When Is Honor, or your safety is in question;
Come Friends, let us once again Enter the Town,
And leave the Ladies here, they will still be safe,
What e're becomes of that, or of our lives,
Though Dead in them, some part of us survives.
Exeunt.
Enter Emperor, Theophilus, and Attendants with Swords drawn, They pass over
the Stage in have, great Clamors and Noise. Trumpets and Drums beat a Battle.
Enter Chancellor, Lorenzo, and Michael, like Turks above. Chanc. The sport's
begun, that noise which dreadful sounds
To others Ears, to mine seems sprightly Music.
Day breaks apace, as soon as we perceive
The Town is taken, hang the Banner out.

Loren. Shall we admit of such as seek Protection?

Chanc. No, not the Emperor himself shall enter;
Let them even take their Chance.
Shouts. Oh, that was brave!
Cries, and running over the stage, all is lost, all is lost. Hang out the Banner
strait, the Town's our own.

The Banner hung out; Enter Christians, drove in by Turks. Enter Emperor,
Theoph. etc. Who make strong Fight by giving way. Enter Thomazo and Dorello
Fighting, and driving off the Turks. Lorenz. See there! the Prince Thomazo and
Dorello
Are Fighting on this side.

Chanc. I Am glad of that,
This forfeits all his favor with the Turk,
And it is not in his Power to save the Town.

Enter Emperor, Thomazo, Dorello, Theoph. Emp. Brother, your Loyalty does bring
a joy
Beyond what Victory it self would do.

Thom. Ah Royal Sir, there is no time to talk,
Our Men can never hold the ground we gained;
Were but your Person safe, I would not Care.

Emp. It Is safe whilst Guarded by your Noble Sword,
And mine I hope shall prove a Guard to yours.

Thom. Sir, it is in vain to hope to keep the Town:
Then take this time to save your self by Flight,
Whilst I make Head against the Entering Turks.

Emp. How Brother, Fly! No, it shall never be said
That I survived a loss so great, as is
So brave a Brother, and an Empire too.

Thom. Sir, be not obstinate! but see a Flag.
That speaks Protection to the Chancellor,
Open your Gates my Lord, and take but in
Your Emperor and Theophilas; such a Deed
Will make Atonement now for all your Crimes.

Emp. I will not hold my Safety from a Villain.

Chanc. No Sir, conent your self, you come not here;
Nor any person else -- my Crimes, my Lord,
Are got above the punishment of Heaven.
Shouts and Clamors.
Emp. Infamous Renegade -- but the Noise
Calls loud for our assistance --
Exit.
Thom. Come, Dorello,
Let Us Keep him safe as long as e're we can --
Ex. all but Theop.
Theop. Blasphemous Traitor, are thy Crimes so great?
Thou thinks the powers above han't strength to punish!

Chanc. Talk not my Lord, I for your Daughters sake
Will let you singly in, and save your life.

Theop. No cursed Dog, I Would sooner find my Death
From my own hand, then owe my life to thee.
Exit.
Chanc. Nay, if you be so brisk, even take your Chance!
What insolent Slaves are these?
Enter Cardinal.
Card. Oh my good Lord!
Let me but find protection in your House!

Chanc. Alas my Lord, your Eminence on foot!
It Is a great way to Rome; you had best make have,
Spare Complements to me -- you have my leave --

Card. My Lord! mock not my misery.

Chanc. You Will be belated truly, wanting Horses,
My Duty to his Holiness, and tell him,
I Have ended now this long continuing Schism
To his own hearts Content!

Card. Impudent Traitor!
A noise! Enter Christians retreating.
Chanc. See see, the Cardinal has lost his Gout --
Ex. Card. running.
Enter Emperor, Thomazo, Theoph. Dorello, and Guards Fighting before the Turks.
Emperor falls Dead. Thom. Oh Heavens! the Emperor's Slain, preserve his Body.
They Fight. Enter Synan, who fighting falls. They are going to Kill him.
Thomazo prevents it -- Accept your Life from Prince Thomazo Sir,
As part of recompense for all your favor Sir.

Synan. Most noble Prince, persist not thus in vain
To stop the Current of our Victory,
Which will at last flow over, and drown you all;
You, and those you shall choose, shall on my honor,
Be safe from either Death or Slavery. --

Thom. I Have nothing now to fight for, but my self,
Since this brave Prince is Slain, therefore I yield
To be a Prisoner to Noble Synan.

Syna. Christians, put up your Swords, this party shall
Continue as a guard about your person,
But that they may be safe, I will appoint
Some Janissaries that may join with them.

Thom. Your Favors all are large!

Syna. Lord Chancellor,
The Sultan does require your person should, should,
Be brought before him straight.

Chanc. With have I Will fly
To Kiss the Foot of our great Emperor.
Exeunt.
Enter Irene and Udoxia. Vdox. What various changes have our miseries?

Irene. It Is better sure we had for ever slept
Then only wak't to a more grievous Death.

Vdox. See yonder! how the Flames ascend the Skies,
Seeming to melt the Heavens.

Iren. O sad sight!
This is the Prince Thomazo's Funeral Pile,
And I ungrateful, I don't leap into it,
But I Will not long survive thee, noble Prince,
For in a Flood of Tears I Will drown my self,
Thus from two warning Elements we will meet
Above; yet keep an everlasting Peace!

Vdox. I yet could Chide, methinks their gallantry
That could expose both us and them to ruin,
In such a needless danger as they sought.

Irene. No 'twas their duty lead them to the fight,
And I do love Thomazo's flame too well,
To wish him safe with loss of any honor,
Though to revive from Death, and meet him well,
Then straight again to lose him, seems severe.

Vdox. Ha! what vision's this!
Enter Thomazo Theop, etc.
Theop. Do I see thee alive, and virtuous both?
Can Heaven bring joy after these fatal losses!
Irene, our Prince is slain and Country lost.

Irene. Did not the thoughts of that suspend my joy,
To see Thomazo and your self alive,
I scarcely should be able to support it.

Enter Synan. Synan. Great Sir! the Sultan has commanded me,
To greet you with this style -- King of Morea;
For with that Kingdom he does now invest you,
Under the tribute of an Annual Horse.

Thom. Your Princes's soul's as large as is his Empire,
And I with grateful thanks receive the gift.

Synan. That action which I feared would raise his anger
Increased but his esteem -- He said, you could
Have found no better way to perfect glory
Then this last act of fighting for your Brother:
And it has strengthened much his Friendship to you.

Thom. How shall I e're express my gratitude
For all these Mighty Favors he bestows.

Synan. The riches in the Town are found prodigious;
Though basely they denied their Prince assistance;
For which 600000. Thousand Souls and more
Forever must into -- Captivity --
As a just reward for their Disobedience!
Only he does permit you shall set free
Ten thousand of such Persons you best like;
The Chancellor and some few other Traitors
He only does except: For they must die
A just example to all future times;
He further does intend a Noble present
For this fair Lady; whom he dares not see.

Thom. He is a Prince of such a mighty Soul;
Virtues in him contend for Victory,
And each of them in turn do gain a Triumph.

Synan. The Execution's doing on the Traitors!
A noise of groaning. Step but a broad and you may see the Train.
I Will go and clear, and stand --

Theop. Fame certainly does spread abro de
'Twas you the Sultan killed.

Irene. That error does arise because we were
Never seen by any person but the Mutes;
The Sultan, and two Bassa's, since we came,
And Fame does still report I was his Mistress.

Thom. Let fame be still a Liar, my Irene,
And say, it is thou art Dead, so I can thus
Admire thy living Beauties -- but let us go
And see the Sultans justice upon Traitors --
Exeunt.
The Scene a great Number of Dead and Dying men in several manner of Death's.
The Chancellor, Lorenzo, and Michael Empal'd. Within. Make way there! Make way.
Enter Synan and Mutes, Thomazo, Dorello, and the rest.
Theoph. What a sad sight is this?

Dorel. This is a severe extension of his power.

Thom. This Turkish way of rule threatens the world,
As if their Crescent would at last be full,
And rule it all.

Synan. This is the way to govern:
Severity, not Mercy, strengthens power.
See there your Chancellor and his two Scribes.

Thom. I pity them, though they deserved far worse,
For ruining their Country, whose sad Fate,
We during life shall Mourn, yet in our Tales
We must your Virtue, and the Sultans praise,
And Monuments of Thanks for ever raise.
Exeunt omnes.
FINIS.

