The dutiful ADVICE of a loving SON, to his aged FATHER.

flower

LONDON, Printed by W. B. and are to be sold by W. Sheares at the sign of the
Bible over against the North-door of Paul's 1650.

The dutiful ADVICE OF A LOVING SON To his AGED FATHER.
SIR,
I Humbly beseech you, both in respect of the honor of God, your duty to his
Church, and the comfort of your own soul, that you seriously consider in what
terms you stand; and weigh your self in a Christian balance, taking for your
counterpoise the judgments of God: Take heed in time that the word TEKEL,
written of old against Balthazar, and interpreted by Daniel, be not verified in
you, whose exposition was, You have been poized in the scale, and found of too
light weight.

Remember that you are now in the weining, and the date of your pilgrimage well
nigh expired, and now that it behooves you to look toward your Country, your
forces languisheth, your senses impair, your body droops, and on every side
the ruinous Cottage of your faint and feeble flesh, threateneth the fall. And
having so many harbingers of death to premonish you of your end, how can you
but prepare for so dreadful a stranger. The young man may die quickly, but the
old man cannot live long: the young man's life by casualty may be abridged, but
the old man's by no physic can be long adjourned, and therefore if green years
should sometimes think of the grave, the thoughts of old age should continually
dwell in the same.

The prerogative of Infancy is innocence; of Childhood, reverence; of
Manhood, maturity; and of old age, wisdom.

And seeing then that the chiefest properties of wisdom, are to be mindful of
things past, careful for things present, and provident for things to come: Use
now the privilege of natures tallent, to the benefit of your own soul, and
procure hereafter to be wise in well doing, and watchful in the foresight of
future harms. To serve the world you are now unable, and though you were able,
yet you have little cause to be willing, seeing that it never gave you but an
unhappy welcome, a hurtful entertainment, and now does abandon you with an
unfortunate fare-wel.

You have long sowed in a field of flint, which could bring nothing forth but a
crop of cares, and afflictions of spirit, rewarding your labors with remorse,
and affording for your gain, eternal danger.

It is now more than a seasonable time to alter the course of so unthriving a
husbandry, and to enter into the field of Gods Church, in which, sowing the
seed of repentant sorrow, and watering them with the tears of humble
contrition, you may hereafter reap a more beneficial harvest, and gather the
fruits of everlasting comfort.

Remember, I pray you, that your spring is spent, your summer over-past, you
are now arrived at the fall of the leaf; yea, and winter colors have long
since stained your hoary head.

Be not careless (says Saint Augustine) though our loving Lord bear long with
offenders; for the longer he stays, not finding amendment, the sorer he will
scourge when he comes to Judgment: And his patience in so long forbearing, is
only to lend us respite to repent, and not any wise to enlarge us leisure to
sin.

He that is tossed with variety of storms, and cannot come to his desired Port,
makes not much way, but is much turmoyled; So, he that has passed many years,
and purchased little profit, has a long being, but a short life; For, life is
more to be measured by well doing, than by number of years: Seeing that most
men by many days do but procure many deaths, and others in short space attain
to the life of infinite ages; what is the body without the soul, but a corrupt
carcass? And what is the soul without God, but a sepulcher of sin?

If God be the Way, the Life, and the Truth, he that goes without him,
strayeth; and he that lives without him, dies; and he that is not taught by
him, erreth.

Well (says Saint Augustine) God is our true and chiefest Life, from whom to
revolt, is to fall; to whom to return, is to rise, and in whom to stay, is to
stand sure.

God is he, from whom to depart, is to die; to whom to repair, is to revive;
and in whom to dwell, is life for ever: Be not then of the number of those that
begin not to live, till they be ready to die: and then after a foes desert,
come to crave of God a friends entertainment.

Some there be that think to snatch Heaven in a moment, which the best can
scarce attain unto in the maintenance of many years, and when they have
glutted themselves with worldly delights, would jump from Dives Diet, to
Lazarus Crown, from the service of Satan, to the solace of a Saint.

But be you well assured, that God is not so penurious of friends, as to hold
himself and his Kingdom salealbe for the refuse and reversions of their lives,
who have sacrificed the principal thereof to his enemies, and their own
brutish lust; then only ceasing to offend, when the ability of offending is
taken from them.

True it is, that a thief may be saved upon the cross, and mercy sound at the
last gasp: But well (says S. Augustine) though it be possible, yet it is
scarce credible, that the death should find favor, whose whole life deserved
death; and that the repentance should be more excepted, that more for fear of
hell, and love of himself, than for the love of God, and loathsomness of sin
cries for mercy.

Wherefore, good SIR, make no longer delays; but being so near the breaking up
of your mortal house, take time before extremity, to pacify Gods anger.

Though you suffer the bud to be blasted, though you permitted the fruits to be
perished, and the leaves to dry up; yea, though you let the boughs to wither,
and the body of your tree to grow to decay, yet (alas) keep life in the root,
for fear lest the whole tree become fuel for hell fire; For surely where the
tree falls, there it shall lie, whether toward the South, or to the North,
to Heaven, or to hell; and such sap as it brings forth, such fruit shall it
ever bear.

Death has already filed from you the better part of your natural forces, and
left you now to the Lees, and remissals of your wearyish and dying days.

The remainder whereof, as it cannot be long, so does it warn you speedily to
ransom your former losses; for what is age, but the Calends of death, and what
imports your present weakness, but an earnest of your approaching dissolution,
you are now embarked in your final voyage, and not far from the stint and
period of your course.

Be not therefore unprovided of such appurtenances as are behovefull in so
perplexed and perilous a Journey; death it self is very fearful, but much more
terrible, in respect of the judgment it summoneth us unto.

If you were now laid upon your departing-bed, burdened with the heavy load
of your former trespasses, and gored with the sting and prick of a festered
Conscience; if you felt the cramp of death wresting your heart strings, and
ready to make the ruefull divorce between body and soul: If you lay panting for
breath, and swimming in a cold and pale sweat, wearied with struggling against
your deadly pangs, O what would you give for an hours repentance; at what rate
would you value a days contrition? Then worlds would be worth less in respect
of a little respite, a short truce would seem more precious than the treasures
of an Empire, nothing would be so much esteemed as a short trice of time, which
now by days, and months, and years, is most lavishly misspent.

Oh how deeply would it wound your woeful heart, when looking back into your
former life, you considered many heinous and horrible offenses committed, many
pious works, and godly deeds omitted, and neither of both repented, your
service to God promised, and not performed.

Oh how unconsolably were your case, your friends being fled, your senses
affrighted, your thoughts amazed, your memory decayed, and your whole mind
aghast, and no part able to perform what it should; but only your guilty
Conscience pestered with sin, that would continually upbraid you with many
bitter accusations.

Oh what would you think then, being stripped out of this mortal weed, and
turned out both of service and house-room of this wicked world, you are forced
to enter into uncough and strange paths, and with unknown and ugly company, to
be convented before a most severe Judge, carrying in your Conscience your
Indictment, written in a perfect Register of all your misdeeds, when you shall
see him prepared to give sentence upon you, against whom you have so often
transgressed, and the same to be your Umpire, whom by so many offenses you have
made your enemies, when not only the Devil, but even the Angels would plead
against you, and your own self, in despite of your self, be your own most
sharp appeacher.

Oh what would you do in these dreadful exigents, when you saw the ghastly
Dragon, and huge gulf of hell, breaking out with most fearful flames, when
you heard the weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth; the rage of those
hellish monsters, the horror of the place, the terror of the company, and the
eternity of all those torments.

Would you then think them wise that should delay in so weighty matters, and
idly play away the time allotted, to prevent these intolerable calamities?
Would you then count it secure, to nurse in your own bosom so many Serpents as
sins? and to foster in your souls so many malicious Accusers, as mortal and
horrible offenses? Would you not think one life too little to repent in, for so
many, and so great iniquities, every one whereof were enough to throw you into
those unspeakable and intolerable torments.

And why then (alas) do you not at the least devote that small remnant, and
surplusage of these your latter days, procuring to make an atonement with God,
and to free your Soul and Conscience from that corruption, which by your fall
has crept into it.

Those very eyes that behold, and read this Discourse, those very ears that are
attentive to hear it, and that very understanding that considers and
conceives it, shall be cited as certain witnesses of these rehearsed things.
In your own body shall you experience these deadly Agonies, and in your soul
shall you feelingly find these terrible fears; yea, and your present estate, is
in danger of the deepest harms, if you do not the sooner recover your self into
that fold and family of Gods faithful servants.

What have you gotten by being so long a customer to the world, but false ware,
suitable to the shop of such a merchant, whose traffic is toil, whose wealth
is trash, and whose gain is misery? What interest have you reaped, that might
equal your detriment in grace and virtue? Or what could you find in the vale of
tears, that was answerable to the favor of God, with loss whereof, you were
contented to buy it.

You cannot now be inveigled with the passions of youth, which making a
partiality of things, sets no distance between counterfeit and current, for
these are now worn out of force, by tract of time are fallen into reproof by
trial of their folly.

Oh let not the crazie cowardness of flesh and blood, daunt the prowess of an
intelligent person, who by his wisdom cannot but discern how much more cause
there is, and how much more needful it is to serve God, than this wicked world.

But if it be the ungrounded presumption of the mercy of God, and the hope of
his assistance at the last plunge (which indeed is the ordinary lure of the
devil) to reclaim sinners from the pursuit of Repentance. Alas, that is too
palpable a collusion to mislead a sound and serviceable man, howsoever it may
prevail with sick and ill-affected judgments: who would rely upon eternal
affairs, upon the gliding slipperiness, and running streams of our uncertain
life? who, but one of distempered wits, would offer fraud to the Discipherer of
all thoughts; with whom dissemble we may to our cost, but to deceive him, is
unpossible.

Shall we esteem it cunning to rob the time from him, and bestow it on his
enemies, who keeps tale of the least minutes, and will examine in the end how
every moment has been im^loyed. It is a preposterous kind of ^^licie, in any
wise conceit to fight against God, till our weapons be blunted, our forces
consumed, our limbs impotent, and our best time spent; and then when we fall
for faintness, and have fought our ^elves almost dead, to presume on his mercy.

Oh! no, no, the wounds of his most sacred body, so often rubbed, and renewed
by our sins, and every part and parcel of our bodies so diverse, and sundry ways
abused, will be then as so many whet-stones and incentives, to edge and
exasperate his most just revenge against us.

It is a strange piece of Art, and a very exorbitant course, when the Ship is
sound, the Pylot well, the Mariners strong, the Gale favorable, and the Sea
calm, to lie idly at the road, burning so seasonable weather: And when the Ship
leaketh, the Pylot sick, the Mariners faint, the Storms boisterous, and the
Seas a turmoyl of outrageous Surges, then to launch forth, (hoise up sail) and
set out for a long voyage into a far Country.

Yet such is the skill of these evening Repenters, who though in the soundness
of their health, and perfect use of their reason, they cannot resolve to cut
the Cables, and weigh the Anchour that withholds them from God.

Nevertheless, they feed themselves with a strong persuasion, that when they
are astonished, their wits distracted, the understanding dusked, and the bodies
and souls wracked, and tormented with the throbs and gripes of a mortal
sickness, then forsooth they will begin to think of their weightiest matters,
and become sudden Saints, when they are scarce able to behave themselves like
reasonable creatures.

No, no, if neither the Canon, Civil, nor the Common Law will allow that man
(perished in judgment) should make any Testament of his temporal substance;
How can he that is animated with inward garboyls of an unsettled Conscience,
distrained with the ringing sits of his dying flesh, maimed in all his ability,
and circled in on every side with many and strange incumberances, be thought of
due discretion to dispose of his chiefest Jewel, which is his Soul, and to
dispatch the whole manage of all eternity, and of the treasures of Heaven in
so short a spurt.

No, no, they that will loyter in seedtime, and begin to sow when others reap;
they that will riot out their health, and begin to cast their accounts when
they are scarce able to speak; they that will slumber out the day, and enter
their journey when the light does fail them, let them blame their own folly, if
they die in debt, and be eternal beggars, and fall headlong into the lap of
endless perdition.

Let such listen to S. Cyprians lesson; Let, says he, the gri^vousness of our
sore be the measure of our sorrow; let a deep wound have a deep and diligent
cure; Let no man's cont^ition be l^ss than his Crime.

FINIS.


