THE ACTS MADE IN THE SECOND PARLIAMENT OF OUR MOST HIGH AND DREAD SOVEREIGN
CHARLES, By the grace of God King of Scotland, England, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.

Holden at Edinburgh in the several Sessions thereof, according to the dates
therein mentioned.

Acts past and done in this present Session of Parliament, the eleventh of June
1640.

EDINBURGH, Printed by Robert Young and Evan Tyler, Printers to the Kings most
excellent MAJESTY. ANNO 1641.

Cum Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

ACTS PAST AND DONE IN THIS PRESENT Session of PARLIAMENT, the eleventh of June
1640.
ACT I. ACT ANENT THE CHOOSING OF Robert Lord Burghlie to be President in this
Court and Session of Parliament, in respect of the absence of the Kings
Commissioner.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by His Majesty's special
authority, Considering, that in respect of the absence of His Majesty's
Commissioner, they are necessitate to make choice of one of their number to be
President in this present Session of Parliament, And understanding the
sufficiency of Robert Lord Burghlie for that charge, They all in one voice,
with one consent, did nominate, elect and choose the said Robert Lord Burghlie,
to be President, and to proceed in this present Session and Court of
Parliament, for discussing and handling of the matters to be determinat
thereintill.

ACT II. ACT ANENT THE CONSTITUTION Of the Parliament, and all subsequent
Parliaments.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by His Majesty's special
authority, Considering that this present Parliament was indicted by His
Majesty, for ratifying of such Acts as should be concluded in the late
Assembly of the Kirk, for determining all Civil matters, and settling all such
things as may conduce to the public good, and peace of this Kirk and Kingdom,
And considering the several complaints of this Kirk unto Parliaments from time
to time, proceeding from her continual experience of prejudice and ruin,
through many persons, and specially of Prelates their attempting to voice or do
any thing in name of the Kirk, without either bearing Office in the Kirk, or
having commission from the Kirk, And the Acts of the late General Assembly,
condemning the office of Bishops, Archbishops, and other Prelates, and the
civil places and power of Kirkmen, as their voycing and ryding in Parliament;
and craving the abolishing of these Acts of Parliament, which grants to the
Kirk or Kirkmen vote in Parliament, to be abrogate, as prejudicial to her
Liberties, and incompatible with her spiritual nature; Considering also that
there are conveened in this present Parliament, by His Majesty's special
indiction, warrant, and authority, the Nobility, Barons, and Burgesses, the
Estates of this Kingdom, who have a full and undoubted power to proceed and
determine in all matters concerning the public good of this Kingdom, and that
notwithstanding of the absence of the Prelates, who by former Laws were
appointed to be members of Parliament; And to the effect none presume to move
any question there anent, The said Estates now conveened, as said is, have
declared, and by these presents declares this present Parliament holden by the
Nobility, Barons, and Burgesses, and their Commissioners; the true Estates of
this Kingdom, to be a complete and perfect Parliament, and to have the famine
power, authority and jurisdiction, as absolutely and fully, as any Parliament
formerly has had within this Kingdom in time bygone; And ordaines all
Parliaments hereafter, to be so constitute, and to consist only in all time
coming, of the Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses, as the members and three
Estates of Parliament: And rescindes and annulls all former Laws and Acts of
Parliament, made in favors of whatsoever Bishops, Archbishops, Abbots, Pryors,
or other Prelates or Churchmen whatsoever, for their ryding, sitting, or
voycing in Parliament, either as Churchmen, or the Clergy, or in name of the
Church, or as representing the Church, as an State or member of Parliament, by
reason of their Ecclesiastical Offices, Titles, Dignities, or Benefices, and
namely, the 231. Act, Parl. 15. K. Ja. 6.1597. anent the Kirk, and specially
parsons and prelates, representing the third Estate, and the 2. Act Parl. 18.
K. Ja. 6.1606. anent the restitution of the estate of Bishops, and their
representing the third Estate, with all Acts and Constitutions of Convention,
Council, or Session, and all practices and customs whatsoever, in so far as
the same or any clause thereof, tends or may be extended to the effect
foresaid, as being found and declared prejudicial to the Liberty of this Kirk
and Kingdom, and to the purity of the true reformed Religion therein
established. And prohibites all persons whatsoever, to call in question the
authority of this present Parliament, upon whatsoever pretext, under the pain
of treason.

ACT III. ACT ANENT THE CHOOSING of Committees out of every Estate.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened, by virtue of His Majesty's
special authority, Considering that there have diverse questions arisen in this
present Parliament, anent the freedom of the Parliament, either to choose, or
not to choose Committees for Articles, and when they resolve to choose anent
the manner of election of them, and anent their use and power: By reason the
same is not yet determined nor set down by any Acts of former Parliaments; for
removing whereof, and avoiding the great prejudice which by experience they
find will hereby redound to this Kingdom, and to the liberty, freedom and
dignity of the supreme Courts of Parliament, They have thought it necessary
that a solid Order be set down, as well declaring the Liberty of the Parliament,
in the manner of their proceedings by themselves alone, or by Committees for
Articles, as prescribing the form and manner of the election of these
Committees for Articles, and defining their use, power, and manner of
proceeding to be observed in all times coming. AND THEREFORE have statute and
declared, That according to the Liberty of all free Judicatories, anent their
own preparatorie Committees, all subsequent Parliaments, may according to the
importance of Affairs for the time, either choose, or not choose several
Committees for Articles, as they shall think expedient, And that any subsequent
Parliaments making election of Committees for Articles, to prepare matters for
them, shall proceed in manner following, To wit, That these of the Noblemen,
shall be named and chosen by the Noblemen themselves, out of their number. And by
the Barons Commissioners of Shires by themselves out of their number; And the
Burgesses, Commissioners of Burrowes by themselves out of their number. The
names of the which persons so named and chosen out of every Estate, (not
exceeding for every Committee, the number prescribed by the Act of Parliament,
1587.) being openly read and made known to the whole Estates sitting in plain
Parliament, The said Estates having received any propositions (which are ever
first to be presented to themselves) by an Act, shall authorize the said
persons with power to treat, reason, and consult upon the expediencie or
inexpediencie of such Articles allanerlie as shall be committed and recommended
unto them by the Estates, and to set down such reasons and motives, as they can
devise, whereby to enforce either the passing or rejecting of the famine in
Parliament, To be reported, with the said Articles, to the remanent of the said
Estates assembled in Parliament, that they may deliberate and advise thereupon,
and that after discussing of the reasons given in either for, or against the
famine, The said Estates may ordain such of the said Articles as they find to
deserve consideration to be formed the said Articles to be voyced in plain
Parliament. And in case it shall happen them to omit or forget to make report
to the Estates, as said is, of any of the said Articles, with their reasons
for, or against the same, It shall be lawful in that case to the in-givers of
the said Articles, to propone the famine again in plain Parliament, that they
may there be determined and decided. And farther, to the effect that the said
Estates may be in readiness to receive all Articles which shall be given in and
presented to the Parliament, and either to give answer thereunto themselves, if
they shall think it expedient, or otherwise to recommend the same to the said
Committee, to be digested by them, and reported, as said is. IT is thought fit
and declared, That the rest of the Estates, by and beside these of the several
Committees to the Articles shall be holden continually to sit for receiving,
advising, and discussing of all Articles, Propositions, Overtures, and Matters
shall be presented to them from the beginning of the Parliament to the closure
thereof. And such like, after all the said Articles are past and discust by
the said Estates in manner foresaid, That they shall take such a competent
time as they shall think requisite, according to the number and importance of
the Affairs in hand, To revise and consider the famine again before the day of
voycing, That they may be well and ripely advised thereanent.

ACT IV. ACT ANENT THE RATIFICATION Of the Acts of the Assembly.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by His Majesty's special
Authority, Ratifies, approves and perpetually confirms the Act of the
General Assembly holden at EDINBURGH in the month of August last bypast,
made upon the seventeenth day of the said Month, and in the eighth Session of
the said Assembly, entitled, Anent the six causes of our bygone evils; whereof
the tenor follows. THE Kings Majesty having graciously declared, that it is
His Royal will and pleasure, that all questions about Religion, and matters
Ecclesiastical, be determined by assemblies of the Kirk, having also by
public Proclamation indicted this Free National Assembly, for settling the
present distractions of this Kirk, and for establishing of a perfect peace
against such divisions and dis-orders as have been sore displeasing to His
Majesty, and grievous to all his good subjects. And now his Majesty's
Commissioner, John Earl of Traquaire, instructed and authorized with a full
Commission, being present and sitting in this assembly, now fully conveened and
orderly constitute in all the members thereof: according to the order of this
Kirk, having at large declared His Majesty's zeal to the reformed Religion, and
His Royal care and tender affection to this Kirk, where His Majesty had both
His Birth and Baptism, His great displeasure at the manifold distractions and
divisions of this Kirk and Kingdom, and His desires to have all our wounds
perfectly cured with a fair and fatherly hand; And although in the way
approven by this Kirk, trial has been taken in former Assemblies before, from
the Kirk Registers, to our full satisfaction, yet the Commissioners Grace
making particular inquiry from the members of the Assembly, now solemnly
conveened, concerning the real and true causes of so many and great evils, at
this time past, had so sore troubled the peace of this Kirk and Kingdom, IT
was represented to His Majesty's Commissioner, by this Assembly, that, beside
many other, the main and most material causes were, first the pressing of this
Kirk by the prelates, with a Service book or book of Common prayer, without
warrant or direction from the Kirk, and containing, beside the popish frame
thereof, diverse popish errors and ceremonies, and the seeds of manifold and
gross superstitions and idolatry; With a book of Canons, without warrant or
direction from the General Assembly, establishing a tyrannical power over the
Kirk, in the persons of the Bishops, and overthrowing the whole Discipline and
Government of the Kirk by Assemblies; With a book of Consecration and
Ordination, without warrant of authority Civil or Ecclesiastical, appointing
offices in the house of God, which are not warranted by the word of God, and
repugnant to the Discipline and Acts of our Kirk; And with the High Commission,
erected without the consent of this Kirk, subverting the jurisdiction and
ordinary Judicatories of this Kirk, and giving to persons merely
Ecclesiastical, the power of both swords, and to persons merely civil, the
power of the keys and kirk censures. A second cause was the Articles of Perth,
viz. the observation of Festival days, kneeling at the Communion,
Confirmation, Administration of the Sacraments in private places, which were
brought in by a null Assembly, and are contrary to the Confession of Faith, as
it was meant and subscribed, Anno 1580. and diverse times since, and to the
order and constitution of this Kirk. Thirdly, the change of the Government of
the Kirk, from the Assemblies of the Kirk, to the persons of some Kirkmen,
usurping priority and power over their Brethren, by the way, and under the name
of Episcopal Government, against the confession of Faith, 1580. against the
order set down in the book of policy, and against the intention and
constitutions of this Kirk from the beginning. Fourthly, the civil places and
power of Kirkmen, their sitting in Session, Council, and Exchequer, their
ryding, sitting, and voycing in Parliament, and their sitting in the Bench as
Justices of Peace, which according to the Constitutions of this Kirk, are
incompatible with their spiritual function, lift them up above their Brethren
in worldly pomp, and do tend to the hinderance of the Ministry. Fifthly, the
keeping and authorizing corrupt Assemblies at Linlithgow 1606. 1608. at
Glasgow, 1610. at Aberdene 1616. at S. Andrews 1617. at Pearth 1618. which are
null and unlawful as being called and constitute quite contrary to the order
and constitutions of this Kirk, received and practiced ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and withal laboring to introduce Novations into this
Kirk, against the Order and Religion established. A sixth cause is, the want of
lawful and Free General Assemblies, rightly constitute of Pastors, Doctors,
and Elders, yearly, or oftener, pro re nata, according to the Liberty of this
Kirk, expressed in the book of policy, and acknowledged in the Act of
Parliament 1592. after which, the whole Assembly, in one heart and voice, did
declare, that these and such other, proceeding from the neglect and breach of
the National Covenant of this Kirk and Kingdom, made anno 1580. have been
indeed the true and main causes of all our evils and distractions, AND
therefore ordain, according to the Constitutions of the General Assemblies of
this Kirk, and upon the grounds respective above-specified, That the foresaid
Service Book, books of Canons, and Ordination, and the High Commission, be
still rejected, That the articles of Pearth be no more practiced, That
Episcopal government, the civil places and power of Kirkmen, be holden still
as unlawful in this Kirk, That the abovenamed pretented assemblies at
Linlithgow 1606. 1608. at Glasgow 1610. at Aberdene 1616. at S. Andrews 1617.
at Pearth 1618. be hereafter accounted as null, and of none effect; and that
for preservation of Religion, and preventing all such evils in time coming,
General Assemblies rightly constitute, as the proper and competent Judge of
all matters Ecclesiastical, hereafter be kept yearly, and oftener pro re
nata, as occasion and necessity shall require (The necessity of these
occasional Assemblies being first remonstrate to His Majesty by humble
supplication) As also that Kirk Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synodal Assemblies,
be constitute and observed according to the Order of this Kirk; Which Act, with
all and sundry the particular heads, clauses, and articles therein contained,
The Estates now conveened by His Majesty's indiction, warrant and authority
foresaid, Ratifies, approves, and confirms in all points, in manners as the
same proports; And gives thereunto the strength of a Law and Act of Parliament,
and ordaines execution to pass thereupon as effeirs; And rescindes, casses,
and annulls all Acts and Decrees of Parliament and Council formerly made,
contrair and in prejudice of the said Act, or any part thereof.

ACT V. ACT ANENT THE RATIFICATION Of the Covenant, and of the Assemblies
supplication. Act of Council, and Act of Assembly concerning the Covenant.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, considering the supplication of the General Assembly at Edinburgh
the 12. of August 1639. to his Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Lords of
His Majesty's Honorable Privy Council, and the Act of the Council the 30.
of August 1639. containing the answer of the said supplication, and the Act of
the said General Assembly, ordaining by their Ecclesiastical constitution, the
subscription of the Confession of Faith and Covenant, mentioned in their
Supplication; And withal, having supplicated His Majesty to ratify and
enjoyne the famine by His Royal authority, under all civil pains, as
tending to the glory of God, preservation of Religion, the Kings Majesty's
honor, and the perfect peace of this Kirk and Kingdom, Do ratify and approve
the said supplication, Act of Council, and Act of Assembly, and conform
thereto, Ordaines and commands the said Confession and Covenant, to be
subscribed by all His Majesty's Subjects, of what rank and quality soever,
under all civil pains, And ordaines the said Supplication, Act of Council,
and Act of the Assembly, with the whole Confession and Covenant it self, to
be insert and registrate in the Acts and books of Parliament; And also
ordaines the famine to be presented at the entry of every Parliament, and
before they proceed to any other Act, That the same be publicly read and
sworn by the whole members of Parliament, claiming voice therein, otherwise
the refusers to subscribe and swear the same, shall have no place nor voice in
Parliament. And such like ordaines all Judges, Magistrates, or other Officers
of whatsoever place, rank or quality, and Ministers at their entry, to swear
and subscribe the famine Covenant, Whereof, and of the said Supplication, Act
of Council, and Act of the Assembly, the tenor follows, etc.

THE SUPPLICATION OF THE General Assembly conveened at EDINBURGH the 12. of
August 1639. to his Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's
Honorable Privy Council.
We the General Assembly, considering with all humble and thankful
acknowledgment, the many recent favors bestowed upon us by His Majesty, and
that there rests nothing for crowning of His Majesty's incomparable goodness
toward us, but that all the members of this Kirk and Kingdom be joined in one
and the same Confession and Covenant with God, with the Kings Majesty, and
amongst our selves: And conceiving the main let and impediment to this so good
a work, and so much wished by all, to have been the Informations made to his
Majesty, of our Intentions to shake off civil and duetifull obedience due to
Sovereignty, and to diminish the Kings greatness and authority, and being most
willing and desirous to remove this and all such impediments which may hinder
and impede so full and perfect an Union, and for clearing of our loyalty, WE
in our own names, and in name of all the rest of the Subjects and Congregations
whom we represent, do now in all humility represent to your Grace, His
Majesty's Commissioner, and the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, and declares before God and the world, that we never had, nor have
any thought of withdrawing our selves from that humble and duetifull obedience
to his Majesty, and to his government, which by the descent and under the
reign of 107. Kings, is most cheerfully acknowledged by us and our
predecessors: and that we never had, nor have any intention nor desire to
attempt any thing that may tend to the dishonor of God, or the diminution of
the Kings greatness and authority: But on the contrary, acknowledging our
quietness, stabilitie and happiness to depend upon the safety of the Kings
Majesty's Person, and maintenance of his greatness and royal authority who is
Gods Vicegerent set over us, for the maintenance of Religion and ministration
of Justice, We have solemnly sworn and do swear, not only our mutual
concurrence and assistance for the cause of Religion, and to the uttermost of
our power, with our means and lives, to stand to the defense of our dread
Sovereign, his person and authority, in the preservation and defense of the
true Religion, Liberties and Laws of this Kirk and Kingdom, but also in every
cause which may concern his Majesty's honor, shall according to the Laws of
this Kingdom, and the duties of good Subjects, concur with our friends and
followers in quiet manner, or in Arms, as we shall be required of his Majesty,
his Council, or any having his authority. And therefore being most desirous to
clear our selves of all imputation of this kind, and following the laudable
example of our predecessors, 1589. do most humbly supplicate your Grace, his
Majesty's Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council, to enjoin by act of Council, that this Confession and Covenant,
which, as a testimony of our fidelity to GOD, and loyalty to our King, we
have subscribed, be subscribed by all his Majesty's Subjects, of what rank and
quality soever.

THE ACT OF HIS MAJESTY'S MOST Honorable Privy Council at Edinburgh, August
30. Anno 1639. containing the answer of the Supplication above-written.
THe which day in presence of the Lord Commissioner, and Lords of Privy
Council, compeired personally John Earl of Rothes, James Earl of Montrose,
John Lord Lowdoun, Sir George Stirling of Keir Knight, Sir William Douglas of
Cavers Knight, Sir Henry Wood of Bonytoun Knight, John Smyth Burgess of
Edinburgh, Mr. Robert Barclay Provest of Irwing, Mr. Alexander Henderson
Minister at Edinburgh, and Master Archbald Johnstoun Clerk to the General
Assembly, and in the name of the present sitting General Assembly, gave in to
the Lord Commissioner and Lords of Privy Council, the petition above written;
which being read, heard, and considered by the said Lords, they have ordained,
and ordain the same to be insert and registrate in the books of Privy
Council, and according to the desire thereof, ordaines the said Confession and
Covenant to be subscribed in time coming by all his Majesty's Subjects of this
Kingdom, of what rank and quality soever.

THE ACT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY, Ordaining by Ecclesiastical authority, the
subscription of the Confession of Faith and Covenant.
THe General Assembly considering the great happiness which may flow from a
full and perfect Union of this Kirk and Kingdom, by joining of all in one and
the same Covenant with God, with the Kings Majesty, and amongst our selves,
having by our great Oath declared the uprightnes and loyalty of our intentions
in all our proceedings, and having withal supplicated his Majesty's high
Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's honorable Privy Council, to
injoyne by Act of Council, all the Lieges in time coming to subscribe the
Confession of Faith and Covenant, which as a testimony of our fidelity to God,
and loyalty to our King, we have subscribed; And seeing his Majesty's high
Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's honorable Privy Council, have
granted the desire of our Supplication, ordaining by civil authority, all his
Majesty's Lieges in time coming, to subscribe the foresaid Covenant, that our
union may be the more full and perfect, We by our act and constitution
Ecclesiastical, do approve the foresaid Covenant, in all the Heads and
Clauses thereof, and ordaines of new, under all Ecclesiastical censure, that
all the Masters of Universities, Colleges, and Schools, all Scholars at the
passing of their degrees, all persons suspect of Papistry, or any other error;
and finally, all the members of this Kirk and Kingdom, subscribe the same,
with these words prefixed to their subscription: The Article of this Covenant,
which was at the first subscription referred to the determination of the
general Assembly, being determined. And thereby the Five Articles of Perth,
the government of the Kirk by Bishops, the civil places and power of
Kirke-men, upon the reasons and grounds contained in the acts of the General
Assembly, declared to be unlawful within this Kirk, we subscribe according to
the determination foresaid. And ordaines the Covenant, with this declaration,
to be insert in the Registers of the Assemblies of this Kirk, General,
Provincial, and Presbyteriall, ad perpetuam reimemoriam; and in all humility
supplicates his Majesty's high commissioner, and the honorable Estates of
Parliament, by their authority, to ratify and injoyne the same, under all
civil pains, which will tend to the glory of God, preservation of Religion,
the Kings Majesty's honor, and perfect peace of this Kirk and Kingdom.

The Confession of Faith, subscribed at first by the Kings Majesty and his
Household, in the year of God 1580. Thereafter by Persons of all ranks, in the
year 1581. By ordinance of the Lords of the secret Council, and acts of the
General Assembly. Subscribed again by all sorts of Persons in the year 1590.
By a new ordinance of Council, at the desire of the General Assembly: with a
general Band for maintenance of the true Religion, and the Kings Person. And
subscribed in the year 1638. By Us, Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen, Burgesses,
Ministers, and Commons, then under subscribing: Together with our resolution
and promises for the causes after specified, to mainetaine the said true
Religion, and the Kings Majesty, according to the Confession foresaid, and
acts of Parliament. And now, upon the Supplication of the General Assembly to
his Majesty's high Commissioner, and the Lords of his Majesty's honorable
Privy Council, subscribed again in the year 1639. by ordinance of Council,
and Act of the General Assembly.
We all, and every one of us underwritten, protest, that after long and due
Examination of our own consciences, in matters of true and false Religion, We
are now thoroughly resolved of the Truth, by the word and Spirit of God; And
therefore we believe with our hearts, confess with our mouths, subscribe with
our hands, and constantly affirm before God, and the whole World, that this
only is the true Christian Faith and Religion, pleasing God, and bringing
Salvation to man, which now is by the mercy of God revealed to the world, by
the preaching of the blessed Evangel, and received, believed, and defended by
many and sundry notable Kirks and Realms, but chiefly by the Kirk of
Scotland, the Kings Majesty, and the three Estates of this Realm, as Gods
Eternal Truth, and only ground of our Salvation, as more particularly is
expressed in the Confession of our Faith, stablished, and publicly confirmed
by sundry Acts of Parliaments, and now of a long time has been openly
professed by the Kings Majesty, and whole body of this Realm both in Burgh
and Land. To the which Confession and form of Religion, we willingly agree in
our consciences in all points, as unto Gods undoubted Truth and Verity,
grounded only upon his written Word. And therefore, we abhor and detest all
contrary Religion, and Doctrine: But chiefly, all kind of Papistrie, in
general and particular heads, even as they are now damned and confuted by the
Word of God, and Kirk of Scotland: But in special, we detest and refuse the
usurped authority of that Roman Antichrist upon the Scriptures of God, upon
the Kirk, the civil Magistrate, and consciences of men, all his tyrannous
laws made upon indifferent things against our Christian liberty: His
erroneous Doctrine against the sufficiency of the written Word, the perfection
of the law, the office of Christ, and his blessed Evangel: His corrupted
Doctrine concerning original sin, our natural inabilitie and rebellion to
Gods Law, our Justification by faith only, our imperfect Sanctification and
obedience to the Law, the nature, number and use of the Holy Sacraments: His
five bastard Sacraments, with all his Rites, Ceremonies, and false Doctrine,
added to the ministration of the true Sacraments without the word of God: His
cruel judgment against Infants, departing without the Sacrament: His absolute
necessity of Baptism: His blasphemous opinion of Transubstantiation, or real
presence of Christ's Body in the Elements, and receiving of the same by the
wicked, or bodies of men: His dispensations with solemn Oaths, Perjuries, and
degrees of Marriage, forbidden in the Word: His cruelty against the innocent
divorced: His divellish Mass: His blasphemous Priesthood: His profane
Sacrifice for the sins of the dead and the quick: His Canonization of men,
calling upon Angels or Saints departed, worshipping of Imagerie, Relicts, and
Crosses, dedicating of Kirks, Altars, Days, Vows to creatures; His
Purgatory, Prayers for the dead, praying or speaking in a strange language,
with his Processions, blasphemous Letanie, and multitude of Advocates or
Mediators: His manifold Orders, Auricular Confession: His desperate and
uncertain Repentance; His general and doubtsome Faith; His satisfactions of
men for their sins: His Justification by works, opus operatum, works of
Supererogation, Merits, Pardons, Peregrinations, and Stations: His holy water,
baptizing of Bells, conjuring of Spirits, crossing, saning, anointing,
conjuring, hallowing of GODS good creatures, with the superstitious opinion
joined therewith; His wordly Monarchy, and wicked Hierarchy: His three
solemn vows, with all his shavelings of sundry sorts: His erroneous and
bloody decrees made at Trent, with all the subscribers and approvers of that
cruel and bloody Band, conjured against the Kirk of GOD: And finally, we
detest all his vain Allegories, Rites, Signs and Traditions, brought in the
Kirk, without, or against the Word of GOD, and Doctrine of this true reformed
Kirk: To the which we join ourselves willingly in Doctrine, Faith, Religion,
Discipline, and use of the holy Sacraments, as lively members of the same in
Christ our Head: Promising and swearing by the Great Name of the Lord our GOD,
that we shall continue in the Obedience of the Doctrine and Discipline of this
Kirk, and shall defend the same according to our vocation and power all the
days of our lives, under the pains contained in the Law, and danger both of
Body and Soul, in the day of GODS fearful Judgment: And seeing that many
are stirred up by Satan, and that Roman Antichrist, to promise, swear,
subscribe, and for a time use the holy Sacraments in the Kirk deceitfully,
against their own consciences, minding thereby, first, under the external
cloak of Religion to corrupt and subvert secretly GODS true Religion within the
Kirk, and afterward, when time may serve, to become open enemies and
persecutors of the same, under vain hope of the Popes dispensation, devised
against the Word of GOD, to his greater confusion, and their double
condemnation in the day of the LORD JESUS: We, therefore, willing to take away
all suspicion of hypocrisy, and of such double dealing with GOD and his Kirk,
Protest, and call The Searcher of all hearts for witness, that our minds and
hearts do fully agree with this our Confession, Promise, Oath, and
Subscription, so that We are not moved for any worldly respect, but are
persuaded only in our consciences, through the knowledge and love of GODS true
Religion, printed in our hearts by the holy Spirit, as we shall answer to him
in the day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed: And because we
perceive, that the quietness and stabilitie of our Religion and Kirk, does
depend upon the safety and good behavior of the Kings Majesty, as upon a
comfortable instrument of Gods mercy, granted to this Country, for the
maintaining of his Kirk, and ministration of Justice amongst us, we protest and
promise with our hearts, under the same Oath, Handwrit, and pains, that we
shall defend his Person and Authority, with our goods, bodies, and lives, in
the defense of Christ his Evangel, Liberties of our Country, ministration of
Justice, and punishment of Iniquity against all enemies within this Realm, or
without, as we desire our GOD to be a strong and merciful defender to us, in
the day of our death, and coming of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; To whom with the
Father, and the holy Spirit, be all Honor and Glory eternally.

LIKE AS many Acts of Parliament not only in general do abrogat, annull, and
rescind all Laws, Statutes, Acts, Constitutions, Canons, civil or municipall,
with all other Ordinances and practique penalties whatsoever, made in prejudice
of the true Religion and Professors thereof: Or of the true Kirk discipline,
jurisdiction, and freedom thereof: Or in favors of idolatry and superstition:
Or of the Papisticall Kirk: As, Act 3. Act 31. Parl. 1. Act 23. Parl. 11. Act
114. Parl. 12. of K. James the sixth, That Papistrie and Superstition may be
utterly suppressed according to the intention of the Acts of Parliament
repeated in the 5. Act, Parl. 20. K. James 6. And to that end they ordain all
Papists and Priests to be punished by manifold Civil and Ecclesiastical
pains, as adversaries to Gods true Religion, preached, and by Law established
within this Realm, Act 24. Parl. 11. K. James 6. as common enemies to all
Christian Government, Act 18. Parl. 16. K. James 6. as rebellers and
gain-standers of our Sovereign Lords authority, Act 47. Parl. 3. K. James 6.
and as Idolaters, Act 104. Parl. 7. K. James 6. But also in particular (by and
attour the Confession of faith) do abolish and condemn the Popes Authority and
Jurisdiction out of this Land, and ordain the maintainers thereof to be
punished, Act 2. Parl. 1. Act 51. Parl. 3. Act 106. Parl. 7. Act 114. Parl. 12.
K. James 6. do condemn the Popes erroneous doctrine, or any other erroneous
doctrine repugnant to any of the Articles of the true and Christian Religion
publicly preached, and by Law established in this Realm: And ordain the
spreaders and makers of Books or Libels, or Letters, or writs of that nature to
be punished, Act 46. Parl. 3. Act 106. Parl. 7. Act 24. Parl. 11. K. James. 6.
do condemn all Baptism conform to the Popes Kirk and the Idolatry of the Mass,
and ordain all sayers, wilful hearers, and concealers of the Mass, the
maintainers and re-setters of the Priests, Jesuits, traffiquing Papists, to be
punished without any exception or restriction, Act 5. Parl. 1. Act 120 Parl.
12. Act 164. Parl. 13. Act 193. Parl. 14. Act 1. Parl. 19. Act 5. Parl. 20. K.
James 6. do condemn all erroneous books and writs containing erroneous
doctrine against the Religion presently professed, or containing superstitious
Rites and Ceremonies Papisticall, whereby the people are greatly abused, and
ordain the home-bringers of them to be punished; Act 25. Parl. 11. K. James 6.
do condemn the monuments and dregs of bygone Idolatry, as going to the
Crosses, observing the Festival days of Saints, and such other superstitious
and Papisticall Rites, to the dishonor of GOD, contempt of true Religion, and
fostering of great error among the people, and ordain the users of them to be
punished for the second fault as Idolaters, Act 104. Parl. 7. K. James 6.

LIKE AS many Acts of Parliament are conceived for maintenance of Gods true and
Christian Religion, and the purity thereof in Doctrine and Sacraments of the
true Church of GOD, the liberty and freedom thereof, in her National and
Synodall Assemblies, Presbyteries, Sessions, Policy, Discipline, and
Jurisdiction thereof, as that purity of Religion and liberty of the Church was
used, professed, exercised, preached, and confessed according to the
Reformation of Religion in this Realm; As for instance, the 99 Act Parl. 7.
Act 23. Parl. 11. Act 114. P. 12. Act. 160. Parl. 13. of K. James 6. ratified
by 4. Act of King Charles. So that the 6. Act Parl. 1. and 68. Act Parl. 6. of
King James 6. in the year of God 1579. declare the Ministers of the blessed
Evangel, whom GOD of his mercy had raised up, or hereafter should raise,
agreeing with them that then lived in Doctrine, and Administration of the
Sacraments, and the people that professed Christ, as he was then offered in
the Evangel, and does communicate with the holy Sacraments, (as in the reformed
Kirks of this Realm they were publicly administrate) according to the
Confession of Faith, to be the true and holy Kirk of Christ Jesus within this
Realm, and discern and declare all and sundry, who either gainsay the Word
of the Evangel, received and approved, as the heads of the confession of faith,
professed in Parliament, in the year of God 1560, specified also in the first
Parliament of King James 6. and ratified in this present Parliament, more
particularly do specify, or that refuses the administration of the holy
Sacraments, as they were then ministrated, to be no members of the said Kirk
within this Realm, and true Religion, presently professed, so long as they
keep themselves so divided from the society of CHRIST'S Body: And the
subsequent Act 69. Parl. 6. of King James 6. declares, that there is none other
Face of Kirk, nor other Face of Religion, then was presently at that time by
the favor of GOD established within this Realm, which therefore is ever
styled, Gods true Religion, Christ's true religion, the true and Christian
Religion, and a perfect Religion, Which, by manifold Acts of Parliament, all
within this Realm, are bound to profess to subscribe the articles thereof,
the Confession of Faith, to recant all doctrine and errors repugnant to any of
the said Articles, Act 4. and 9. Parl. 1. Act 45.46.47. Parl. 3. Act 71. Parl.
6. Act 106. Parl. 7. Act 24. Parl. 11. Act 123. Parl. 12. Act 194. and 197
Parl. 14. of King Lames 6. And all Magistrates, Sheriffs, etc. on the one part
are ordained to search, apprehend, and punish all contraveeners. For instance,
Act 5. Parl. 1. Act. 104. Parl. 7. Act 25. Parl. 11. K. James 6. and that
notwithstanding of the Kings Majesty's licenses on the contrary, which are
discharged and declared to be of no force, in so far as they tend in any ways
to the prejudice and hinder of the execution of the Acts of Parliament against
Papists and adversaries of true Religion, Act 106. Parl. 7. K. James 6. On the
other part in the 47. Act Parl. 3. K. James 6. it is declared and ordained,
seeing the cause of Gods true Religion, and his highness Authority are so
joined, as the hurt of the one is common to both, and that none shall be
reputed as loyal and faithful subjects to our Sovereign Lord, or his
authority, but be punishable as rebellers and gain-standers of the same, who
shall not give their Confession, and make their profession of the said true
Religion, and that they who after defection shall give the Confession of their
Faith of new, they shall promise to continue therein in time coming, to
maintain our Sovereign Lords Authority, and at the uttermost of their power
to fortify, assist, and maintain the true Preachers and Professors of Christ's
Evangel, against whatsoever enemies and gain-standers of the same: and namely,
against all such (of whatsoever nation, estate, or degree they be of) that have
joined, and bound themselves, or have assisted, or assist to set forward and
execute the cruel decrees of the Council of Trent, contrary to the true
Preachers and Professors of the Word of God, which is repeated word by word in
the Articles of Pacification at Perth the 23 of February 1572. approved by
Parliament the last of April 1573. ratified in Parliament 1587. and related,
Act 123. Parl. 12. of K. James 6. with this addition, that they are bound to
resist all treasonable uproares and hostilities raised against the true
Religion, the Kings Majesty, and the true Professors. LIKE AS all Liedges are
bound to maintain the K. Majesty's Royal Person, and Authority, the Authority
of Parliaments, without the which neither any laws or lawful Judicatories can
be established, Act 130. and 131 Parl. 8. K. James 6. and the subjects
liberties, who ought only to live and be governed by the Kings laws, the
common laws of this Realm allanerly. Act 48. Parl. 3. K. James the first. Act
79. Parl. 6. K. James 4. repeated in the Act 131. Parl. 8. K. James 6. Which,
if they be innovated or prejudged, the Commission anent the Union of the two
Kingdoms of Scotland and England, which is the sole Act of the 17. Parl. of K.
James 6. declares such confusion would ensue, as this Realm could be no more a
free Monarchy, because by the fundamental laws, ancient privileges,
offices, and liberties of this Kingdom, not only the Princely Authority of his
Majesty's Royal descent has been these many ages maintained, but also the
peoples security of their Lands, livings, rights, offices, liberties, and
dignities preserved. And therefore for the preservation of the said true
Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom, it is statute by the 8. Act,
Parl. 1. repeated in the 99. Act, Parl. 7. Ratified in the 23. Act, Parl. 11.
and 114. Act, Parl. 12. of K. James 6. and 4. Act of K. Charles, that all Kings
and Princes at their Coronation and reception of their Princely authority,
shall make their faithful promise by their solemn Oath in the presence of the
Eternal GOD, that, enduring the whole time of their lives, they shall serve
the same eternal GOD to the uttermost of their power, according as he has
required in his most holy Word, contained in the Old and New Testament: And
according to the same Word, shall maintain the true Religion of Christ Jesus,
the preaching of his holy Word, the due and right ministration of the
Sacraments now received and preached within this Realm (according to the
Confession of Faith immediately preceding) and shall abolish and gain-stand all
false Religion contrary to the sme, and shall rule the people, committed to
their charge, according to the will and command of GOD, revealed in his
foresaid word, and according to the laudable Laws and Constitutions received
in this Realm, no ways repugnant to the said will of the eternal GOD, and
shall procure, to the uttermost of their power, to the Kirk of GOD, and whole
Christian people, true and perfect peace in all time coming: and that they
shall be careful to root out of their Empire all Heretics, and enemies to the
true worship of GOD, who shall be convicted by the true Kirk of GOD, of the
foresaid crimes, which was also observed by his Majesty, at his Coronation at
Edinburgh, 1633. as may be seen in the Order of the Coronation.

IN OBEDIENCE to the commandment of God, conform to the practice of the godly
in former times, and according to the laudable example of our Worthy and
Religious Progenitors, and of many yet living amongst us, which was warranted
also by Act of Council, commanding a general Band to be made and subscribed
by his Majesty's Subjects, of all ranks, for two causes: One was, for defending
the true Religion, as it was then reformed, and is expressed in the Confession
of Faith, above-written, and a former large Confession established by sundry
acts of lawful General Assemblies, and of Parliament, unto which it has
relation set down in public Catechismes, and which had been for many years
with a blessing from Heaven preached, and professed in this Kirk and kingdom,
as GODS undoubted Truth, grounded only upon his written Word. The other cause
was, for maintaining the Kings Majesty, his Person, and Estate, the true
worship of GOD, and the Kings authority being so straightly joined, as that they
had the same friends, and common enemies, and did stand and fall together. And
finally, being convinced in our minds, and confessing with our mouths that the
present and succeeding generations in this Land, are bound to keep the foresaid
National Oath and Subscription inviolable, We Noblemen, Barons, Gentlemen,
Burgesses, Ministers, and Commons under-scribing, considering diverse times
before, and especially at this time, the danger of the true reformed Religion,
of the Kings honor, and of the public peace of the Kingdom, by the manifold
innovations and evils generally contained, and particularly mentioned in our
late supplications, complaints, and protestations, do hereby profess, and
before GOD, his Angels, and the world, solemnly declare, that with our whole
hearts we agree and resolve all the days of our life constantly to adhere
unto, and to defend the foresaid true religion, and (forbearing the practice of
all novations, already introduced in the matters of the worship of GOD, or
approbation of the corruptions of the public government of the Kirk or civil
places and power of Kirkmen, till they be tried and allowed in free assemblies,
and in Parliaments) to labor by all means lawful to recover the purity and
liberty of the Gospel, as it was established and professed before the foresaid
novations: And because after due examination, we plainly perceive, and
undoubtedly believe, that the innovations and evils contained in our
Supplications, Complaints, and Protestations have no warrant of the word of
GOD, are contrary to the articles of the foresaid Confessions, to the intention
and meaning of the blessed reformers of Religion in this Land, to the
above-written acts of Parliament, and do sensibly tend to the re-establishing
of the Popish religion and tyranny, and to the subversion and ruin of the true
reformed religion, and of our liberties, laws and estates, We also declare
that the foresaid confessions are to be interpreted, and ought to be understood
of the foresaid novations and evils no less than if every one of them had
been expressed in the foresaid confessions, and that we are obliged to detest
and abhor them amongst other particular heads of Papistry abjured therein.
And therefore from the knowledge and consciences of our duty to GOD, to our
King and Country, without any worldly respect or inducement, so far as
humane infirmity will suffer, wishing a further measure of the grace of GOD for
this effect; We promise, and swear by the Great Name of the Lord our GOD, to
continue in the Profession and obedience of the foresaid Religion, That we
shall defend the same and resist all these contrary errors and corruptions,
according to our vocation, and to the uttermost of that power that GOD has put
in our hands, all the days of our life. And in like manner with the same
heart, we declare before GOD and Men, that we have no intention nor desire to
attempt any thing that may turn to the dishonor of GOD, or to the diminution
of the Kings greatness and authority: But on the contrary, we promise and
swear, that we shall, to the uttermost of our power, with our means and
lives, stand to the defense of our dread Sovereign the Kings Majesty, his
Person, and Authority, in the defense and preservation of the foresaid true
Religion, Liberties and Laws of the Kingdom: As also to the mutual defense
and assistance, every one of us of another, in the same cause of maintaining
the true Religion, and his Majesty's authority, with our best counsel, our
bodies, means, and whole power against all sorts of persons whatsoever; So
that whatsoever shall be done to the least of us for that cause, shall be taken
as done to us all in general, and to every one of us in particular. And that
we shall neither directly nor indirectly suffer our selves to be divided or
withdrawn by whatsoever suggestion, allurement, or terror from this blessed
and loyal Conjunction, nor shall cast in any let or impediment, that may stay
or hinder any such resolution as by common consent shall be found to conduce
for so good ends. But on the contrary, shall by all lawful means labor to
further and promove the same. And if any such dangerous and divisive motion be
made to us by word or writ, we, and every one of us, shall either suppress
it, or, if need be, shall incontinent make the same known, that it may be
timously obviated. Neither do we fear the foul aspersions of rebellion,
combination, or what else our adversaries from their craft and malice would put
upon us, seeing what we do is so well warranted, and arises from an unfeigned
desire to maintain the true worship of God, the Majesty of our King, and peace
of the Kingdom, for the common happiness of our selves, and the posterity.
And because we cannot look for a blessing from God upon our proceedings,
except with our profession and subscription we join such a life and
conversation as beseems Christians, who have renewed their Covenant with God;
We therefore faithfully promise, for our selves, our followers, and all others
under us, both in public, in our particular families, and personal carriage,
to endeavor to keep our selves within the bounds of Christian liberty, and
to be good examples to others of all Godliness, Soberness, and
Righteousness, and of every duty we owe to God and Man. And that this our
Union and Conjunction may be observed without violation, We call the living
GOD, the Searcher of our Hearts, to witness, who knows this to be our
sincere Desire, and unfeigned Resolution, as we shall answer to JESUS CHRIST,
in the great Day, and under the pain of GODS everlasting wrath, and of infamy,
and loss of all honor and respect in this World, Most humbly beseeching the
Lord, to strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our
desires and proceedings with a happy success, that Religion and Righteousness
may flourish in the Land, to the glory of GOD, the honor of our King, and
peace and comfort of us all. In witness whereof we have subscribed with our
hands all the premises.

The article of this Covenant, which was at the first subscription referred to
the determination of the General Assembly being determined, And thereby the
Five articles of Perth, The government of the Kirk by Bishops, The civil
places and power of Kirkmen upon the reasons and grounds contained in the Acts
of the General Assembly declared to be unlawful within this Kirk, We
subscribe according to the determination foresaid.

ACT VI ACT RESCISSORIE.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, Considering that the office of Bishops and Archbishops, and all
other prelates, the civil places and power of Kirkmen, as their voycing and
ryding in Parliament, are condemned by the Assemblies of this Kirk, And
considering the several acts and complaints of this Kirk unto Parliaments from
time to time against any persons, especially of prelates their attempting to
vote or do any thing in name of the Kirk, without either bearing Office in the
Kirk, or having Commission from the Kirk, with her frequent supplications to
the Parliament, for dissolving of all prelacies; Considering also the petition
of the Commissioners of the late General Assembly, humbly craving the
rescission of all Acts of Parliament, which grants to the Kirk or Kirkmen, of
whatsoever sort allowed or disallowed, as representing her, or in her name, the
privilege of ryding and voting in parliament, as prejudicial to her liberties,
and incompatible with her spiritual nature, declares that the sole and only
power and jurisdiction within this Kirk, stands in the Kirk of God as it is now
reformed, and in the General, Provincial, Presbyterial Assemblies, with the
Sessions of the Kirk, established by act of Parliament in June 1592. cap. 1140.
which act the said Estates now conveened by his Majesty's special indiction,
warrant and authority, revives and renewes in the whole heads, points, and
articles thereof (with this express declaration, that according to the last
clause in the Act of the late General Assembly of the 17. of August, the
necessity of occasional Assemblies be first remonstrate to his Majesty by
humble supplication) to stand in full strength as a perpetual law in all time
coming, notwithstanding of whatsoever acts and statutes made in the contrair
thereof, in whole or in part, which the Estates conveened, as said is, casses
and annuls in all time coming, and declares, that it is and shall be lawful
to the Presbyteries of this Kirk, to exact and receive from subjects of all
qualities, their Oath of the Confession of Faith and Covenant, with the
Subscription thereof, to examine Pedagogues of the sons of Noblemen, passing
out of the Country, to give them Testimonials, according to former Acts of
Parliament, to give and direct admonitions, private or public, to persons
joined in marriage for adherence, to design manse and gleibs to ministers, to
appoint stent-masters for reparation of Kirks and Kirkyards, and for
maintenance of the Masters of Schools, and to stent the parochioners, conform
to the Act of parliament, to admit Ministers upon the presentations from the
lawful Patrons, or Jure devoluto, which shall happen hereafter. Or unto Kirks
which fall not under patronages suchlike and as freely as they did or might
have done off before. And to do all and whatsoever things which before
pertained to Presbyteries, and were usurped by the prelates, And that
notwithstanding of whatsoever acts or statutes made in the contrair in favors
of Bishops, Archbishops, or other prelates, which the Estates authorized in
manner foresaid, casses and annuals. And specially the Estates foresaids casses
and annuls the 23. Act 1597. anent the Kirk and special persons and prelates
voycing in Parliament, and representing the third Estate, the 2. Act 1606.
anent the restitution of the state of Bishops, and their representing the third
estate, the 8. Act 1607. anent the Chapter of S. Andrews, the 6. Act. 1609.
anent the Commissariats and jurisdiction given to Bishops and Archbishops, the
first Act 1612. anent the ratification of the Acts of the pretended Assembly of
Glasgow, 1610. the first and second Acts 1617. anent the election of Bishops
and restitution of Chapters, without prejudice always to the Ministers,
serving the cure of any emoluments allowed to them in part of their stipend,
the first Act 1621. anent the ratification of the Articles of the pretended
Assemby holden at Perth. And finally, the Estates foresaid, conveened by
authority, rescindes and annulls all and whatsoever Acts of Parliament, Laws,
and Constitutions, in so far as they derogate, and are prejudicial to the
spiritual nature, jurisdiction, discipline, and privileges of this Kirk, or
of her General, Provincial, Presbyteriall Assemblies, and Kirk-sessions, and
so far as they are conceived in favors of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, and others, Prelates or Kirkmen whatsoever, their dignity, title,
power, jurisdiction and estate in this Kirk and Kingdom, or in favors of the
civil places and power of Kirkmen, of whatsoever sort allowed or dis-allowed,
for their riding, sitting, and voycing in Parliament, either as Kirkmen, or the
clergy, or in name of the Kirk, or as representing the Kirk, either in regard
of their Ecclesiastic titles, offices, places, and dignities, or in regard of
the temporality or spirituality of their Ecclesiastic benefices, or other
pretext whatsoever, with all acts and constitution of convention, counsel, or
session, or other Judicatory whatsoever, and all practices and customs
whatsoever, introduced in favors of the said offices, titles, benefices, or
persons provided thereto; And declares all persons civil or ecclesiastical,
censured, deprived, confined, or banished, by virtue of whatsoever acts,
decreets, or sentences, given and pronounced by the said Archbishops and
Bishops, or others their colleagues and associats in their Ecclesiastical
courts, holden by virtue of the acts foresaids, or any of them, or by virtue of
the pretended high Commission, and all acts interponed thereto, against the
persons foresaids, for not obedience of the foresaids Acts, or any of them
which are now repealed, as said is, or for not acknowledging their said
courts; or for their pretended contumacy, and not compearance to answer before
them, To be null, and of none avail, force, nor effect, and the foresaids
persons to be restored and reponed against the same, such like as if the samine
had never been given nor pronounced.

ACT VII ACT FOR PLANTING OF KIRKES Unprovided with Ministers through the
Patrons default.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, Considering the lamentable condition of a great number of
Congregations, lying destitute of Ministers, since the assembly at Edinburgh,
and before, by the negligence of Patrons and others, having interest, to the
great prejudice of the Gospel, Therefore do require the Presbyteries, with
consent of the Parochins, with all diligence to plant these vacant Kirks, which
by the oversight of any Patrons whatsoever, have lain six months unprovided.
And ordain the Lords of Session to give forth sentences and letters in the
ordinary form, for payment of the former stipends of these Kirks, to such as
the Presbyteries shall admit, or have already admitted to the office and cure
of the ministry in these Kirks, with consent of the Parochins, as said is,
while the samine former stipends of these Kirks be changed by the Laws of the
Country. And it is always declared, that this admission, standing good for
the present intrants their time, is and shall be without prejudice to the right
of patronage belonging to his Majesty, or to any other Kirk-patron whatsoever
whenever their Kirks shall fall to vaike.

ACT VIII. ACT ANENT ADMISSION OF Ministers to Kirks which belonged to
Bishoprics.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, Considering that the right of patronage and power of presenting of
Ministers to diverse Kirks within this Realm, have been acclaimed and possessed
by the sometime pretended Bishops and Archbishops within this Kingdom, by
virtue of the 2. Act of Parliament 1606. anent the restitution of the estate of
Bishops, or by some other right, or pretense of right, to the very great grief
and prejudice of this Kirk, her just liberty and possession since the
Reformation, by Superintendents, and the Commissioners of the Kirk before the
erection of Presbyteries. And since by Presbyteries themselves, who have been
respective in possession, for providing and planting of all Kirks within this
Kingdom, belonging to the Bishoprics, And that even since their annexation
1587. upon the suit and calling of the Congregations and Paroches, where the
Ministers were to serve in the function of the Ministry, which is most
evident by the 7. act of the 1. Parliament of our dearest father, in the year
1567. and by the assignation to Ministers of stipends, out of the thirds of
benefices, and letters of horning constantly used to be direct by deliverance
of the Lords of Session upon the provisions and admissions of Ministers to the
said stipends out of the thirds of benefices by Superintendents, Commissioners
of the Kirk and Presbyteries respective without any presentation at all, both
before and since the act of annexation 1587. whereby the Ministers so provided
and admitted did brook and enjoy the fruits and rents assigned, and their
stipends during their life time, and many of them yet living do still brook
and enjoy the same. And suchlike, the foresaid privilege and the right of the
Kirk is evident by diverse Acts of her General Assemblies made thereanent, and
by her frequent grievances against the usurpation of Prelates and others, upon
her said right and possession, and especially by her protestation against the
foresaid two Acts of Parliament of King James the 6. his Majesty's Umwhile
dearest father, holden in the year 1606. whereby the Prelates pretended right
of patronages, and advocations of Kirks, and defrauded the Kirk thereof. And
now seeing the said Act of that Parliament in the year 1606. is rescinded,
cassed, and annulled in this present Parliament, and it is most reasonable,
that the Kirk be restored now after the abolition of the Estate of Bishops, to
the wonted rights, privileges and liberties which she had, and was in
possession of before the restitution of Bishops; Therefore the said Estates of
Parliament conveened, as said is, decernes, statutes and ordaines, that
according to the said 7. Act of the first Parliament of the Kings Majesty's
Umwhile dearest father, the full power of providing of all Ministers to Kirks,
which the said pretended Bishops have been in use to provide, since the said
Act of their restitution 1606. shall hereafter belong and appertain to the
Kirk: and that in all time coming, Presbyteries (who are now in place of
Superintendents and Commissioners of the Kirk) within their several
jurisdictions, shall provide and admit Ministers to all these vacand Kirks,
which before were acclaimed by the foresaids Bishops, by the said Act of
restitution 1606. to the fruits and stipends thereof, but prejudice always to
any patronages of Kirks, which belong either to the Kings Majesty, or to any
Laick patron, or to any Nobleman, Baron, or Burgess right and possession
before these late troubles, and but prejudice of the interest of the paroches,
according to the Acts and practice of the Kirk since the Reformation: And
declares that the said provision and admission with collation and institution
following thereupon, shall be a sufficient right and title for the Intrant to
possess and enjoy the whole fruits, rents and stipends whatsoever belonging to
the Kirk, and to the Ministers serving the cure thereat. And ordaines the Lords
of Session, and all other Judges competent, to give out decreets and sentences,
letters conform, horning, and inhibition, and all other executorialls upon the
said provision and admission of Ministers by Presbyteries, collation and
institution following thereupon, suchlike as they are in use to do upon
collation and institution, following upon presentations from lawful patrons.

ACT IX. ACT DISCHARGING THE GOING OF Salt-pans and Mylnes upon the Sabbath day.
FOrsamekle as the Estates of Parliament presently conveened by His Majesty's
special authority, Considering that GODS public worship upon the Sabbath day
is hindered, and the Sabbath day profaned by the going of Mylnes and Salt-pans
upon the Sunday; For remeed hereof, the Estates of Parliament presently
conveened by his Majesty's special authority, discharges and prohibites all
Salt-pans and Mylnes within this Kingdom, from all going, grinding, making of
Salt, or any ways working upon the Sunday in any time hereafter: And ordaines
the Salters, Millers, and other servants in the said Mylnes and Salt-pans, to
attend GODS public worship every Sunday hereafter, under the pains and
censures contained in the Acts of the Assembly, or other Kirk-Acts set down
hereanent. To the which Acts, the said Estates of Parliament interpones the
civil sanction and authority of Parliament for the better execution thereof.

ACT X. ACT DISCHARGING SALMOND-fishing on Sunday.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, Considering the great abuse and profanation of the Sabbath day,
occasioned by the fishing of Salmond upon that day, whereby many people are
withheld from divine exercise, and are employed in the ordinary works of
their calling, or other ways have opportunity to mis-spend their time in
unlawful actions, contrary to the Law of GOD, and Acts of this reformed Kirk:
Therefore, for remeed thereof in all time coming, inhibites and discharges all
manner of Salmond-fishing upon the Sabbath day, under the pain to the
contraveeners, to be punished as breakers of the Sabbath day, by the
confiscation of the nets and fish to the behoof of the poor.

ACT XI. ACT AGAINST PAPISTS.
THE Estates of Parliament now presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, ratifies and approves all and whatsoever acts and statutes of
Parliament, Convention, or Secret Council, made against Papists, against
sayers and hearers of Mass, and against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and against
excommunicate persons for papistry, or for resetting of Jesuits and
excommunicate Papists, and against the resetters of the foresaids persons, or
any of them, in the whole heads and articles thereof; And specially but
prejudice of the generality foresaid, ratifies and approves the Act of
Parliament made by his Majesty's Father of blessed memory, Parl. 13. cap. 164.
and Parl. 14. cap. 193.194. and the Act made Parl. 20. cap. 5. in the whole
heads and articles thereof; And declares, that witting and wilful resetting of
the persons foresaids, shall be understood to be committed by these, who (after
lawful intimation to be made at the head Burgh of the Shire where they dwell
and make their residence for the most part, and at the market Cross of
Edinburgh, of the names of the Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and excommunicate
persons for the causes foresaid) resets the persons foresaids by the space of
three nights together, or three nights at several times (which is the manner of
intimation prescribed by the said 13. Parl. cap. 164. and by the said Parl. 20.
cap. 59. and that the persons resetters in manner foresaid, shall be liable to
the pain and punishment contained in the said Acts, without farther verifying
of their notice and knowledge except the intimation foresaid. And also
declares, that the said Acts of Parliament ratified, as said is, shall
comprehend not only men, but women of all quality, and that they and their
resetters shall be liable to the pains therein contained. And such like, the
Estates ratifies and approves the act of Parliament made by his Majesty's
Father, Parl. 16. Cap. 17. entitled Act anent non-Communicants, and ordaines
every person non-communicant, to be liable to the pains therein contained. And
wills and ordaines all Ministers within their Parochins, and all Presbyters
within their Presbyteries to take trial and cognition of the premises, and
that as fully as the Bishops or Archbishops might have done by the foresaids
acts or any of them; And abrogates the said acts in so far as any power is
thereby granted to the said Archbishops and Bishops anent the premises.

ACT XII. ACT DISCHARGING THE ZULE VAcance, and appointing the Session to sit
down the first of November, and rise the last of February; and thereafter to
sit down the first of June, and rise the last of July yearly.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, Understanding that the Kirk within this Kingdom, is now purged of
all superstitious observation of days; And herewith also considering that the
keeping of the Zule vacance has not only relation to that superstition, and
may serve to keep the famine in memory, but also that the keeping of the said
Zule vacance, has interrupted the course of Justice in this Kingdom, to the
hinderance and heavy prejudice of the lieges thereof. Therefore the said
estates have discharged, and simply discharges the foresaid Zule vacance, and
all observation thereof in time coming, and rescindes and annulls all acts,
statutes, warrants and ordinances whatsoever, granted at any time heretofore,
for keeping of the said Zule vacance, with all custom of observation thereof,
And finds and declares the famine to be extinct, void, and of no force nor
effect in time coming. And ordaines the Court and Session of the College of
Justice, and Senators and members thereof, to conveene and sit for the
administration of Justice, without any interruption by the foresaid Zule
vacance, from the first day of November to the last day of February thereafter
inclusive yearly. And ordaines the said Senators and remanent members of the
College of Justice, to rise the said last day of February, and to conveene,
and sit down again for administration of Justice to the Lieges, the first day
of June yearly, and to rise the last day of July next thereafter inclusive. And
also ordaines the whole remanent Judges of inferior Courts within the
Kingdom, to proceed in the administration of Justice within their several
jurisdictions, without any respect to the said Zule vacance, and without any
interruption or vacation by the same Zule vacance, notwithstanding of any
bygone custom of observation of the said Zule vacance, seeing the famine is
now discharged in manner foresaid.

ACT XIII. ACT DISCHARGING THE MONDAY Market in Edinburgh, Jedburgh, Drumfreis,
Brechin, and Glasgow.
FOrsameekle as the Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's
special authority, are informed and understand, that traveling upon the
Sunday, and the profanation of that day is greatly occasioned by the Markets
holden weekly upon the Monday in Edinburgh, Jedburgh, Drumfreis, Brechin, and
Glasgow, and that the Leiges resorting from the Country to the said Markets
upon the Monday, are distracted from Gods public worship and service upon the
Sunday, and are constrained to travel all the Sunday, for keeping of the
Monday Markets respective foresaids; For remeed whereof, the said Estates of
Parliament have discharged, and simply discharges all Markets upon Monday, to
be any ways kept in the Burghs of Jedburgh, Drumfreis, and Brechin in time
coming. And appoints, changes and ordaines the famine Markets which were in
time bygone kept and holden weekly upon the Monday in the said Burghs of
Jedburgh, Drumfreis, and Brechin, to be hereafter kept and holden in Jedburgh
weekly upon Tuesday, and in Drumfreis and Brechin weekly upon Wednesday. And
also the said Estates of Parliament foresaids, discharges all Markets within
the Burgh of Glasgow, to be kept or holden hereafter upon the Monday, or
selling, buying, and making Market of Horses, and other quick bestiall, Meal
brought to Glasgow Market upon Monday from Burrows-townes, as Stirling,
Falkirk, and other remote places, where men may not come from their own houses
in the morning to the hour of the Market with their said Commodities. Item,
the Beere-Market, and all crafts-mens work brought to be sold in Market, as well
by free as unfree persons. Item, all Market for Salt, brought from the
Salt-pans upon Forth, the Market for salt Butter, keeping Cheese, and Timber of
all sorts, which is brought up the river of Clide to the town of Glasgow, And
ordains and appoints the Market for the particular goods foresaids, to be
kept hereafter weekly within the Burgh of Glasgow upon the Wednesday. And in
like manner, the said Estates of Parliament, discharges all Market to be
kept and holden hereafter within the Burgh of Edinburgh upon the Monday, for
Wool, Butter, Cheese, Skins, Hides, Shoone.

And generally discharges all markets in Edinburgh upon Monday of all
unfree-mens work, brought in to be sold in Edinburgh upon the Monday in any
time hereafter, but ordaines and appoints the market of these goods and
merchandise particularly and generally before rehearsed, to be kept and holden
weekly upon the Wednesday within the said Burgh of Edinburgh in time coming,
in the same manner, and as freely in all respects, as the market thereof has
been kept on the Monday in times bygone. And therefore ordaines the Leiges to
keep and attend the said market days respective before rehearsed, as the
samine are now appointed to be kept within the Burghs of Edinburgh, Glasgow,
Jedburgh, Drumfreis, and Brechin, and to resort and repair thereto weekly as
they shall have occasion, suchlike and in the same manner as they were in use
to repair to the Monday markets within the said Burghes before the
discharging thereof: And also ordains the Magistrates of the said Burghes, to
see the markets kept and holden in their said Burghs, upon the days hereby
appointed, and that no markets be kept upon the Mundayes for the goods hereby
discharged in time coming. And last, the said Estates of Parliament discharges
and prohibits all markets and trysts to be kept hereafter upon Sunday
throughout all this kingdom, and discharges all the Lieges from all keeping
thereof upon Sunday hereafter, and ordaines this Act to stand in full force as
a law while the next assembly, that the inconveniences redounding hereby to the
Lieges, being represented to that Assembly, the Assembly may consider thereof,
and as they find the same sufficient, they may supplicate the next ensuing
Parliament, to rescind this Act in whole, or in part, as after trial it shall
be found hurtful to the Lieges.

ACT XIV. ACT FOR TAKING ORDER WITH THE Abuses committed on the Sunday by the
confluence of people for hyring of shearers on Sunday.
FOrsamekle as the profanation of the Sunday is greatly occasioned in the time
of harvest by the great confluence of people to public places; as ports, or
streets of towns, and paroch Kirkes of Landward every Sunday, from morning to
preaching time, for hyring shearers the week following, whereof there arises
also sundry tumults, disorders, swearing, drinking, and often fighting, on the
Sabbath day; For remeed hereof the Estates of Parliament presently conveened by
his Majesty's special authority refers and remits the samine to be taken order
with, to the Justices of peace, and Kirk Sessions, where the abuse shall be
committed hereafter by the coufluence of the said people and hyring of the
said shearers upon the Sunday, as said is, as the said Justices of peace and
Kirk Sessions shall find the said abuses then to be committed, to deserve.

ACT XV. FOR DIRECTING LETTERS OF HORNING And Caption by the Lords of Session
against the excommunicate Prelates, and all other excommunicate persons.
THe Estates of Parliament conveened by his Majesty's special authority,
Considering the necessity of reviving and putting in execution the 53. Act of
the third Parliament of King James the sixth, Anent Letters of horning and
caption to follow upon excommunication of the Kirk after forty days, Renews
and revives the said Act of Parliament, and ordaines the Lords of Session to
grant Letters and other Executorials against the excommunicate Prelates, and
all other excommunicate persons.

ACT XVI ANENT THE LARGE DECLARATION, Or, MANIFESTO.
THe Estates of Parliament conveened by his Majesty's special Authority,
Considering that the supplication of the late general Assembly to his
Majesty's Commissioner, against a book called, A large Declaration, as
follows, was presented unto Us by the Commissioners of the Kirk, and
recommended to his Majesty's Commissioner, for obtaining from his Majesty's
Justice and Goodness the desire thereof: And as the said Book was examined by
the appointment of the Assembly, and found to be dishonorable to God and his
true Religion, to this Kirk and Kingdom, to the Kings Majesty, and to the
Marquis of Hammiltoun then his Majesty's Commissioner, and diverse others
persons therein, and to be full of lies, in averring known untruths, in wilful
concealing and perverting many truths, in wresting of intentions, words, and
actions, as is particularly contained in the censure of the book, registrate in
the Registers of Assembly: So they having re-examined the same, declares their
judgment to be the same there-anent: And therefore ordaines the Authors and
Spreaders thereof to be most severely punished according to the Laws of this
Kingdom, against liesing-makers betwixt the Kings Majesty and his Subjects,
slanderers of the King and Kingdom, and raisers of sedition and discord
betwixt them, that all others may be deterred from such dangerous courses, Gods
honor may be vindicate, the innocence of this Kirk and Kingdom, and his
Majesty's Justice and goodness may appear, not only in censuring such
Malefactors, but in discouraging all such underminers of his Majesty's Throne,
and abusers of his Royal Name, by prefixing the same to such scandalous and
dishonorable Treatises.

ACT XVII STATUTARIE APPOINTING PARLIAments to be holden once every three year.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority; Considering that by reason of his Majesty's ordinary residence
forth of this his ancient and native Kingdom, the grievances and complaints of
his good Subjects cannot have so free and easy access to his Majesty's ears,
as the same may be conveniently represented to his Majesty's Commissioners, and
the Estates of Parliament from time to time, and how necessary it is that
frequent Parliaments be kept within this Kingdom for preservation of the
purity of the true Religion now by Gods providence established within the
same, and for the equal and impartial administration of Justice to all his
Majesty's Subjects, and maintaining of peace and concord amongst them, by
applying of the true and lawful remedies to their grievances and complaints,
and timous suppressing of all abuses and corruptions, which otherwise from
small beginnings will grow to great disorders, (which frequent Parliaments were
continually observed in this Kingdom before his Majesty's Father, of happy
memory, went into England;) Have statute and ordained that every three year,
once at least a full and free Parliament shall be holden (and oftener as his
Majesty shall be pleased to call them) within the bounds of this Kingdom, in
the most commodious place and convenient time to be thought upon, appointed and
affixed by his Majesty or his Commissioner for the time, and the Estates of
Parliament, before the ending and closing of every Parliament, and to be the
last Act thereof. And the whole Estates wishes, that as it was their
happiness to have his Majesty's presence at all Parliaments, while the King
had his residence in this Kingdom, so that his Majesty would be pleased to be
present at each Parliament, and they humbly supplicate his Majesty for that
effect.

ACT XVIII. ANENT THE KEEPERS OF THE CASTLES Of Edinburgh, Striveling, and
Dumbartane.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority; Considering that the commandment of the Castle of Edinburgh,
wherein the most part of the public Registers and Records, and the Honors of
the Kingdom are kept; and siclike the commandment of the Castle of
Striviling and Dumbartane, being a charge of great weight and importance,
concerning as well the Kings Majesty's honor and safety, as the security and
safety of this whole Kingdom, ought not to be committed but to such persons,
as are known and approved by the whole course of their life, to be true and
faithful Subjects to his Majesty, and trusty and well affected Contrymen,
loving, and tendering the peace, prosperity, and good of this whole Kingdom,
and the preservation and advancement of the true reformed Religion, now therein
by Gods providence established and professed, and intertaining of Unity
betwixt the King and his good Subjects: Have therefore statute and ordained,
and hereby statutes and ordains that the custody and keeping of the said
Castles shall be only entrusted to such persons as are natives, borne and bred
within this Kingdom, known and esteemed to be of the quality foresaid,
without exception, and who before their entry and admission to whatsoever
charge, place, or service within the said Castles, or any of them, either as
Captains, Constables, Commanders, Soldiers, or Servants within the same,
shall be bound and oblisht by a solemn oath to be given and made by them, and
every one of them, to make faith that they shall faithfully employ whatsoever
power, charge, or service committed, or that shall be committed to them within
the said Castles, or any of them, so far as they can, or in them lies, to the
Kings Majesty's honor and safety, to the peace, safety, good, and
prosperity of this Kingdom, and commonwealth, and to the preservation and
advancement of the true reformed Religion therein presently established and
professed, as they will answer to God: Like as incase it shall happen any of
the persons foresaids, to do or attempt any thing contrary to the premises,
or any part thereof; It is statute and declared that they shall be punished
with all rigor, as Traitors and common enemies to the King and Country: And
farther, That the Captains and Commanders of the said Castles, shall be
chosen by his Majesty from time to time by advice of the Estates of
Parliament, and that such as shall happen to be placed therein betwixt
Parliaments, shall be first tried and found by his Majesty's Council to be of
the quality above-exprest, and shall have the charge thereof only, to the next
ensuing Parliament, by the which they shall of new be tried and allowed, or
otherwise his Majesty shall place others therein by the advice of the Estates,
as said is: Always without prejudice of the Earl of Mar his heritable right
of the keeping of the Castle of Striviling.

ACT XIX. ANENT PRODUCTION OF THE REGIsters and Records of Parliament to the
first Session of each Parliament.
THe Estates of Parliament now presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Considering that for the better clearing and resolving of all
doubts and difficulties, which may arise in Parliaments, anent such matters as
shall be brought in before them, It is very necessar that they have inspection
of the Books, Registers, and Records of Parliaments, as they shall have
occasion to make use thereof; Have statute and ordained that in all times
coming the Clerk of Register and his Deputes, and such others, who for the
time shall happen to have the charge, keeping, or power of any of the said
Registers or Records, shall be holden to exhibit and produce the same, as they
shall be required by the Estates in time of Parliament, that they may have the
use and inspection thereof upon all occasions, as they shall think expedient
for clearing of whatsoever difficulties: And siclike that the Clerk of
Register, or some having power from him, and entrusted with the keeping of the
Registers, shall be present at all times, and shall be ready to give extracts
to the Lieges in their particular affairs, upon their reasonable charges, and
expenses, and both these under the pain of deprivation of the party
contraveening any of the said members of the Acts, or to be otherwise more
mildely or severely punished, as the Parliament shall find the fault to
demerit.

ACT XX. DISCHARGING ALL PROXIES TO BE Admitted in Parliament, and that no
foreign Nobleman shall have place and voice in Parliament, unless they have
ten thousand merkes of land- rent within the Kingdom.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Considering how far the dignity, honor* and authority of the
high and supreme Court of Parliament, which is the great Council of this
Kingdom, has been and is yet likely to be farther diminished and weakened by
two reasons, one is, the giving of power of voicing and reasoning to Proxies
and Procurators in absence of such as are als much tied to give their personal
judgment, as their personal presence, and has all these honors, riding,
sitting, reasoning, and voicing in Parliament, only onferred on them and their
Successors personally; so that it is as absurd that they should give power to
any, to reason or voice for them, as to give any power to ride and to sit in
their place of honor, and dignity: And it might tend to the weakening and
utter overthrow of Parliaments: For thus the absence of the most part of the
best qualified, and experienced might be supplied by Proxies granted to a few,
and of less abilities. The other is, the granting to strangers, having titles
of honor conferred on them without any other interest in this Kingdom, power
of sitting, riding, reasoning, consulting, and voicing in this Court of
Parliament, whereas none should be members of this Court but such as have
enterest by Birth, Blood, or Inheritance within this Kingdom, and so may be
sensible of the prejudice or advantage following the laws and constitutions
thereof: Therefore the said Estates statutes and ordains, that hereafter all
Noblemen, viz. Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts, and Lords, shall give their
personal presence in all Parliaments, and so being personally present, reason,
and advise, and voice, and no ways by proxies or procurators: but discharges
any such procurator and commissions in all time coming: and that no persons
shall hereafter have any place or voice in Parliament, as said is, but such
Noblemen before specified; and Commissioners from Shyres and Burrows, as have
enterest, either by Birth, Blood, or by Inheritance within this Kingdom, and
that proportional to the honor and dignity they carry, which in the least
proportion for every Nobleman must be ten thousand marks by year of land rent.
And that notwithstanding any gifts or patents granted, or to be granted to any
person whatsoever. Suchlike the estates foresaid, casses and annulls all acts
and constitutions any ways derogatory to this present Act or any part thereof.

ACT XXI. ACT DISCHARGING THE GRANTING Of Protections by the Lords of Council
and Exchequer.
FOrsameekle as the Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's
special Authority, Considering the great prejudice and hurt sustained by his
Majesty's Highness lieges, by the frequent granting of Protections and
Supersederes, and remembering herewithall, that his Highness Umwhile dearest
Father of worthy memory, by the 47. Act of his eleventh Parliament, anno
1587. entitled, All Supersederes, as contrair to the furtherance of justice,
are forbidden: Of the which Act the tenor follows. Forsameekle as our
Sovereign Lord, and the Estates of this present Parliament, understanding great
contempt to be done to his Highness Laws, and great hurt to his lieges, by
passing of Licenses and Supersederes, which daily uses to be granted to such as
either by themselves, or other friends, have credit of his Majesty, they being
at his Highness Horn, either for causes of Treason, or not satisfying of their
debts to their creditours, for not obtempering decreets and charges, Therefore
our Sovereign Lord with advice foresaid, statutes and ordaines, that no such
Licenses and Supersederes be granted in any time coming. And in case any
happens to be purchased, declares the same to be null of the Law, and not
admissable by any Judge, nor effectual to the purchaser in any ways, And
ordaines all Judges within this Realm, to proceed and do justice to all
parties, suchlike and in the same manner, as if the said Supersederes had
never been purchased nor produced. And also by the 13. Act of his 23.
Parliament, in anno 1621, entitled, Anent the discharging of Protections: Of
the which Act also the tenor follows. Our Sovereign Lord and Estates of
Parliament understanding that there may sundry Protections be sought by
bankrupts and others, who are adebted in great sums of money, whereby the
execution due unto the creditours by the Laws of the Country against the
debtor may be frustrate, to the great damage of the creditour. FOR REMEED
whereof it is statute and ordained, that hereafter the Lords of Session shall
grant no Protection from any execution due and competent against any man of the
Law. And declares, that if any shall be hereafter granted, the granter of the
same shall be subject and liable of the Law for the sum from the which he
has granted Protection. And the said Estates of Parliament foresaid, being
careful that the prejudices and evils incurred and sustained by his Highness
Lieges, by the granting of the said Protections, be helped and remeeded, Have
therefore renewed, ratified, and approven, and by these presents renewes,
ratifies and approves the foresaids two particular Acts of Parliament above
mentioned, in the whole heads and clauses thereof before rehearsed, conform to
the tenor of the samine, which are insert hereintill ad longum, ut supra. And
ordaines the said Acts, and every one of them to have the strength of a Law,
with full force and execution, conform to the tenor thereof in all time
coming, with this addition, That the certification of the foresaid last Act
made in anno 1621. against the Lords of Session, shall also be extended against
the Lords of Secret Council and Exchequer; AND THEREFORE of Estates of this
present Parliament statutes and ordaines, that hereafter the Lords of Privy
Council, Session, or Exchequer, shall grant no protection from any Execution,
due and competent against any man of the Law, and declares, that if any shall
be hereafter granted, the granter of the same shall be subject and liable of
the Law to the Creditor for the sum, from the which he has granted
protection. And ordaines all Sheriffs, Stewarts, Bailiffs of Regalities,
Provests and Bailiffs of Burrows, and other Officiars of Justice in all time
coming, to proceed in discharge of their duty and execution of the command of
our Sovereign Lords Letters, notwithstanding of any Protection or Supersedere.

ACT XXII. ACT ANENT THE EXCHEQUER, DECLARING The famine to be only Judges to
matters concerning the managing of the Kings Rents and Casualities.
THe Estates of Parliament now presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, for the explanation of the 18. Act of the late Parliament holden at
Edinburgh, in the month of June 1633. year, entitled, Anent the Exchequer,
Finds, declares, statutes, and ordaines, that the validity or invalidity of
Infeftments of his Highness property, or of any other Infeftments, may not be
discust nor decided in Exchequer, neither by way of Action, Exception, or
Reply, but that the discussing and decision thereof, is only proper to the
Lords of Session. It is added, that the Exchequer are only Judges to matters
concerning the managing of the Kings Rents and Casualities.

ACT XXIII. IN FAVORS OF THESE WHO HELD their lands of Archbishops, Bishops,
or of their Chapters.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority; considering that the Offices of Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeanes,
Deanes, and others the members of their Chapters are now abolished out of this
Kirk and Kingdom: And herewith also taking to their consideration that there
is sundry Noblemen; Gentlemen, and others within this Realm, who held their
lands of the said Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeanes, Deanes, and others,
members of Chapters (who are now abolished forth of this Kirk and Kingdom, as
said is) for payment of certain yearly few duties, and fulfilling of certain
clauses irritant, and performing of other conditions contained in their
Infeftments, Takes, and Rights: And who not knowing to whom they shall now pay
their said duties, and fulfill the other conditions of their Infeftments and
Rights, may be prejudged by incurring of the failie, and danger of the clause
irritant of their said Rights for not payment of their few and other duties
therein specified: And by the incurring of the certification contained in the
Acts of Parliament set down anent the payment by Vassels of their few duties
to their Superiors: The said Estates for remeed hereof, and for eschewing of
the prejudice and danger that may come hereby, Finds and declares, that these
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others who by their Infeftments, Takes, and Rights,
are adebted in payment of few and Take duties, or oblisht in fulfilling of any
other conditions to the said Archbishops, Bishops, Archdeanes, Deanes, or
other beneficed persons, members of their Chapters now abolished, as said is,
are not, and shall not be in mora, for not payment of their said duties, and
not fulfilling of the other conditions of their Rights: And that the clause
irritant of their Infestments, Takes, and other Rights shall not run against
them; Nor yet the certification of the said Acts of Parliament militat against
them, for not payment of their said duties, and not fulfilling of the other
clause of the Rights during the intervall of time, betwixt the first day of
April 1638. years, and sensyne, and in time coming, while order be taken by
the Estates of Parliament, anent the way and manner of payment of the foresaids
few and other duties for the sayds Noblemen, Gentlemen, and others foresaids,
their security for the payment thereof, and while the same order so to be taken
by the Estates hereanent, be publicly notified to all the Lieges,
notwithstanding of any clause irritant, contained in the foresaids Infeftments
and Rights: And notwithstanding of the certification of the Acts of Parliament
set down against these who pays not their few duties to their Superiors.

ACT XXIIII. ANENT VASSALS OF ERECTIONS, THAT They be not subject in double
payment, nor the superiors defrauded of their few duties.
THE Estates of Parliament conveened by his Majesty's special Authority:
Considering that whereas by the general surrender of Kirk lands and
erections, made by the Superiors and Titulars thereof, in favors of the Kings
Majesty: It is specially provided, that the said Superiors and Titulars
notwithstanding their surrender foresaid, shall have right to the Few-fermes,
and duties of the Vassals and Fewars of the said Kirk lands and erections, till
the Kings Majesty make payment to them of the prices of the said Few-firmes,
and duties modified by the Lords, and others of the Commission for surrenders
and teinds. And siclike the Fewars and Vassals of the said Kirk lands and
erections, are obliged by their new infeftments under the great Seal, to pay
the said Fewfermes and duties to the Kings Majesty and His Successors: And
so are liable to double payment thereof, without remeed be provided. It is
therefore statute and ordained by the said Estates, that the said Fewars and
Vassals of Kirk lands and erections, their heirs and successors, shall be
obliged to make thankful payment of the said Few-fermes, and duties, and
services used and wont, contained in their Infeftments and whereof the said
Superiors and Titulars have been in possession preceding that surrender
foresaid to the said Superiors and Titulars, their heirs and successors, aye
and while they get payment of the prices modified by the said Lords, and
others of the Commission foresaid: And that Letters of horning and poinding
shall be granted to that effect, without prejudice always to his Majesty and
his Successors, of the Superiority of the said Fewars and Vassals surrendered
in manner foresaid, and without prejudice to them of their infeftments, taken
to be holden of his Majesty and his successors: Like as it is declared, that
the said Fewars and Vassals of Kirk lands and erections, have been in bona
fide in payment of the said Few-fermes and duties to the said Superiors and
Titulars of all terms bygone, according to the provision contained in the
said general surrender.

ACT XXV. APPOINTING ALL GRIEVANCES TO Be given in plain Parliament.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, considering that the Act of Parliament made in Anno 1594. in the 14.
Parliament of King James the 6. cap 218. whereby all matters and grievances to
be given in to Parliament, are appointed to be given to his Majesty's Clerk of
Register, and by him presented to the Estates, Has bred great hurt, and
prejudice to the liberties, and freedom of this Kirk and Kingdom, and
Subjects thereof in time bygone, as is evident by experience of the evils that
has flowed therefrom. Therefore, the said Estates for remeed hereof,
retreats, rescinds, casses, and annuls the foresaid Act of Parliament, and
declares the same to be null and of none avail, force, nor effect in all time
coming: And ordaines and appoints all grievances, and other matters that are
to be handled and treated of in Parliament hereafter, to be given in, and
presented in open and plain Parliament in all time coming.

ACT XXVI. FOR SUPPRESSING THE DISTINCTION Of spiritual and temporal Lords of
Session.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, casses, annulls, and rescinds that Article of the first Act of the
fifth Parliament holden by King James of fifth, of worthy memory, Anent the
institution of the College of Justice, bearing, That the Lords of Council and
Session shall be chosen half spiritual, half temporal: And decernes and
ordaines the whole number to be temporal and none of them spiritual: And the
foresaid distinction of spiritual and temporal to be suppressed and forgotten
in all time coming.

ACT XXVII. ACT AGAINST LIESING-MAKERS OF Whatsoever quality, office, place,
or dignity.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Considering the Honor, Dignity and Authority of the supreme
Court of Parliament, over the Council and Session, and all other civil
Judicatories of this Kingdom, which have their original, their power and
antiquity from the Kings Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, is
subordinate thereunto, and ought to be countable and censurable by them, for
their abusing of their power, to the prejudice of the Country: For the weal
whereof they were established, according to the twelfth Act of the second
Parliament of King James 4. wherein the Kings Council was sworn in presence of
the three Estates, to give his Highness a true and effauld Counsel, in all
matters, concerning his Majesty, and his Realm; And to be responsall and
accusable to the King and his Estates of their Counsel, Considering also, that
during his Majesty's absence forth of this Kingdom, it is most necessar for
the public peace of this Kingdom, and his Majesty's honor, that all
misinformers, raisers, and entertainers of jealousies, suspicions, and
divisions betwixt the King, this Kirk and Kingdom, should be severely
punished, and especially all bad Counselors, who in stead of giving his
Majesty a true and effauld Counsel, has given, or will give information and
counsel to the evident prejudice and ruin of the liberties of this Kirk and
Kingdom, should be exemplarly judged and censured by the Kings Majesty and
the Estates of Parliament. Therefore they renew and revive all Acts of
Parliament made against liesing makers, raisers and entertainers of jealousies,
contentions, and divisions betwixt the Kings Majesty and this Kirk and
Kingdom. And declares that no dignity, quality, place, or office whatsoever
shall exeeme these or any person whatsoever from the censure of the said Acts.

ACT XXVIII. ANNVLLING ALL UNLAWFUL AND Unjust Proclamations made under the
pain of treason, against the disobeyers.
For So Much as the Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's
special authority, having taken to their consideration, that there has been
diverse unjust and unlawful Proclamations made, commanding the obedience of
things unjust and unlawful, (tending to the overthrow and prejudice of the
laws and liberties of Kirk and Kingdom) under the pain of treason; As also
declaring the disobeyers of these unlawful and unjust proclamations to be
rebels and traitors, which is aagainst law, equity, and reason, no trial nor
declaratour of treason having proceeded against them of before: Finds and
declares all these proclamations, with the pretended Acts and warrands for
making and proclaiming thereof, to be null and of none avail, force, nor
effect, with all that has followed or may follow thereupon: And therefore the
said Estates of Parliament casses and annulls the foresaids pretended
proclamations, with all the said Acts and warrands whereupon the same
proceeded: And finds and declares that no person nor persons can be declared
traitors, but either by the Parliament it self, and by Act and Sentence
thereof, or then by the lawful ordinar Judge, after trial, And finding that
the said persons has contraveened, a law and Act of Parliament made under the
pain of treason against the disobeyers and contraveenars thereof.

ACT XXIX. EXPLAINING THE PRECEDING ACTS Of Parliament made against Bands and
Conventions amongst the Subjects, as also declaring the Bands and Conventions
made and kept since the beginning of the present troubles, to be legal and
lawful.
TOrsomuch as the Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's
special Authority, Considering that by the twelfth Act of the tenth
Parliament of the Kings Majesty's umwhile dearest Father, of eternal memory,
All Leagues and Bands amongst the Subjects are discharged, and by the 131. Act
of the eighth Parliament of the Kings umwhile dearest Father, All Councels,
Conventions or Assemblies without the Kings command or license, are also
discharged, under the pains ordained by the Acts of Parliament, against such
as unlawfully convocates the Kings Lieges: And that also by sundry other
preceding Statutes and Acts of Parliament made by his Majesty's most noble
Progenitors, the foresaid Leagues, Bands, Counsels, Conventions, and Meetings,
are likewise discharged. And herewith also the said Estates, taking to their
consideration what was the true end and meaning for making of the foresaid
Acts, and how far the same in equity and reason can be extended, finds and
declares that the foresaid Acts and Laws particularly and generally before
expressed, is not, nor cannot be extended against any Bands, Leagues, Counsels,
Conventions, Assemblies, Committees, or Meetings, made, holden, and kept by the
Subjects, for maintenance and preservation of the Kings Majesty, the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties of the Kingdom, or for the public good, either of Kirk
or State. But the said Estates finds and declares, that all these Bands,
Conventions, Committees, and other meetings made and kept by the Estates and
Subjects of this Kingdom, for the public good of King, Kirk and State, and
intended for the defense and preservation thereof since the beginning of these
present troubles, are not prohibited nor discharged by the foresaids Laws and
Acts of Parliament, particularly and generally before rehearsed, nor none of
them. And can no ways be understood, nor interpret to fall within the compass
of the discharge and prohibition of the foresaids Acts, and does no ways
contraveene the same, nor none of them. And therefore the said Estates
ratifies, approves, and allows all the said Bands, Conventions, Committees,
and other Meetings, which are, and have been made and kept within this
Kingdom, for the defense and preservation of the Kings Majesty, the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties of this Kirk, and Kingdom, since the beginning of the
present troubles thereof. And declares the same to be lawful and legal
deeds, and that they do no ways contraveene the foresaids Acts of Parliament
respective above mentioned, nor none of them, nor no other Law, nor
constitution of this Kingdom.

ACT XXX. ANENT THE WARD AND MARRIAGE OF These who shall happen to be killed in
the defense of the Religion and Liberties of Kirk and Kingdom.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Taking to their consideration the prejudice that may come to these
Subjects, who holds their lands ward of the Kings Majesty, or of any other
Superior whatsoever, and shall happen to be killed in the defense and
maintenance of the Religion, and of the Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom,
during the time of the present troubles thereof, has statute and ordained, and
hereby statutes, ordaines, and declares, that the profit and benefit of the
ward marriage, none entresse, and relief falling by the decease of any of
these who shall happen to be killed in manner and for the cause foresaid, with
the whole commodity that can follow upon the same, shall only pertain, and
freely be given and disponed to the heirs Relick and Bairnes, of these who
shall happen so to be killed as follows, viz. Where the Relicke and remanent
Bairnes (by the heir) shall be found provided by the Defunct, Then in that
case the whole benefit of the ward marriage, none entresse and relief shall
solely belong to the heir. But where the Relicke and remanent Bairnes (by the
heir) be's not found provided, in that case the benefit of the marriage shall
only pertain to the heir, and the profit, commodity, and benefit of the
ward, none entresse, and relief shall be employed and used for the
entertainment and maintenance of the Relicke and Bairnes unprovided: And also
for the entertainment of the heir, if he have no other means for maintenance:
And what is overplus by the Relicke and Bairnes, their entertainment foresaid,
ordaines the same superplus to be employed for the provision of the said
remanent Bairnes, by the heir unprovided, as said is. Providing always, that
the said heirs, and other persons foresaids, to whom the benefit of the
said ward, marriage, none entresse, and relief is appointed to pertain in
manner respective before rehearsed, Be's found not to have studden against the
maintenance of Religion, laws and liberties of Kirk and Kingdom, contrair to
the late Covenant, ratified in this present Parliament: And also the said
Estates finds and declares, that the Kings Majesty, and all other Superiors
whatsoever of the said ward, holdings, shall be altogether secluded from the
benefit of the foresaid ward, marriage, none entresse, and relief falling by
decease of their Vassals, in manner, and for the cause before rehearsed.

ACT XXXI. RATIFYING THE ACT OF THE LORDS Of Session, made for supplying of the
absence of the Signet, and discharging the transporting thereof, or any other
Seal in time coming
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Ratifies and approves the Act of the Lords of Council and Session
made at Edinburgh the penult day of March, 1639. years, whereof the tenor
follows: The which day the Lords of Council and Session, being petitioned by
some of his Majesty's Lieges, to provide remeed against the prejudice sustained
by them through the exportation of the Signet out of this Kingdom: And
thereupon taking unto their consideration the many great inconveniences
redounding to this Realm, and whole Lieges thereof: And manifestly ensuing by
the transporting of the Signet, not only from the place of residence of the
said Lords, but out with the bounds of this Kingdom into England without any
reason or example: Therefore after mature deliberation, they have statute and
ordained, and for remeed of the said heavy prejudice, statutes and ordaines,
that all Summonds, Letters, Charges, Suspensions, Signators, or other Writs
whatsoever, which by the law and custom of this Realm uses to pass the said
Signet, shall be presented to George Hadden, writer to the Signet, and the
ordinary price due for the Signet, consigned in his hands, to be made forth
coming to the Lord Secretary, and his keepers of the Signet in his name,
Whereupon the said George Hadden shall mark the date of the said offer, beside
the wax at the place customably, bearing the date of the Signet, and write
thereupon these words (marked by me according to Act and Warrant of the Lords
of Session, and ordained to be a Warrant for execution hereof, or passing
through the Seals, albeit it be not signetted) which words he shall subscribe
with his Sign and Subscription manual: Which Summonds, Charges, Letters,
Suspensions, Signators, or Writs whatsoever so dated, and subscribed by the
said George Hadden, shall have the same effect in all respects, as if the
Signet were affixed thereto: And the said Lords declares, that the same shall
be a sufficient warrant to all keepers of Seals and Registers, Messengers of
Arms, Pursevants, Heralds, or others persons whatsoever for passing of the
said writs through the Seals, execution of the said Summonds, Letters,
Charges, and Suspensions, and doing all deeds incumbent to their office, such
like and as amply and warrantablie in all respects, as if the same had past
the Signet, and that aye and while the said Signet be returned again to
Edinburgh, and the same intimate to the Lieges: The said George Hadden, always
keeping and retaining the warrands, and making a minute and note thereof: And
making the same, together with the prices paid therefore, forth-comming to the
Lord Secretary, or others in his name by his warrant: And ordaines these
presents to be intimate to all his Majesty's Lieges, by public Proclamation at
the market cross of Edinburgh to be made hereupon: And these presents for the
full warrant of the whole premises, to be enacted and recorded in their books
of Sederunt. Which Act, the said Estates not only ratifies in manner above
specified: but also ordaines the said Act to stand in full force and strength,
to the effect above-written, therein specified conform to the tenor thereof
foresaid, while the (...) day of (...) 1600. and (...) years. And strictly
inhibits and discharges all keepers of the Signet in any time hereafter, for
any cause, or any pretended occasion whatsoever to transport or carry the
Signet, or any Seal forth of this Kingdom under the pain of death, and
confiscation of their moveable goods.

ACT XXXII. ACT DISCHARGING ALL CUSTOM OF Ammunition brought home to the
lieges to their own use for defense of religion and liberties of Kirk and
Kingdom.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened, by his Majesty's special
authority, considering the privilege and exemption bruiked by the Nobility and
Barrons of this Kingdom, whereby they have been exeemed from payment of all
custom, for goods imported to this Kingdom, for their own use: And
there-with-all, Taking to their consideration that the said exemption ought
more especially be enjoyed, for the arms brought home, at this time to the
Nobility, Barrons, and Gentry of this Kingdom, and all others his Majesty's
lieges whatsoever, for their own use, for defense of Religion, Liberties of
this Kirk, and Kingdom, in their times of troubles, since the year of God
1637. Therefore statutes and ordaines, that all sort of Ammunition whatsoever,
brought into this Kingdom, since the year of God 1637. or to be brought in
hereafter, during the time of their troubles, shall be free of all customs and
imposition whatsoever. And inhibites and discharges all Customers, or
whatsoever receivers thereof, of exacting any custom or imposition for any
kind of arms or ammunition already imported, or to be imported, during the
time foresaid: And of all arresting or detaining the said arms and
ammunition, or any goods belonging to the Merchants importers thereof, for any
custom acclaimed for the same: which the Estates finds no ways due, nor
reasonable to be granted in the case foresaid.

ACT XXXIII. ACT FOR THE COMMITTEES OF ESTATES.
THe three Estates of Parliament presently conveened, having taken to their
consideration the present estate of this Country and Kingdom, being environed
and threatened with arms, by sea and land, and great hostile preparations
hatched and prepared against the same, without any just ground or quarrel,
whereby (as manifestly does appear) there is nothing less intended against
this Church and Kingdom, nor an utter exterminion and total destruction: So
that the said Estates are necessitate, and forced to put themselves in
readiness for a just and lawful defense of the Religion, Laws, Life's,
Liberties, and Country: and withal considering how necessar it is for the
good of the public, weal of the Country, and maintenance of the armies
lifted, and to be up-lifted, and out-reiked both by sea and land, and for
ordering, directing, and governing of the whole body of this Country, and
Kingdom, That a settled, grave and solid Committee from the Estates be
elected, nominate, constitute, and authorized by this present Parliament: which
Committee from the Estates shall consist of a competent number, of the most
able, qualified, and trusty Noblemen, Barons, and Burgesses of this Kingdom.
Therefore the foresaids Estates of Parliament now conveened, do hereby
nominate, elect, choose, and appoint the persons after specified, viz. John
Earl of Rothes, James Earl of Montros, John Earl of Cassils, John Earl of
Wigtoun, Charles Earl of Dumfermling, William Earl of Lothian, John Lord
Lindesay, John Lord Balmerino, James Lord Couper, Robert Lord Burghly, Archbald
Lord Napeir, John Lord Lower, Sir Alexander Gibson of Dury, Sir John Hope of
Craighall, Sir John Scot of Scotstarvet, Senators of the College of Justice;
Sir Thomas Nicolsone of Carnok, Sir Patrik Hepburne of Wauchton, Sir David Hume
of Wedderburne, Sir George Stirling of Kier, Sir Patrik Murray of Elibank, Sir
Patrik Hamiltoun of Littlepreston, Sir William Cunningham of Caprintoun, Sir
William Douglas of Cavers, James Chalmers of Gadgirth, Sir Thomas Hope of
Carse, (...) Drummond of Riccartoun, (...) Lesly of Forbes, Master George
Dundasse of Manner, John Smyth, Edward Edgar, Thomas Paterson, Richard Maxwell,
Merchants, Burgesses of Edinburgh, William Hamiltoun Burges of Lithgow, Master
Alexander Wedderburne Clerk of Dundie, George Porterfield Baliffe of Glasgow,
Hew Kennidie Baliffe of Air, John Rutherfurd Provest of Jedburgh, Master
Alexander Jaffray, Burges of Aberdeene, or Master William Ore in his absence,
James Sword Burges of S. Androes, and James Scot Burges of Montros, to be
Commissioners from the Estate, To whom the Estates and Body of this Present
Parliament, gives, and commits full power, warrant, and commission to do,
order, direct, act, and put in execution every thing necessar, expedient, and
incumbent, alswell for the preservation and maintenance of the armies, both of
horse, and foot, by sea and land, as for ordering the Country, and whole body
and inhabitants thereof, deciding of questions and debates, which shall happen
to arise, or fall out in any business which shall occasion, or offer, in this
Kingdom concerning the peace and quiet thereof, But prejudice of the College
of Justice, or any other ordinary judicatorie within this Kingdom, lawfully
established by Act of Parliament, which shall no ways be prejudged by this
commission, And with full power to them, to borrow, up-take, and levy moneys
for the use the public: and to give, and prescribe orders, and directions for
depursing thereof, and for any other thing requisite which may concern the
good, quiet, and peace of the Country, And with power to them, to call and
conveene such Noblemen, Barons, Burgesses, and other country men, to repair
to them for their counsel, and assistance in any business which shall
occur, as they shall find necessar and expedient, And with power to them, to
give orders and directions to collectors, commissioners, and all other persons,
who shall happen to be employed, or have charge or place either in the army or
in the Country in the public business, in every thing which concerns their
place, and charge, and to call them to an account als often as they please, and
to appoint Auditors for hearing, and receiving thereof, (whether of their own
number or any other they please to nominate) and with power to them, to allow
and disallow, as they shall find equitable, and expedient, for what ever the
said Commissioners shall either uplift and borrow for the public use, or
shall find due, by any compts, bands, bills of exchange, or other furnishing or
debt already borrowed, and advanced for the use of the public, either in
money, victual, or any other necessar furnishing whatsoever, the same compts
being fitted and found lawful by the said commissioners and their auditors
foresaids. The said Estates declares that what shall be found due, or resting
thereof shall be a lawful debt, and burden, which shall burden and affect
the said Estates, who do hereby bind and oblish them and their successors, to
pay, relieve, ramburse, and defray the same: Like as the said Estates of
Parliament, do hereby give and grant full power and warrant to the said
Commissioners from the Estate, to prescribe, injoyne and set down rules, and
ways, for the defrayment of the same burdens, and for payment and relief
thereof to the creditors, and others who lie, and shall lie under the burden
of the same, and that out of the readiest moneys, or other goods belonging to
the public, and Estate, or otherwise by proportion, to impose the payment and
relief thereof, upon the Estate, and inhabitants of the Country according to
the rentals, rolls, and valuations of the rents of the Kingdom: And for that
effect to revise, comptroll, fit and allow the whole compts of the common
burdens, alswell already resting, owing by bands, contracts, bills of
exchange, letters of credit, factorie compts, or otherwise, as which shall
happen to be borrowed and resting, or owing hereafter: and having drawn the
same to a total sum, to cast a proportional part thereof upon every
sherifdome, presbytery, parochin and burgh within this Kingdom, conform to
the said valuations, And which sherifdomes, presbyteries, and burghs, shall
divide the same among the particular persons, liable therein, and that letters
be direct in the ordinar manner, alswell for ingathering thereof, as for
relief thereof, with certification, if the same or any part thereof shall not
be paid, at the terms appointed, by the said Commissioners auditors
foresaids, The persons refusers, or delayers, shall not only pay anual-rent for
the same, conform to the Act of Parliament; but shall also pay ten marks for
each hundredth marks failie, With power likewise to them, as said is, to set
down ways for exsyses to be laid on vivers for the weal of the Country, and
helping to relieve the burdens thereof, and maintenance of the Army: And with
power to them to give orders, instructions, and directions to all inferior
Committees, Shires, Burghs, Presbyteries, Stewartries, Regalities, and others
whatsoever within this Kingdom, in every thing which concerns the public,
and for the maintenance of the Armies, and other necessar employments through
the whole Kingdom, in such form and manner as the said Commissioners, or so
many of them as are a Quorum, in manner after-specified, shall direct and
appoint: And generally with full power to them to do all and sundry other
things requisite, anent the ordering, directing, managing, prosecuting, and
executing of all affairs, and business of this Kingdom, which may or can
conduce to the weal of this Kingdom, or any part thereof: And which ought,
and should, or shall be needful to be done by them, for maintenance and
preservation of the Religion, and liberties of this Kingdom, anent the
premises: Without prejudice always of the ordinary Judicatories, as said is.
And further, with power to the said Commissioners of Estate, to nominate and
constitute Commissioners, overseers, and all other officers, as well in the
Army as in the Country, so often as occasion and necessity shall require, for
maintaining of the Army in every thing necessar, and for exercising and
discharging of all other things needful for the public, through the whole
Kingdom, (without prejudice of the general Commissars gift) And it is hereby
ordained that the form and manner of the proceedings of the said
Commissioners of Estate, and the places of their residence respective, shall
be in manner after-specified, viz. There shall be two constant places of their
residence, whereof the one shall be at Edinburgh, or any other convenient
place, where they may most conveniently and safely sit and reside, And the
other shall be constantly at the Army, who shall keep correspondence the one
with the other, anent their proceedings. And it is ordained, that there shall
be twelve of every Estate for both Committees, making eighteen for every
Committee; and the Quorum to be thus, viz. Three of each estate, when the
Estates are full, or any seven promiscuously, when any of the Estates keeps
not, and when any of the persons nominate upon this Commission shall decease,
it shall be leisome to the most part of the Quorum of that Estate in Edinburgh,
or at the Camp respective, to appoint any other of their own Estate in place
of the person deceasing, viz, The Quorum at Edinburgh, or other-where else, to
nominate the person in place of the party inlacking of the Commission
appointed to reside at Edinburgh or other-where else: And the Quorum of the
Committee at the Camp to nominate the person in place of the party inlacking
of the Committee at the Camp. And it is ordained that the forenamed
Commissioners divide their numbers proportionally, and with such equality, as
neither the Army nor the Country at any time shall want a competent number,
to sit and reside constantly for determining of all matters incumbent to them:
And what ever the foresaid Quorum of (...) persons at Edinburgh, or in the
Country, or more of them, and what ever the foresaid Quorum of (...) persons,
or more of them being at the Camp shall determine, decerne, and ordain, in any
cause, business, or debate incumbent to them, the same shall have the full
strength of a valide and lawful decree and sentence, or what ever business,
or conveniencie, shall be prescribed by the foresaids Quorums respective, or
either of them, the same shall be as valide, as if it were done by the whole
number; Providing always, that none of the said Quorums, either these who
shall reside at Edinburgh, or these who shall be with the Army severally by
themselves, shall engage in war with any Nation, or make capitulation of
agreement, without mutual consent of the whole, at the least of both the
Quorums. And because it is expedient, that the said Commissioners of Estate
have a sufficient trusty and able Clerk, for keeping of all the Records,
Registers, Acts, Bands, Warrands, and other Papers whatsoever, which concern
the Public, or the said Judicatories: And the Estates of Parliament having
real experience of the trust, qualification, and ability of Master Adam
Hepburne of Humbie, for discharging of the same office and place, Therefore the
said Estates of Parliament do hereby create, nominate, and constitute the
said Master Adam Hepburne to be Clerk to the said Commissioners of Estate,
and other of them, with all Privileges, Liberties, Casualities, Fees, and
Immunities belonging thereto: With power to him to substitute Deputes, one or
more, for whom he shall be answerable: To the effect, that either he, or his
Deputes, may be always present: So that none of the said Judicatories be
interrupted for want of Clerks. Which Clerk foresaid, and his Deputes, shall
have the trust, charge, and keeping of all the Papers, Registers, Records, and
others foresaids, which concern the Premises, and the Acts, and Subscriptions
of the said Clerk and his Substitutes, shall make as great faith as the Acts
and Subscriptions, of any other Clerk within this Kingdom. The said
Commissioners and Clerks being countable to the Estates of Parliament: With
power also to the said Commissioners, or the Quorum residing at Edinburgh, or
other where else, to conveene the whole body of the Estates, when they shall
find necessity: And this Commission to endure aye and while the next meeting
of Estates, either in Convention or Parliament: And that the same be discharged
by either of them. And it is hereby declared, That if any of these whose turn
falls to be present, shall be absent, by whose neglect the business may be
disappointed, The said Quorums, or any of them shall enjoyne such pains and
penalties, either upon their persons or goods, as they shall find the said
persons of the said Committee to demerit for their absence from any of the said
places respective. And because there will fall out in the camp a necessity
either of treaties, consultations or public declarations, to show the reasons
of the Demands and proceedings in the Assembly and Parliament, and the
prejudices against either of them, The Estates ordaines Master. Archbald
Iohnstoun Procurator for the Kirk, as best acquaint with these reasons, and
prejudices, to attend his Excellence, and to be present at all occasions with
the said Committee, for their further information and clearing thereanent, with
power to any of the said Quorums to take the oaths of these who are presently
absent for their faithful, dutiful, and diligent endeavors in the
performance of their duty in the foresaid Commission: Like as it is hereby by
declared, that the General his Excellence, and other general Officers are
hereby privileged and warranted to be at the said Committee, as occasion shall
offer.

ACT XXXIV. ANENT THE COMMON RELIEF.
For So Much as at the Convention of the Estates, holden in Januarie 1640. years,
It was voluntarily offered, that for defraying of the common charges, and for
other necessars and urgent expenses, every man should pay the tenth part of his
yearly Rent, as well to Burgh as Land-ward, for the Cropped and year of God,
1639. conform to the valuations to be made within and without Burgh
respective: And for that effect did voluntarily oblige themselves thereunto, as
the bands granted thereanent by the Heritours within the several Presbyteries
and Burghs more fully proports: Which band and whole tenor thereof, the said
Estates now conveened in Parliament, ratifies and approves in all points as the
same is conceived, as well anent the payment of the said tenth part, as anent
the retention of the proportional part of the annual Rent in manner therein
expressed: And sicklike, in respect that the burdens of the common charges daily
increases, and that the Heritours to Land-ward, and Burgesses within Burghs
bear the same, conform to their rents, trade, house-mails, and others,
whereby yearly profit and commodity arises, without respect to their moneys:
Therefore it is ordained, that the moneys or annual rent, or life-rent shall
bear an equal and proportional burden with the said rents, trade, and
house-mails by way of retention, as well for the foresaid tenth part, as in all
other burdens, the Country is, or shall be put unto by general order, and
the terms of retention to be conform to the terms of payment of the said
tenth part, or of any other burden imposed, or to be imposed upon the said
rents, trade, or others foresaid, after the proportion thereof shall be
determined by the Commissioners, Auditors of the accounts of the common
burdens, appointed for that effect, until which time no debtours shall have
power to retain any part or portion of his annual rent or life-rent further
then the said tenth part for the crop and year 1639. allanerly. And because the
present expedition, or any other expedition hereafter requires advancement by
the Heritours and Burghs, of the two part of the foote-men and horsemen their
pay conform to the rents and valuations of each Shire and Burgh which will be
only in some Sherifdomes and Burghs: And to the effect that the burden may be
equal through the whole Kingdom: Therefore it is ordained, that the said
advancement and provision shall be put in count by the Shire, Burgh, Regiment,
or Company, who shall send out their men in the said expedition, or in any
other expedition or service necessar, as the Council of Estate and General
shall command, and the said accounts, to be given in to the said
Commissioners Auditors thereof, who shall have power to comptroll, fit, or
allow the same: Which compts being so fitted and allowed, shall be a part of
the common burden to be rambursed and allowed to the advancers thereof: And
because a great part of the Presbyteries and burghs of this Kingdom have not
as yet reported their valuations perfectly and rightly, done conform to the
general order: Therefore it is ordained, that all the presbyteries and burghs
within this Kingdom, who have not as yet made report of their said valuations
in form and manner above-specified, shall report the same betwixt and the
twenty day of June instant, be-south Tay, and betwixt and the first day of July
next to come be-north Tay, and that either under the hands and subscriptions of
the sworn men, appointed within each presbytery, testifying the same to be
true upon their conscience and credit according to their knowledge after the
most exact and true informations they could get, or otherwise, under the hands
of the heritors or magistrates, upon their consciences, and credit: or last, by
the subscriptions of the heritors and magistrates their hands, but with this
caveat, that what is concealed of land, rent, trade or other rent (whereby
profit or commodity arises, or did arise the said year) the whole rent
thereof, or the equivalent and avail of the same, shall be confiscate to the
public use, and the general collector appointed to uplift and receave the
same, and if need be, to pursue therefore. And (that no subterfuge and
concealment be used in valuations) it is appointed, that all land, trade,
shipping, salmond-fishing, and other yearly commodity whatsoever, whereby
profit did arise the said year, shall be fully and truly given up without
partiality, as the up-givers will either be answerable on their consciences,
or the heritors upon the hazard of confiscation. And likewise it is ordained,
that all money whatsoever, which pays annual rent to any person not liable in
the foresaid contribution, shall pay a proportionable part of their said
annual rent to the public use, as the same shall be imposed, as well for the
said tenth part as for the burdens hereafter to be imposed: And for that
effect, the valuers to take particular notice of such sums, and in case any
delay or refuse, to send in their said valuations to the Clerk of the same at
Edinburgh, betwixt and the said days respective, in that case it is declared,
that the delayers or refusers shall be esteemed and valued conform to their
retoures or otherwise, as the Committee at Edinburgh shall think fit, and a
proportion laid on accordingly, which they shall be holden to pay without any
deduction or favor in time coming: And such like for in-bringing of the
monys, conform to the said valuations, it is appointed, that there be
collectors chosen in every presbytery (where there are none chosen as yet) by
the Gentlemen and heritors, and that the Commissioners of shires see the same
done, and cause the said collectors (so to be chosen) subscribe bands for
doing of their diligence, and making payment of the collection to the general
collector, and send the same into Edinburgh to him. And where the valuations
are already brought in, and collectors already made, it is ordained, that the
said collectors shall, with all possible diligence, send all the money they
have to the principal Collector at Edinburgh, and shall use all possible
diligence for the rest, and give in their diligence to the said principal
Collector, With certification, if any, liable in payment of the said tenth
part, shall not pay to the said Collectors the sums due by them, conform to
the said valuations, the said principal Collector or his deputes shall use
all lawful execution against them where the bands are subscribed, and where
the bands are not subscribed, they shall be repute, and used as
non-Covenanters. And to take away all objections for not paying of the said
tenth part, it is appointed, that every Presbytery and burgh shall send in
their moneys, due for the tenth part, without deduction of any part of it,
except what is allowed for pay to their officers before the first of February
last, and prices of victual delivered to Commissars, for the public use, or
by warrant from the Committee: And if they have not ready money, they shall
borrow the same, from any person or persons to burgh or land-ward, where it may
be had upon their own security: And if any person or persons, of whatsoever
rank, degree, or calling, shall refuse to lend the same (reserving always so
much thereof, as may reasonably serve his own private use, and his family,
according to his estate and quality) upon the said security, It shall be
liesome to them, to conveene them before any ordinary Judge, or Committee of
the shire, or Presbytery: which being lawfully proved, by writ, witness, or
oath of party, that they have money, and refuse to lend the same, They shall be
holden as opposites to the common cause, and the money to be confiscate, the
one half to the apprehenders, and the other to the public use: And because
there is a present necessity of moneys, by and attour the said tenth part,
Therefore it is appointed, and ordained, That every presbytery within this
kingdom shall lend to the public use, the twentieth part of the rent,
contained in the valuations, and that by and attour the said tenth part, upon
declaration and Act to be made by the Committee from the Estates, that the
same is given and lent by them for the public business, to be repayed,
together with the annual rents thereof, when a common course is laid down,
and prosecute for relief of the common burdens, to be ended with all
possible diligence: And the furthest shirs to return their bands or money
betwixt and the first day of July next; Or otherwise it shall be liesome to
the said Committee, from the Estates, to find out the money in manner, and with
certification foresaid, and to design to the havers of the said money any
Noblemen, Gentlemen, Burgesses, or substantious wealthy men, within each
presbytery, one or more, who shall be oblisht to give band or security to the
said lenners, for repayment thereof, and annual rents for the same, in the
ordinary form, the sum not exceeding the said proportion of the said
twentieth part of the valuation of the said presbytery. For relief of the
which persons, one or more who shall give band or security foresaid, the whole
heritors of the said presbytery, as well to burgh as landward, shall be bound,
conform to the proportion of their rents and duties: and for that effect,
shall have action of relief against them, in case of distresses: And such
like, it is declared, That all the Bands, Contracts, and other oblishments for
sums of money already borrowed for the public use, shall be relieved and
paid by all the heritors within this Kingdom, as well to Burgh as land-ward,
conform to the valuations proportionally: And that these who have subscribed
the said bands, contracts, and other oblishments foresaids, shall have their
relief of the whole Shires and Burghs, conform to the several proportions,
as well these who have subscribed, as these who have not subscribed the said
bands and other foresaids: And where the valuers and collectors, chosen, or to
be chosen, refuse to go on and perfect the said valuations, or collect the
tenth part in manner above specified, in that case they or any of them shall
be holden and repute as enemies to the common cause: without prejudice
always, in case after their said refusal to the heritors and magistrates, to
do any of the other two alternatives, and in case the said Heritors or
Magistrates delay after the said days respective, the foresaid certification
to be valide against them in manner foresaid: And it is hereby declared, that
if any person or persons within or without Burgh shall upon their oaths
declare to the said Valuers or Auditors, that they pay annual rent to
strangers, dwelling without this Kingdom, of whom they cannot have the
retention of the proportional part of the contribution due out of the said
annual rent, in that case the said valuers or auditors shall defaulk
proportionally to the said person or persons contribution of their trade,
craft, rent, and estate, as they shall find agreeable to equity and reason.
And such like, it is hereby declared that this present Act, nor no clause
therein shall be any ground of Suspension to any debtour for retention of the
principal sums adebted by him, and byrun annual rents: But that every
creditour may suit, crave, and charge for the same after the day of payment, as
accords of the law: As also it is statute and ordained, that these debtors who
shall not pay their annual rents termly at least within six months after each
term of payment of the said annual rent, shall have no retention of the said
proportional part of the said contribution. And such like, it is hereby
declared, that this present manner of stenting for the said collection and
contribution shall no ways prejudge any person whatsoever in succeeding
taxations; But that every man's right and claim anent the prejudice may arise
concerning the same and manner thereof, whereby any man can instruct, enorme
lesioun, and that he was unequally stented, Is hereby specially reserved hinc
inde. And last, It is statute and ordained, that the Lords of Session shall be
Judges to all Suspensions to be raised in the said collection and contribution
in such form and manner as they are, and have been in matters of taxation.

ACT XXXV. ORDAINING SUMMONDS TO BE DIRECT and execute against the persons, who
are culpable of the crimes and faults, contained in the Act, to compeare before
the next Session of Parliament.
THe Estates of Parliament conveened by his Majesty's special Authority,
Considering the present strait and exigencie, menacing the ruin of this
Kingdom, and how necessary it is, for preventing thereof, that these who have
been the authors, or are the maintainers and assisters of these courses that
are destructive to the liberties of this Kirk and Kingdom, and that either by
their false suggestions and calumnious relations of the Estates of this
Kingdom, and their proceedings to his Majesty, or by their coming in Arms
against this their mother Country, and contributing to further our Adversaries
in their intended and professed plots and violences, for the subduing and
destroying this Kingdom, or by their rising in Arms within the Country,
fortifying and keeping of Castles, and houses against the Estates, who defend
the Country against all foreign invasions and subjection, or by deserting
their native Country in such an extreme necessity, and withdrawing from
them all the assistance they can: That all these and others in the like
condition be distinguished, and censured according to the several degrees of
their transgression against the State and Kingdom, Therefore they grant full
power and warrant to the Committee, which is to sit at Edinburgh, for to direct
in their name precepts to the Lion King of Arms, and his brethren Heralds and
Messengers, to pass, warn, and charge in name of the said Estates, the
persons underwritten:

And all others whom the said Committee upon like probable grounds can suspect
to have been the Liesing-makers, and tellers, and false accusers of the States
of this Kingdom, and their proceedings to the Kings Majesty, as seditious,
rebellious and treasonable, to have been the instigatours, framers, and
up-drawers of the strange Proclamations, and Declarations made against his
Majesty's Subjects and Estates, as Rebels and Traitors, or to have risen, or
rise in Arms, and concur with the adversaries, for subduing of this their
native Country, or to fortify, keep, or detain Strengths, or Castles
against the Estates of this Kingdom, who stand to their Covenant, for
defending their Religion, Crown, and Country; Or wittingly and willingly to
withdraw their assistance from their mother Country, in this extremity, and
contribute their help and countenance to the adversaries, and all others who
are either authors, abetters, maintainers, or suppliers, or art and part, or
have any hand in countenancing and concurring with our adversaries, to the
subduing and destroying of this Kingdom; and especially these that have seemed
to join with us, and have subscribed the Covenant, for to compeare personally
on (...) day at Edinburgh before the Parliament at the next Session thereof, to
answer unto these and all other crimes of that kind, which may be laid to
their charge, and that under the pain of treason and forefaultrie for their
contumacie, in case of not compearance: Like as the Estates declares that these
precepts being subscribed by the Praeses and Quorum of the Committee foresaid,
shall be as sufficient, as if they were subscribed in Parliament.

ACT XXXVI. IN FAVORS OF THE KINGS VASSELS of ward-lands, recommending their
prejudice by the Act Anno 1633. to the consideration of the next Parliament,
and in the mean time while then, suspending the force and execution of that
Act.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Taking to their consideration the bounty and benevolence of the
Kings Majesty's most noble Progenitors, King James the second, and King James
the fourth, giving their Vassels liberty to set ward-lands few: And likewise
considering how the Kings Vassels of ward-lands are secluded from that benefit
by the Act 1633. which seems to be done by misinformation of the Kings
Majesty, and contrary to the intention of the Parliament, to debar the
Subjects of the bounty and benevolence of the Kings Majesty toward them, which
was formerly granted by his Progenitors, Recommendeth the serious
consideration hereof, with the meaning and intention of the Kings, and the
Estates, in setting down of the foresaids Acts, and how far the same Acts
can be extended to the prejudice of the Vassels (the Act Anno 1633. being only
a ratification of a former Act made in favors of the Subjects, and appointing
the same to be extended to lands holden of the King and Prince, and not a
direct Act for these lands) to the next meeting of the Parliament: And in the
mean time, while the determination thereof, the Estates suppresses and
suspends the force and execution of the Act 1633. against the Kings Vassels of
ward-lands, and exeemes them from that Act during the said interim.

ACT XXXVII APPOINTING THE FEES FOR THE Procurator, the Clerk, and Agent for
the Kirk.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Taking to their consideration, the desire of the last Assembly, and
the supplication of the Commissioners of the Kirk, craving that the Advocate
for the Kirk, the Clerk of the Assembly, and the Agent for the Kirk may be
provided to Fees and Pensions, for their service in that charge out of the Kirk
rents belonging to the late Bishoprics, as they have had their Pensions paid
to them out of the same, since the Reformation. For the Procurator of the Kirk
had assigned to him four last, half last cost, extending to six chalders
twelve; bowls meal and malt out of the readiest duties of the Bishopric of
Orknay yearly: In place whereof, after the restitution of Bishops Anno 1606.
there was five hundredth pounds ordained to be paid out of the Kings Checker to
the Advocate for the Kirk: Like as the Clerk of the general Assembly, since
the Reformation, and before the restitution of Bishops, and by the Bishops
themselves, conform to their Band in Janu. 1610. years, had five hundredth
marks paid to him yearly, and the Agent for the Kirk had a continual pension
paid to him out of the Kirk rents for his charge. And herewith also, the said
Estates considering the necessity of the said Officers of Advocate, Clerk,
and Agent for the Kirks business, with the weight of that charge, and
continual attendance requisite thereto, ordaines, and appoints the sum of a
thousand marks of Fee and Pension to be paid yearly to Master Archbald
Johnstoun present Advocate for the Kirk, and to his successors, chosen and
appointed by the Assembly in that place for the Fee of that charge, as
Procurator for the Kirk, and the sum of five hundredth marks to be paid
yearly to the said Master Archbald Johnstoun as present Clerk to the general
Assemblies of the Kirk, for the Fee and Pension of that office, and to his
Successors chosen and appointed by the Assembly in that place, for the
discharge thereof and service thereintill: And the sum of other five hundredth
marks of Fee and Pension yearly to be paid to Master Robert Dalgleish
present Agent for the Kirk, and to his Successors chosen and appointed by the
Assembly in that charge. And in respect, that the Advocate, Clerk, and Agent
for the Kirk, must have their continual residence at Edinburgh, for attending
the affairs of the Kirk, and that the said Fees and Pensions ought to be
paid out of the Bishops rents, and that the said officers, should be paid
thereof, out of the nearest and most commodious rents, belonging to the said
Bishoprics, Therefore the said Estates, ordaines the said fees and pensions
to be paid to the said present officers, and to their successors respective,
in that charge out of the readiest of the few duties, and out of the quotes of
Testaments of the diocese of S. Andrews, Glasgow, and Edibburgh, according to
the proportion and division to be determinate and set down, by the Committee,
from this present Parliament appointed to remain at Edinburgh: and ordaines
the foresaids fees, to be paid conform to that division by the heritors,
fewars, fermorers, and others adebted in payment of the few duties of the said
three Bishoprics, and by the collectors, and intrometters with the said
quotes of Testaments: And also ordaines the Lords of Session to direct letters
on this present Act, and upon the determination and division of the said
Committee, at the instance of the Advocate, Clerk, and Agent for the Kirk,
present and to come, for payment to them yearly, of their said fees and
pensions above-specified. And because that the present Procurator, Clerk, and
Agent, have been serving the Kirk, in these places these two years bygone,
without receiving their fees otherwise due to them, and that the rents of the
said two years, are yet untaken up, by the pretended Bishops of Edinburgh,
Glasgow, and S. Andrews, but are restand in the tenants and collectors hands,
Therefore they ordain their entry of payment, to be to the crop and year of
God, 1638. years.

ACT XXXVIII ORDAINING THE WHOLE SUBJECTS And Lieges of this Kingdom to obey,
maintain, and defend the Conclusions, Acts and Constitutions of this present
session of Parliament, and to subscribe the band appointed for that effect.
IN the Parliament holden at Edinburgh, the eleventh day of June 1640. years,
the Estates of Parliament presently conveened, by his Majesty's special
authority, Considering that whereas, after many petitions and supplications
given in and presented to his Majesty, and the Lords of his secret council,
by diverse of the Nobility, Barons, and Burgesses of this Kingdom, for granting
a free General Assembly and Parliament, for reforming of many great abuses and
novations, tending to the overthrow of the true reformed Religion, and undoing
of this Kirk and Kingdom, devised and brought in by the late pretended
Bishops, who by their subtle practices, during his Majesty's absence, these
many years, had ingrost in their persons, all the Ecclesiastic and civil
Power of this his Majesty's ancient and native Kingdom; It was granted by his
Majesty, out of his Royal Justice, and accorded by the Articles of
Pacification, made at his Majesty's camp in the month of June, 1639. years
last bypast, that a free general Assembly and Parliament should be indicted
by his Majesty, and that all matters Ecclesiastical should be determined by
the Assemblies of the Kirk: and matters civil, by Parliaments, and other
inferior Judicatories, established by Law: And that according thereunto, his
Majesty did indict an Assembly to be holden at Edinburgh, the twelfth of
August, and a Parliament for ratifying the Conclusions of the same assembly,
and setting down such other things as might conduce to the peace and good of
the Kingdom, To be holden at Edinburgh the twenty sixth of August last
bypast. In the which assembly, the matters concerning the purity of the true
reformed Religion, and peace of this Kirk, after great debate, delays, and
protracting of time, made by John Earl of Traquaire, his Majesty's
Commissioner, being at length concluded upon the (...) day of August, 1639.
years; the Parliament sitting down, immediately thereafter, upon the penult
day of the said month of August, the ratifications of the Conclusions of the
same assembly, and many other matters of great importance, conducing
necessarily to the settling of the peace of this Kingdom, being proponed in
Parliament, were likewise shifted and delayed, and the closing of the
Parliament protracted from time to time, unto the (...) day of November last
bypast: At the which time, the said John Earl of Traquaire did take upon him
without the consent of the Estates, to prorogate the foresaid Parliament, to
the second day of June instant, not only contrary to the Articles of
Pacification, but also to the prejudice of the Liberties of the Parliament: for
preservation whereof, the said Estates were forced to make a declaration in
Parliament against the same: And that albeit since the said (...) day of
November, unto this time, the said Estates have used all possible means to
give his Majesty full satisfaction, both by their peaceable carriage at home,
and by sending their Commissioners to acquaint his Majesty with all their just
desires, and the reasons thereof, yet they have not only received no answer,
but upon the contrary, their proceeding in the said Parliament, being untruly
related, by the said John Earl of Traquaire, have been condemned as Rebellious
without hearing, And our Commissioners sent for clearing thereof, all
restrained in private houses for a long time, and John Lord Lowdoun, being one
of them committed to the Tower, where he is still detained prisoner: The
Castles of Edinburgh, and Dumbartane have in the mean time been fortified and
provided with all sort of Ammunition, in great abundance, and Garrisons of
Soldiers, (not being natives of this Kingdom) put therein, the Garrison in the
Castle of Edinburgh, daily killing diverse of the inhabitants of this City,
and spoiling their houses with muskets and great Ordnance: all ships belonging
to this Kingdom arrested in England, and Ireland: and many of them coming from
other places, laid wait for, and taken by the way: their owners and
passengers spoiled of their goods and apparel, laid in the yrons, and
barbarously abused: A Commission granted to the General of the English forces
by sea and land, to kill, destroy, and subdue this whole nation, a printed
Declaration put forth, denouncing war against it, persuading, exhorting, and
provoking the other two Kingdoms to grant subsidies, and take Arms against
the inhabitants of this Kingdom as traitors and rebels: And the Parliament
of Ireland has proceeded so far as to declare them to be such: All which
they have hitherto endured patiently, and thereby given an evident
demonstration to the world of the loyalty of their affections to their
Sovereign, which no extremity shall ever make them to forget: And now being
pressed by the present exigence of the Estate of this Kingdom, and bound by the
necessity of that natural duty they owe to themselves and their posterity, to
provide for the safety of the Commonwealth, and their own, and timously to
prevent the utter ruin of this Nation, which can no longer subsist under so
great a burden, That time appointed being come, to the which the Parliament was
prorogate, and no advertisement come from his Majesty to them anent any course
to be taken, for remeeding of the great disorders, they being the great
Council of the Kingdom, could not be altogether so forgetful of themselves,
and deficient to their Country, as to suffer this Parliament which they had so
often petitioned from his Majesty, which was conditioned and accorded by the
said Articles of Pacification, and indicted by his Majesty's Authority, to be
deserted and expired without any conclusion to the good of the Commonwealth in
so great extremity: But rather, thought themselves bound in conscience and
duty to proceed to the determination of such matters as are necessary for the
establishing of the peace of this Kirk and Kingdom, as being the express and
special ends of all their Supplications, and agreeable to the said Articles
of Pacification, without trenching any ways on Soveraignitie, or derogating in
any sort from his Majesty's Royal Authority: but on the contrary, only looking
first upon the constitutions of the general Assembly, past in presence of his
Majesty's Commissioner, and the necessary consequences thereof, and then
providing remedies for the present evils of the Kingdom, by removing the
cause, and establishing necessary conclusions for preventing the like
hereafter: In doing whereof, as they have proceeded uprightly in the way of
Justice, and with all due reverence, and regard to his Majesty's Authority, and
thereby have stopped the calumnious mouths of their adversaries, so they rest
assured, that his Majesty after due examination of their proceedings, finding
the same agreeable to the fundamental laws and customs of this his ancient
and native Kingdom, and no ways repugnant to Monarchical government, will
out of his Royal Justice and goodness give his full consent thereunto; And
thereby totally remove and extinguish all ground and occasion of controversy
against his faithful and loyal Subjects, restore this Kingdom to a perfect
and sollid peace, which they pray the LORD to put in his Majesty's Royal
Heart, that he may long and prosperously reign over them. And on the other
part, considering from bygone experience how malicious and diligent their
adversaries will be to calumniate these their proceedings, and by their
suggestions to the Kings Majesty, and to the Lieges, to kindle and entertain
factions and divisions thereanent, and how necessary it is for the safety and
peace of this Kirk and Kingdom, that the members of both do unanimously with
heart and hand testify by their subscription their resolution, and obligation
to acknowledge this Parliament so often desired by their petitions and
supplications, and conveened by his Majesty's solemn indiction, according to
the Articles of Pacification, to be a free, lawful, and necessary Parliament,
and to obey, observe, and maintain the same for themselves constantly and
faithfully, and to the uttermost of their power, to join and concur, in
their several stations and callings, with others to advance, further, and
assist the execution, obedience, and observing of the Acts and Constitutions of
this present Parliament, as the most sit and necessary remedies of the bygone
and present evils and distractions of this Kirk and Kingdom, and for
preservation of the Religion, laws and liberties thereof, and of his Majesty's
Authority, and that in the first Parliament which shall be holden hereafter
within this Kingdom, and at all other occasions, against any opposition
whatsoever, except in so far as shall hereafter be thought sit and expedient
by the common advise and consent of the Estates: They have ordained, and
ordaines the Band underwritten, to be subscribed by all the Members of
Parliament present and absent, and by all Noble men, Barons, Burgesses, and all
other Subjects and inhabitants of the Kingdom, in their Shires, and Burghs, as
they shall be directed by the Commissioners of Parliament left at Edinburgh,
and to be reported to the Clerk, betwixt and the first day of September next,
with certification, that such as refuse, or post-pone, and delay to subscribe
the same, shall be holden as Enemies and Opposites to the common Cause,
consisting in the maintenance of the true reformed Religion, and of the laws,
and liberties of this Kingdom, and his Majesty's Authority.

We Noblemen, Barons, Burgesses, and others, under subscribers, Considering
how necessary it is to establish our Union in the preservation and maintenance
of the Religion, Laws, and Liberties of this Kingdom, and of his Majesty's
Authority, and to prevent all factions, contentions, and divisions, which may
arise in prejudice thereof, from malicious suggestions and mis-informations of
our adversaries, do all, and every one of us with our heart and hand testify
and declare our Resolution and Obligation, (for the reasons and causes at
length expressed in the Act of Parliament immediately preceding) to acknowledge
the foresaid Parliament to have been, and to be a free and lawful Parliament.
Like as we bind and oblish us, and every one of us upon our honors and
credit, and as we desire to be, and to be holden true lovers of our Country,
and of the Religion, laws, and liberties thereof, effauldly and faithfully to
the uttermost of our power, To join and concur with our persons and estates,
every one of us according to our several stations and callings, in the
maintenance of the freedom and lawfulness of the foresaid Parliament, and in
the advancement, furtherance, and assistance of the execution, obedience, and
observation of the Acts and Constitutions thereof, as the most sit and
necessary remedies of the bygone and present evils and distractions of this
Kirk and Kingdom, and for the preservation of Religion, laws, and liberties
thereof, and of his Majesty's Authority, and that in the first Parliament,
which shall be holdeu hereafter within this Kingdom, and at all other
occasions, and against any opposition whatsoever, except in so far as shall be
hereafter thought sit and expedient, by the common advise and consent of the
Estates. In witness whereof we have signed and subscribed these presents with
our hands, At, etc.

ACT XXXIX. DECLARING THE PARLIAMENT Current, and continuing the same while the
nineteenth of November next.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, Continues this present Parliament, and all matters and actions
belonging thereto, while the nineteenth day of November next to come: At the
which day, ordaines the whole Estates to be present, and to attend at
Edinburgh, or where it shall happen the same to be appointed to be holden for
the time: And in the mean time declares the same Parliament to be current to
the day foresaid: And ordaines the whole Acts and Statutes concluded in this
present Session of the said Parliament, to stand and have the force and
strength of Laws, such like as any Acts and Statutes of any preceding
Parliaments in any time bygone: And ordaines the same to be published and
printed, notwithstanding of the continuation thereof to the day foresaid.

ACTS DONE AND PAST AT EDINBURGH, NOVEMBER The nineteenth 1640.
ACT ANENT THE ELECTION OF Robert Lord Burghly to be Preses of this meeting of
Estates in Parliament.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, this nineteenth day of November 1640. years. To the which day the
Parliament was continued by the last Act of the last Session thereof, the 11.
of June 1640. did unanimously elect and choose Robert Lord Burghly to be
President of this their meeting of Estates in Parliament.

ACT I. ACT ANENT THE CONTINUATION Of the Parliament, to the 14. of Januarie
1641. years, with continuation of days.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, yet as of before, continues this present Parliament, and all
summonds and actions intended or depending, with all other matters belonging to
the said Parliament, to the fourteenth day of Januarie next to come, with
continuation of days. At the which day, or sooner, as the Committee of Estates
and Quorums thereof, both in the Country and at the Army, shall appoint,
Ordaines the whole Estates to be present, and to attend at Edinburgh, or where
it shall happen the famine to be appointed to be holden for the time. And in
the mean time declares the said Parliament to be current to the day foresaid.
And ordaines the whole acts and statutes made and concluded in plain
Parliament, in the last session thereof, in June last bypast, to stand and
have the force and strength of laws and acts, conform to the tenours thereof,
such like as any acts and statutes of any preceding parliaments in any time
bygone: And namely (but prejudice of the generality foresaid) the act of
Committee of the Estates, to stand in full force ay and while it be discharged
by the Estates. And ordaines the foresaid acts, with the act of election of the
said Robert Lord Burghly to be Preses at this meeting of Estates, together with
this present act of continuation, to be published and printed, conform to the
last act of continuation, bearing date the eleventh of June last,
notwithstanding of this present continuation of the Parliament to the day
above-written.

ACTS DONE AND PAST AT EDINBURGH, Januarie 14. 1641.
ACT ANENT THE ELECTION OF Robert Lord Burghly to be Preses of this meeting of
Estates in Parliament.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, this fourteenth day of Januarie 1641. years: To the which day the
Parliament was continued by the last act of continuation thereof, dated the 19.
of November 1640. years, did unanimously elect and choose Robert Lord Burghly
to be President of this their meeting of Estates in Parliament.

ACT II. ACT ANENT THE CONTINUATION Of the Parliament to the 13. day of April,
1641. years, with continuation of days.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, yet as of before, continues this present Parliament, and all
summonds and actions intended or depending, with all supplications, grievances,
and other matters belonging to the said Parliament, to the thirteenth day of
April next to come, with continuation of days: And that for satisfaction of
his Majesty's gracious desire, signified by his Majesty's letter directed to
the Estates to that effect, bearing date the last of December 1640. And also
for sundry grave and weighty considerations, concerning the weal of the Estate,
Kirk, and Kingdom, known to the Estates. At the which 13. day of April,
ordains the whole Estates to be present, and to attend at Edinburgh, or where
it shall happen the famine to be holden for the time, But prejudice always of
the power granted to the Co^mittees of Estate, contained in the Act of this
present Parliament made thereanent, dated the 11. day of June last, and
mentioned in the last Act of continuation thereof, bearing date the 19. of
November 1640. And in the mean time, the Estates declares the said Parliament
to be current to the effect above-written unto the day foresaid, with
continuation of days, and ordaines the whole Acts and Statutes made and
concluded in plain Parliament in that Session thereof in June last bypast,
together with all former Acts of continuation made by the said Estates, to
stand and have the force and strength of Laws and Acts, conform to the tenours
thereof, such like as any Acts and Statutes of any preceding Parliaments in any
time bygone: And namely (but prejudice of the generality foresaid) the Act of
Committee of the Estates to stand in full force in all the clauses thereof, aye
and while it be discharged by the Estates, And ordaines the foresaids Acts,
with the Act of Election of Robert Lord Burghlie, to be preses at this meeting
of Estates, together with this present Act of continuation, to be published and
printed, conform to the last Act of continuation of the date foresaid,
notwithstanding of this present continuation of the Parliament to the day
above-written.

ACTS DONE AND PAST AT EDINBURGH, April 13. 1641.
ACT ANENT THE ELECTION OF Robert Lord Burghly to be President of this meeting
of Estates in Parliament.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, this 13. day of April, 1641. years: To the which day the Parliament
was continued by the last act of continuation thereof, of the date the 14. day
of January 1641. years, Did unanimously elect and choose Robert Lord Burghly to
be President of this their meeting of Estates in Parliament.

ACT III. ACT ANENT THE CONTINUATION OF The Parliament to the 25. day of May
1641. years, with continuation of days.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, yet as of before, continues this present Parliament, and all
summonds and actions intended or depending, with all supplications, grievances,
and other matters belonging to the foresaid Parliament, to the twenty fifth day
of May next to come, with continuation of days: And that for satisfaction of
his Majesty's gracious desire signified by his Majesty's letter, direct to the
Estates to that effect, bearing date 23. March 1641. And also for sundry grave
and weighty considerations, concerning the weal of the Estate, Kirk, and
Kingdom, known to the Estates. At the which twenty fifth day of May next to
come, ordaines the whole Estates to be present, and to attend at Edinburgh, or
where it shall happen the famine to be holden for the time, But prejudice
always of the power granted to the Committees of Estate, contained in the Act
of this present Parliament made thereanent, dated the eleventh day of June
last, and mentioned in the two last Acts of continuation thereof, the one
bearing date the 19. of November 1640. and the other bearing date the 14. of
January last bypast 1641. And in the mean time, the Estates declares the said
Parliament to be current to the effect above-written unto the day foresaid,
with continuation of days, and ordaines the whole Acts and Statutes made and
concluded in plain Parliament in that Session thereof in June last bypast,
together with all former Acts of continuation made by the said Estates, to
stand and have the force and strength of Laws and Acts, conform to the tenours
thereof, such like as any Acts and Statutes of any preceding Parliaments in any
time bygone: And namely (but prejudice of the generality foresaid) the Act of
the Committee of Estates to stand in full force in all the clauses thereof, aye
and while it be discharged by the Estates, And ordaines the foresaids Acts,
with the Act of Election of Robert Lord Burghlie, to be preses at this meeting
of Estates, together with this present Act of continuation, to be published and
printed, conform to the last Act of continuation of the date foresaid,
notwithstanding of this present continuation of the Parliament to the day
above-written.

ACTS DONE AND PAST AT EDINBURGH, May 25. 1641.
ACT ANENT THE ELECTION OF Robert Lord Burghly to be President of this meeting
of Estates in Parliament.
THe Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
Authority, this 25. day of May, 1641. years: to the which day the Parliament
was continued by the last act of continuation thereof, of the date the 13. day
of April 1641. years foresaid, Did unanimously with one uniforme consent,
elect and choose Robert Lord Burghly to be President of this their meeting of
Estates in Parliament.

ACT IIII. ACT ANENT THE CONTINUATION Of the Parliament, to the 15. day of July
1641. years, with continuation of days.
THE Estates of Parliament presently conveened by his Majesty's special
authority, yet as of before, continues this present Parliament, and all
summonds and actions intended or depending, with all supplications, grievances,
and other matters belonging to the said Parliament, against all parties cited
or desired to be sent home to Scotland as Incendiaries, or cited for other
crimes or causes, and the former citations and continuations thereof, and this
present continuation, to continue in the same force, strength and effect, as
they were at the several days of compearances respective, whereunto they were
cited, and as if they had been called, or were now called per expressum, upon
the said several days whereunto they were cited respective, as said is, or
upon the several days of continuation whereunto this Parliament was continued
from time to time, notwithstanding of the not calling of them publicly in
judgment at none of the said days, which was no ways necessary to have been
done, nor to be done, before insisting against them, in respect that they were
both cited to several days of compearance, with continuation of days, and
that the Parliament was continued from time to time to certain other days
also, with continuation of days, to the fifteenth day of July next to come,
with continuation of days, and that for satisfying his Majesty's gracious
desire, signified by his Majesty's letter direct to the Estates for that
effect, beating date the 18. of May, 1641. years, And also for sundry grave
and weighty considerations: concerning the weal of the Estate, Kirk and
Kingdom, known to the Estates, But prejudice always to the Estates of
Parliament, of their undoubted liberty to sit without prorogation, except they
consent to a prorogation: and that by reason that all Acts of prorogation of
Parliament, are Acts of Parliament, and no Acts of Parliament can be made
without consent of the Estates conveened and sitting in plain Parliament: AT
the which fifteenth day of July next to come, ordaines the whole Estates to be
present and to attend at Edinburgh, or where it shall happen the famine to be
holden for the time: And such, like ordaines his Majesty's Advocate and
Procutors of Estate, all and every one of them to compeare and attend, and to
insist as they shall be commanded by the Estates, against whatsoever persons
indicted or to be indicted, And discharges the said Advocate and Procutors, and
every one of them to consult with, or take upon hand, directly or indirectly,
to defend any who shall seek their advise for pleading or maintaining them in
any sort, against any pursuit moved, or to be moved against them in Parliament,
for any crime against the public, or to give any information for that effect:
And that because it is incumbent to the Kings Majesty's Advocate and Procutors
of Estate to pursue all who happens from time to time to be cited to the
Parliament for any offense against the public, and no ways to take their
Patrocinie: but prejudice likewise of the power granted to the Cornmittees of
Estate, contained in the Act of this present Parliament, made thereanent, dated
the 11 of June last, and mentioned in the three last Acts of continuation
thereof: The first dated the 19. November 1640. the second the 14. of January,
1641. and the third dated the 13. of April the same year, 1641. years; And in
the mean time the Estates declares the said Parliament to be current, to the
effect above-written, unto the day foresaid, with continuation of days, and
ordaines the whole Acts and Statutes made, and concluded in plain Parliament in
that session thereof in June last bypast, together with all the former Acts of
continuation made by the said Estates, to stand and have the force and
strength of Laws and Acts, conform to the tenours thereof, such like as any
Acts and statutes of any preceding Parliaments in any time bygone: And namely
(but prejudice of the generality foresaid) the act of the Committee of Estates,
to stand in full force in all the clauses thereof, ay and while it be
discharged by the Estates, and ordaines the foresaids Acts with the Act of
election of Robert Lord Burghlie to be preses of this meeting of Estates,
together with this present Act of continuation, to be published and printed,
conform to the last act of continuation of the date foresaid, notwithstanding
of this present continuation of the Parliament to the day above-written.

ACTS DONE AND PAST IN THE LAST SESSION OF THE SECOND PARLIAMENT OF OUR
SOVEREIGN LORD, etc.
Beginning the 15. day of June 1641. and ending the 17. of November, the same
year, according to the several dates respective after specified prefixed
thereto.
ACT V. ANENT THE OATH TO BE GIVEN BY Every member of Parliament. August 18.
1641.
FOR SO MUCH as the honor, greatness and happiness of the Kings Royal
Majesty, and the welfare of the Subjects depend on the purity of Religion, as
it is now established in this Kingdom, the laws, liberties and peace thereof,
which ought to be sought after by all good Christians, loyal Subjects, and
true Patriots, And to be furthered and maintained by them against all such, as
by any means, endeavor to shake, or subvert the same. THEREFORE We
under-subscribers, and every one of Us, do in the presence of almighty God
promise and vow, That in this present Parliament We shall faithfully and
freely, speak, answer and express our selves upon all, and every thing which
is or shall be proponed, so far as we think in our conscience may conduce to
the glory of God, the good and peace of the Church, and State of this
Kingdom, and employ our best endeavors to promove the same: And shall in no
ways advise, voice nor consent to any thing, which to our best knowledge, we
think not most expedient and conduceable thereto: as also that we shall
maintain and defend with our Life, Power, and Estate, His Majesty's Royal
Person, Honor and Estate, as is expressed in our National Covenant: And
likewise the Power and Privileges of Parliament, and the lawful Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects, and by all good means and ways, oppose, and
endeavor to bring to exact trial, all such as either by force, practice,
counsel, plots, conspiracies, or other ways, have done, or shall do any thing
in prejudice of the purity of Religion, the Laws, Liberties, and Peace of the
Kingdom: And further, that we shall in all just and honorable ways endeavor
to preserve union and peace betwixt the three Kingdoms of Scotland, England,
and Ireland, and neither for hope, fear, nor other respect shall relinguish
this vow and promise.

Read in audience of the Kings Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, who
approve the same, and appoint the said oath to be taken by all members of this
Parliament, and in all Parliaments hereafter, before they proceed to any act,
or determination.

ACT VI. ACT ANENT THE RATIFICATION OF The Articles of the Treaty,
superscribed by the King, and subscribed by the President of the Parliament.
August 26. 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Ratifies and approves the
articles of the large treaty concerning the establishing of the peace betwixt
the Kings Majesty, and his people of Scotland, and betwixt the two Kingdoms
of Scotland and England: And for his Majesty and his successors perpetually
confirms the same, ordaining the same in all time coming to have the full
force and strength of perfect security, laws, and acts of Parliament: Like as
his Majesty, for Himself and his Successors, promises, in verbo Principis,
never to come in the contrary thereof, for any thing therein contained: but to
hold the same firm and stable, and shall cause it to be truly observed by all
his Majesty's Lieges according to the tenor and intent thereof for now and
ever. Whereof the tenor follows:

WHereas by his Majesty's Royal Wisdom, and Princely care of the Peace and
Happiness of his Majesty's Dominions, a Treaty has been appointed for
removing of all differences raised betwixt the two Kingdoms, and betwixt the
King and his Subjects of Scotland, and for settling and assuring a firm and
blessed Peace for all time to come: and a Commission has been given under the
great Seal of England, with approbation of both Houses of Parliament, bearing
date 23. of November in the 16. year of his Majesty's reign, and in the words
following:

CHARLES by the grace of God, King of Scotland, England, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our Right trusty, and right welbeloved Cousins, Francis Earl of Bedford,
William Earl of Hartford, Robert Earl of Essex, And to our right trusty, and
right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, William Earl of Salisbury, And to our
right trusty, and right welbeloved Cousin, Robert Earl of Warwick, And to our
right trusty, and right welbeloved Cousin, John Earl of Bristoll, And to our
right trusty, and right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, Henry Earl of
Holland, And to our right trusty, and right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor,
Thomas Earl of Berks, And to our right trusty, and welbeloved, Philip Lord
Wharton, William Lord Paget, Edward Lord Kimbalton, Robert Lord Brook, John
Lord Paulet, Edward Lord Howard of Estrick, Thomas Lord Savil, and Francis Lord
Dunsmore, Greeting.
Whereas diverse of our Subjects of Scotland, have by their several Petitions
humbly besought us, that we would be graciously pleased to grant unto them
certain Demands, we reposing especial trust and confidence in your great
wisdoms and fidelities, have named, assigned, and appointed you, and by these
presents do name, assign, and appoint you to be our Commissioners: and do
hereby give, and grant unto you, or any ten, or more of you, full power, and
authority to treat with John Earl of Rothes, Charles Earl of Dumfermling,
John Lord Loudoun, Sir Patrick Hepburne of Wauchton, Sir William Douglas of
Cavers, William Drummond of Riccarton, John Smith Baily of Edinburgh, Alexander
Wedderburne Clerk of Dundy, Hugh Kennedy Burgess of Air, Alexander
Hendersone, and Archibald Johnstoun, or any of them, Or any other deputed, or
to be deputed by our said Subjects of Scotland, or nominated on their behalf;
and to take into your serious consideration the said Demands, and compose,
conclude, and end all differences arising thereupon: Or otherwise, as you, or
any ten, or more of you, in your wisdoms shall think fit: And whatsoever you
our Commissioners aforesaid, or any ten, or more of you shall do in the
premises, We do by these presents ratify, and confirm the same. In witness
whereof We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness our self at Westminster the three and twentieth day of November, in
the sixteenth year of our Reign.
Per ipsum Regem.
AND IN LIKE MANNER, A COMMISSION has been granted by the Committees of the
Parliament of Scotland, bearing date the last of October, and the 4 day of
November, 1640. and in the words following:
We the Commissioners of the Parliament of Scotland, being a full number of
both the Quorums thereof, under-subscribing: For So Much as the Kings Majesty,
our dread Sovereign has been graciously pleased, upon our humble
supplications, to appoint a Treaty, and Conference at Rippon betwixt our
Commssioners, chosen, and sent by Us for that effect, and a number of the
Peers of England, who accordingly met, and have accorded upon certain
Articles, as well anent the maintenance of our Army, as anent the cessation of
Arms during the Treaty. And because the time for the ensuing Parliament of
England could not permit the Treaty to come to the wished conclusion there, his
Majesty was therefore likewise pleased to trans-ferre the said Treaty to
London, where the said Parliament is to hold, that there these entrusted by his
Majesty, and Estates of Parliament, may have the better time and place to
treat, and conclude thereanent.

Therefore We the said Commissioners, being a full number of both Quorums
thereof under-subscribing, by virtue, and conform to the Commission granted to
us by the Estates of Parliament, do not only approve the said Articles
already agreed upon, and subscribed by our said Commissioners at Rippon, but
also do by these presents give full power, warrant and Commission to John
Earl of Rothes, Lord Lesley, etc. Charles Earl of Dumfermling, Lord Urquhart
and Fuby, etc. John Lord Londoun, Sir Patrick Hepburne of Wachtoun, Sir William
Douglas of Cavers, William Drummond of Riccarton, John Smith of Edinburgh, Mr.
Alexander Wedderburne of Dundy, and Hugh Kennedy, of Air, as members of the
Estates of Parliament. And because many things may occur, concerning the
Church, and Assemblies thereof: Therefore besides these of the Estates we
nominate, and appoint Mr. Alexander Hendersone, and Mr. Archibald Johnstoun,
whom we adjoyne for that effect; With power to them, or any seven of them,
there being always two of every Estate, to pass to the said City of London,
and there, or at any other place convenient (mutually to be agreed upon) to
meet, and conveen with any who shall be appointed by his Majesty, and Estates
of Parliament of England for the foresaid Treaty, giving, granting, and
committing; like as we by these presents give, grant, and commit to them in
manner foresaid, full power, warrant, and commission to treat, consult, advise,
determine, and agree, as well anent the satisfying, and granting of our
Demands, as in obtaining, and securing a settled peace for all time coming,
conform to the instructions given to them herewith, or which shall be sent to
them hereafter by us, or any one of the said Quorums at the Camp of Edinburgh
thereanent. With power to them, as said is, to do everything which may conduce
for the better and easier obtaining of our said demands, and establishing a
settled peace, conform to the said particular instructions, in such like manner
as we might do if we were all personally present our selves in full number,
promising to hold firm and stable all, and every thing our said Commissioners
in manner foresaid shall do in the Premises, conform to the said
instructions. And in case it shall be found expedient, or necessary to add any
more Commissioners to the foresaid persons, these who shall so be sent,
authorized under our hands, or the full number of any of the said Quorums,
shall have a like power, and Commission by virtue of these presents with the
forenamed Commissioners, in such like manner, as if their names were
particularly expressed herein.

In witness whereof these presents are subscribed at Newcastle and Edinburgh
the last of October, and 4. of November, 1640. SIC SUBSCRIBITUR.
Rothes. Montrose. Cassils. Lothian. Lyndesay Balmerino. Naper. Burghly. Jo.
Cooper. Thomas Hope. Ricccarton. Caprinton. Gaitgirth. Dundas. Edward Edgar.
Rich. Maxwell. James Scot. Gorterfield. Hume. Hammilton. Mr. Will. More. Ja.
Sword. Hew Kennedy. Rutherfoord.


And forasmuch as by virtue of the said Commissions, the Commissioners therein
authorized, have treated, and by the assistance and blessing of God have agreed
upon the heads, and articles following.

ARTICLES OF THE LARGE TREATY concerning the establishing of the peace betwixt
the Kings Majesty, and his people of Scotland, and betwixt the two Kingdoms,
agreed upon by the Scottish and English Commissioners, at the City of
Westminster, the seventh day of August. 1641.
THe SCOTTISH COMMISSIONERS (having given in the Declaration following, viz.
WE do still in all Loyalty, as becomes humble and duetifull Subjects,
acknowledge our dependency upon his Majesty as our dread Sovereign, whether his
Majesty live in Scotland or England, and shall always, and in all things
witness our high respects and best affections to the Kingdom and Parliament
of England, according to the strong bonds of nature and religion, by which the
two Kingdoms are joined under one Head and Monarch: yet as we are fully
assured that the Kingdom and Parliament of England, is for the present far
from any thought of usurpation over the Kingdom and Parliament of Scotland, or
their Laws and Liberties: so, for the preventing the misunderstanding of the
Posterity and of Strangers, and for satisfying the scruples of others not
acquainted with the nature of this Treaty and the manner of our proceedings,
which may arise upon our coming into England, and our treating in time of
Parliament; We do by these declare and make known, that neither by our Treaty
with the English, nor by seeking our peace to be established in Parliament,
nor any other actions of ours, do we acknowledge any dependency upon them, or
make them Judges to us or our Laws, or any thing that may import the smallest
prejudice to our Liberties, but that we come in a free and brotherly way by
our informations to remove all doubts, that may arise concerning the
proceedings of our Parliament, and to join our endeavors in what may conduce
for the good and peace of both Kingdoms, no otherwise then if by occasion of
the King his residence in Scotland Commissioners in the like exigence should be
sent thither from England) DID DEMAND, that his Majesty would be graciously
pleased to command that the Acts of the late Parliament may be published in
his Highness name as our Sovereign Lord, with consent of the Estates of
Parliament conveened by his Majesty's authority.

WHEREUNTO it is answered and agreed, That for as much as the Kings Majesty, at
the humble desire of his Subjects, did call and conveen a Parliament to be
holden at Edinburgh the 2. of June, 1640. wherein certain Acts were made and
agreed upon, which Acts his Majesty (for the peace and good of his Kingdom)
is pleased to publish in his own name with consent of the Estates, and
therefore commands that the said Acts bearing date the 11. day of June, 1640.
be published with the Acts to be made in the next Session of the same
Parliament: and that all the said Acts, as well of the precedent as of the next
Session, to be holden, have in all time coming the strength of Laws, and to
be universally received, and obeyed by all the Subjects of the Kingdom of
Scotland.

His Majesty does in the word of a King promise the publishing of the said Acts
in such sort as is above specified.

As for the manner of publishing the said Acts, his Majesty approves that the
Declaration of the Estates in the beginning of the Acts, and the conclusion at
the end, may be past in silence at the publishing of the Acts, and left out in
the printed Copies: And if any thing shall further occur concerning the
manner of publishing the said Acts, his Majesty's Commissioner may then offer
it to the Estates to be considered of, his Majesty being most assured that the
Estates of Parliament will have a great care not to suffer his Majesty's
authority to be prejudiced in the managing of these great affairs. Tertio
Decembris, 1640.

THE SECOND DEMAND, that the Castle of Edinburgh, and other strengths of the
Kingdom should, with the advice of the Estates of Parliament, according to
their first foundation be furnished, and used for defense and security of the
Kingdom. IS AGREED UNTO.

THE THIRD DEMAND, that Scottish men within his Majesty's Dominions of England
and Ireland, may be freed from censure for subscribing the Covenant, and be no
more pressed with oaths and subscriptions unwarranted by their Laws, and
contrary to their National oath and Covenant approved by his Majesty.

It is thereto answered and agreed in his Majesty's name, upon December. 8. 1640.
That as his Majesty has granted your first and second Demands, so do we in
his Majesty's name answer to the third: That all these who in his Majesty's
Dominions of England or Ireland have been imprisoned, forfeited, or censured
any other way for subscribing of the Covenant, or for refusing to take any
other Oath contrary to the same, shall be freed of these censures, and shall be
fully restored to their Liberties, Estates, and Possessions. And for time
coming, that the Subjects of Scotland, as Subjects of Scotland, shall not be
constrained to any oath contrary to the Laws of that Kingdom, and the
Religion there established: but such of the Kingdom of Scotland as shall
transport themselves into the Kingdom of England or Ireland, and there be
settled Inhabitants, either by way of having inheritance or freehold, or by way
of settled Trades (by which the way of trading of the Factors of Merchants, nor
of Merchants themselves is not to be understood) shall be subject to the Laws
of England or Ireland, and to the oaths established by the Laws, and Acts of
Parliament in the said Kingdoms respectively, wherein they live, and have
their ordinary and constant residence, and not otherwise. And the English and
Irish shall have the like Privilege in Scotland, 8. Decembris. 1640.

To the fourth Demand, craving that his Majesty may be graciously pleased to
declare, as an Act of Royal Justice, serving much to his own Honor, for the
establishing of his Throne, and for the good and Peace of both Kingdoms, That
whosoever shall be found upon Trial and Examination by the Estates of either
of the two Parliaments (they judging against the Persons subject to their own
Authority) to have been the Authors and Causers of the late and present
troubles and combustion, whether by laboring to make, and forment Division
betwixt the King and his People, or betwixt the two Nations, or any other way,
shall be liable to the Censure and Sentence of the said Parliaments
respectively, Conform to the Paper of December. 9. 1640.

It is answered, upon the 11. of December. 1640. That his Majesty believes he
has none such about him; And therefore concerning that point, he can make no
other Declaration, then that he is just, and that all his Courts of Justice are
free and open to all men. His Parliament in this Kingdom is now sitting, and
the current Parliament of Scotland near approaching the time of their meeting,
To either of which, he does not prohibit any of his Subjects to present their
just grievances, and complaints, of whatsoever nature, each meddling, and
judging against the Persons, subject to their own Authority. 11. Decembris 1640.

It is further answered upon the said 11. of December, 1640. To your fourth
Demand, Concerning Incendiaries, that his Majesty believes, he has none such
about him: Therefore, concerning that point, he can make no other Declaration,
then that he is just, and that all his Courts of Justice are to be free and
open to all men. His Parliament in this Kingdom is now sitting, and the
current Parliament of Scotland near approaching the time of their meeting; in
either of which respective, he does not prohibit the Estates to proceed in
trying and judging whatsoever of his Subjects.

And whereas it was further demanded, that as his Majesty would not hinder any
of his Subjects to be tried and judged by the Parliament: so that none after
the Sentence of the Parliament should have access to his Majesty, or be
maintained, and enjoy Places or Offices, and have credit or authority to
inform and advise his Majesty, Conform to the Paper of December 23. 1640.

It is declared in his Majesty's name, upon December 30. 1640. Besides his
Majesty's former Answers, His Majesty has commanded us to declare in his Name,
That he will not employ any Person or Persons in Office or Place that shall be
judged incapable by sentence of Parliament: Nor will he make use of their
service without the consent of Parliament, nor grant them access to his
Person, whereby they may interrupt, or disturb that firm Peace, which he now
so much desires, he being confident that they will proceed in a fair and just
way, and (according to their several professions) with that respect to his
honor, which in reason he may expect from good and dutiful Subjects: 30. of
December. 1640.

The fifth Demand, That their ships and goods, and all Damage thereof may be
restored.

Is condescended unto, and to be reciprocal, That all Ships and Goods taken at
Sea or stayed in Ports, with damage be restored on both sides. And that some
summary course be agreed upon for the performance thereof upon the Demands of
the particulars on both sides, Conform to the Paper of December 30. 1640.

And further it was agreed upon the 7. of Januarie, 1641. Stilo Scotico. That
all Ships taken and stayed should be reciprocally restored on both sides, And
that the Scottish Commissioners having informed that about fourscore Ships of
Scotland are yet stayed in the Ports, and are like to suffer much further loss
and damage, if they shall not be delivered into some hands who may have care
of them: It is agreed, for the more speedy expedition of the Scottish Ships,
and that the owners thereof be not longer damnifyed by the want of them, that
warrants shall be presently granted for delivery of all their Ships, and that
four thousand pounds be presently advanced for Cauking, Sails, Cordage, and
other necessaries for helping the present setting forth of the said Ships: And
for the rest of this Article, when it shall come in the sixth Demand, it shall
be agreed unto, 7. of Januarie, 1641. Stilo Scotico.

To the sixth Demand, concerning the losses which the Kingdom of Scotland has
sustained, and the vast charges they have been put unto by occasion of the late
troubles, and the reparation desired from the Justice, and kindness of the
Kingdom of England toward relief thereof, in manner, and upon the ground
expressed in the Paper of the 7. of Januarie, 1641. Stilo Scotico.

It is answered, that this House thinks fit that a friendly assistance, and
relief shall be given, toward supply of the losses and necessities of the
Scots, and that in due time this House will take into consideration the measure
and manner of it, Conform to the paper 22. of Jan. 1641. Stilo Scotico.

And further, the Parliament upon the 3. of February did declare, that they did
conceive, that the sum of three hundred thousand pounds is a fit proportion
for the friendly assistance, and relief formerly thought fit to be given
toward supply of the losses, and necessities of their Brethren of Scotland,
and that the House would in due time take into consideration the manner how,
and the time when the same shall be raised, Conform to the Paper of the 3. of
Febr. 1641. Stilo Scotico, and given in to the Treaty upon the 5. of the said
Month.

And whereas it was desired by the Scottish Commissioners, that the English
Commissioners would let them know from the Parliament, the security, manner,
and terms of Payment of the foresaid sum of three hundred thousand Pounds,
and of the Arrears due for relief of the Northern Counties, It was agreed
unto by warrant, and order of the Parliament, that they should have fourscore
thousand Pounds, as a part of the foresaid sum of three hundredth thousand
pounds, with the whole Arrears due to the Army, before the disbanding thereof,
Conform to the Paper of the 26. of May, 1641. and given in to the Treaty upon
the 27. of the said Month.

And concerning the security for paying of the remnant of the said sum of three
hundred thousand pounds, which is Arreare, extending to 200 and 20000 Pounds,
It is resolved, and agreed unto by both Houses of Parliament, That an act of
Parliament of public Faith shall pass for security thereof, And that one
moity, or equal half of the same, extending to one hundred and ten thousand
Pounds, shall be paid at Midsommer, in Anno 1642. And the other moity, or
equal half thereof to be paid at Midsommer, in Anno 1643. as the order of
the houses of Parliament, of the 19 and 25. days of June 1641. does more fully
purport.

And in like manner, whereas it was desired by the Scottish Commissioners, that
they might know to whom they should address themselves, for payment of the
sums at the days appointed by the Parliament, Conform to the Parliaments
determination of the 19. of June: Secondly, at what place the payment should be
made: Thirdly, that a safe conduct may be granted for the secure transporting
of the moneys to Scotland, at the times of the payment agreed upon.

It is answered and resolved by the Parliament, That these Earls, Lords and
Commissioners following, shall be the persons to whom the Scots shall address
themselves for the receiving of the sums at the days appointed by the
Parliament; Earl of Bedford, Earl of Essex, Earl of Warwick, Earl of
Holland, Earl of Stanford, Lord Wharton, Lord Mandevill, Lord Brook, Mr.
Martin, Sir Thomas Barrington, Mr. Capell, Sir Ar. Ingram, Sir Gilbert Gerrard,
Sir Robert Pie, Mr. H. Bellasis, Sir Walter Earl, Sir William Litton, Sir
Henry Mildmay, Sir Thomas Cheek, Sir John Strangewayes, Mr. Arthur Goodwine,
Mr. Hampden, Alderman Soam, Alderman Pennington.

Resolved upon the question, That the place of payment shall be the Chamber of
London. Resolved upon the question, that a safe conduct shall be granted for
the secure transporting of the moneys to Scotland, at the terms of Payment
agreed upon at the charge of the Scots, Conform to the Paper, June 22. 1641.
years.

To the seventh Demand, desiring that as his Majesty has approved the acts of
the late Parliament, wherein all such Declarations, Proclamations, Books,
Libels, and Pamphlets as have bin made, written, or published against his loyal
and dutiful subjects of Scotland, are re-called, and ordained to be
suppressed, and destroyed, So his Majesty may be pleased to give order that the
same may be suppressed, recalled, and forbidden in England and Ireland, and
that the loyalty, integrity, and faithfulness of his Majesty's subjects of
Scotland toward his Majesty's Royal Person and Government, may at the closing
of this Treaty of Peace, and at the time of public thanksgiving for the same,
be made known in all places, and all Parish Churches of his Majesty's
Dominions. This was the more earnestly desired, and confidently expected from
his Majesty's Justice and goodness, Because no calamity or distress has so
sore vexed, or so deeply wounded the hearts of his Majesty's Subjects, as that
their loyalty and love toward their Native King should have been controverted,
and by the malignancy of bad Instruments brought into suspicion; And because
they unfainedly desire, and pray for his Majesty's happiness, and are resolved
by all means, and at all occasions to deny themselves, and what they have for
his Majesty's Honor: As is more fully contained in the Paper of the 8. of
February 1641. Stilo Scotico.

It is answered upon the 10. of February 1641. Stilo Scotico. We do agree, that
all declarations, proclamations, acts, books, libels, and pamphlets that have
been made, and published against the loyalty and dutifulness of his Majesty's
subjects of Scotland, shall be recalled, suppressed, and forbidden in England
and Ireland. And that this be reciprocal in Scotland, if any such have bin
made, or published there in prejudice of his Majesty's honor: And this upon
diligent inquiry to be done by the authority of the Parliament next sitting in
Scotland, of which the Commissioners of Scotland do promise to have an
especial care: And we do also agree, that when it shall please Almighty God to
grant a happy close of this Treaty of Peace, the loyalty of his Majesty's said
Subjects shall be made known at the time of public thanksgiving in all places,
and particularly in the Parish Churches of his Majesty's Dominions. Unto which
we are the rather induced, for that you express how deeply it has wounded the
hearts of his Majesty's said Subjects, that their loyalty and love to his Matie
their native King should be brought in question, and suspicion: Whereas they
unfainedly desire and pray for his Majesty's happiness, and are resolved by all
means, and at all occasions to deny themselves, and what they have, for his
Majesty's honor, 10. Febr. 1641. stilo scotico. Concerning the eighth Demand,
for an happy and durable Peace, which is the chiefest of all our desires, and
unto which all the former seven Articles being now agreed upon, are as many
Preparations.

We do first of all desire, that all monuments, tokens, and shows of hostility
upon the borders of the two kingdoms may be taken away, and that upon the
reasons and considerations particularly expressed in the paper, of the 10. of
Febr. 1641. stilo scotico. That not only the Garrisons of Barwick, and Carlisle
may be removed, but that the works may be slighted, and the places dismantled.

It is answered, and agreed upon the 14. of June, That his Majesty is desirous,
that all things betwixt the Kingdoms of Scotland and England, be reduced into
the same state they were in, before the beginning of the late troubles.

And therefore He does give his Assent to the advice of the two Houses of
Parliament, that the Garrisons of Barwicke and Carlisle, upon the disbanding of
the Scottish Army now in England, and of all such Forces as are gathered
together in Scotland, be likewise presently removed: And that the
Fortifications of Barwick and Carlisle be also reduced to the same condition
they were before the late troubles. So that all Fortifications in Scotland be
likewise put in the same condition they were before the said troubles; And that
the Works be not repaired, but suffered to decay, and that the Ordinance, and
Ammunition be removed: And that it be without prejudice to his Majesty's
former grant of the second Demand, Concerning the keeping of the Castles of the
Kingdom of Scotland, 14. of June, 1641.

To their desire concerning unity in Religion, and uniformity of
Church Government, as a special means for conserving of Peace betwixt the two
Kingdoms, upon the grounds and reasons contained in the Paper of the 10. of
March given into the treaty and Parliament of England.

It is answered, upon the 15. of June, That his Majesty, with the advice of
both Houses of Parliament, does approve of the affection of his Subjects of
Scotland, in their desire of having Conformity of Church Government between
the two Nations, and as the Parliament has already taken into consideration
the Reformation of church government, so they will proceed therein in due time,
as shall best conduce to the glory of God, the peace of the Church, and of both
Kingdoms; 11. of June 1641.

To their desire of the Kings Majesty, and the Prince their coming, and
residing some times in Scotland, upon the reasons given in, February 16. 1641.
Stilo Scotico.

It is answered upon the 9. of June, that his Majesty does take in good part
the sense his Subjects of Scotland have of his absence, and the dutiful
expression they make of their desire to have Him, and the Prince his Son
frequently among them; and assuring himself that they have no other intention
in this Demand, but merely to express their love to his Person, and the
welfare of his ancient Kingdom, He declares unto them, that as he shall find
the urgency of those affairs require his presence, and his other conveniences
here permit, He will repair thither, and the Prince his Son, so far as he
may know and be acquainted with the People there, 9. of June 1641.

To the desire concerning the manner of choosing and placing of the officers of
State, Counselors, and Sessioners, within the Kingdom of Scotland by advice
of the Parliament, upon the grounds and reasons given in, March 15. 1641. Stilo
Scotico.

It is answered the 9. of June, in his Majesty's name; We intend nothing more
heartily, and really then that our People shall be governed by the Laws of the
Kingdom, and that all Judges in their several Judicatories should judge
accordingly.

Therefore we will never allow nor permit, that either Counselors, officers of
State, or Judges be exeemed from our, and our Parliaments trial and censure,
for the discharging of their duties in their several offices, and places;
Likewise we conceive that nothing will more conduce to the good of our service,
and the peaceable and happy government of the Kingdom, then that officers of
State, places of Council and Session, and other Judicatories be provided with
honest, able, and qualified men. For which end, and because of our necessary
absence from that Kingdom, which makes the qualification of Persons fit for
places less known to us, We shall so far give ear to the Informations of our
Parliament, and when our Parliament is not sitting, of our Council, and
College of Justice, as that we shall make choice of some one of such, as they
by common consent upon the vacancie of the place shall recommend unto us: Or if
we shall conceive another person to be fitter then any of these recommended,
we shall make the same known to the Parliament, or in the time between
Parliament, to out Council and Session, that from them we may be informed of
the Qualification and Abilities of the person named by us, to the effect, that
if by their Information it shall appear to us, that there is just exception
against the life, and qualification of the said party, we may timely nominate
some other, against whom there shall be no just exception.

By which means we doubt not, but that we shall from time to time choose
such honest men, as for their known Integrities and Abilities shall be fit to
discharge their places, and Offices, with that duty and sufficiency which we
and our Subjects may justly expect.

Which intention of ours being now so clearly and fully expressed, we doubt
not, but will give good satisfaction to our ensuing Parliament.

And as we never intended to remove just and able men from their places in the
College of Justice: So do we now declare for our peoples full satisfaction,
that their places shall provided unto them, Quam diu se been gesserint.

And if this our Answer cannot content the Scottish Commissioners, We do then
remit the whole Answer to be considered by us, or our Commissioner, and the
Parliament, at the next sitting thereof, 9. of June, 1641.

To their desire of placing some Scottish men of respect about the King; and
Queens Majesty's, and the Princes Highness, upon the grounds and reasons
given in the 9. of April, 1641.

It is answered, His Majesty's goodness, and grace toward his Subjects of
Scotland in placing them about his own Person, in places of greatest
neerenesse and trust, has been such, as ought to give them full satisfaction
of His Royal Affection toward His Subjects of His Native Kingdom.

Therefore, for this point, His Majesty needs only to assure them that he
shall continue the same care, which hitherto he has done for their
satisfaction in this particular: and not only so, but shall also recommend the
same to the Prince his Son, that successively the Kingdom of Scotland shall
so taste of the care of their Sovereigns, That by the Grace of God, they shall
never want a sufficient number of honest, and sufficient persons of that Nation
about the Kings Person and Princes, against whom there shall be no just
exception, the 9. of June, 1641.

To their desire that none may have place about his Majesty, and the Prince,
but such as are of the reformed Religion, in manner expressed in the paper. 1.
April 1641.

It is answered, His Majesty does conceive, that his Subjects of Scotland have
no intention by this proposition, (especially by way of demand) to limit, or
prescribe unto him the choice of his Servants, but rather to show their zeal to
Religion, wherein his own piety will make him do therein that which may give
just satisfaction to his people, 9. June 1641.

To their desire given in the first of April, concerning the Copper Coin.

It is answered, Whereas the Scottish Commissioners have represented unto his
Majesty, the great prejudice sustained by the Kingdom of Scotland, through the
coining of Copper money, which has passed there this long time bygone, for
seven times and above as much as the true value and worth thereof, contrary to
the continual custom of that Kingdom, And therefore desiring that no Copper
money be coined hereafter, without consent of the Estates conveened in
Parliament, who may remedy the present prejudices the Country sustains thereby:
And who upon good consideration of the necessity thereof in time to come, may
appoint such a competent proportion as is fit, and as the Country shall
require for the use of the poor, and for change in buying and selling of
commodities, and that the same shall not pass, but according to the intrinsic
value thereof, with the allowance of a tenth part or such a proportion as the
Parliament shall think fit to allow for the impression, and workmanship in
coining. His Majesty is graciously pleased to recommend to the ensuing
Parliament of Scotland the whole matter of copper coin, and remits to their
consideration to take such order therein as they shall think fitting, not
only concerning the copper coin to be coined hereafter, but also the copper
money already coined, how the same shall take vent, and pass in payment in
time coming, Conform to the paper of the ninth of June, 1641.

CONCERNING AN ACT OF Pacification and Oblivion.
IT is agreed unto, that in the approaching Parliament of Scotland there shall
be an Act of Pacification, declaring that the late commotions, and troubles
arising from the innovations of Religion, and corruption of Church Government,
by the mercy of God, and the Kings Royal wisdom, and Fatherly care, are
turned into a quiet calm and comfortable Peace, lest either his Majesty's
love, or the constant loyalty of his Subjects in their Intentions and
Proceedings be hereafter called in question, and that such things as have fallen
forth in these tumultuous times, while Laws were silent, whether prejudicial
to his Majesty's Honor and Authority, or to the Laws and Liberties of the
Church and Kingdom, or to the particular interest of the Subject, (which to
examine in a strict court of Justice might prove an hinderance to a perfect
peace) may be buried in perpetual Oblivion: So it is expedient for making the
Peace and Unity of his Majesty's Dominions the more firm and faithful, and
that his Majesty's countenance against all fears may shine upon them all the
more comfortably, that an Act of Pacification and Oblivion be made in the
Parliaments of all the three Kingdoms, for burying in forgetfulness all Acts
of hostility, whether between the King and his Subjects, or between subject and
subject, or which may be conceived to arise upon the coming of any English Army
against Scotland, or coming of the Scottish Army into England, or upon any
Action, Attempt, Assistance, Counsel, or Advise having relation thereunto, and
falling out by the occasion of the late troubles preceding the conclusion of
the Treaty, and the return of the Scottish Army into Scotland, That the same,
and whatsoever has ensued thereupon, whether trenching upon the Laws and
Liberties of the Church and Kingdom, or upon his Majesty's Honor and
Authority, in no time hereafter may be called in question, nor resented as a
wrong National, or Personal, whatsoever be the quality of the person, or
persons, or of whatsoever kind or degree, Civil or Criminal, the injury is
supposed to be, and that no mention be made thereof in time coming, neither in
judgment, nor out of judgment, But that it shall be held, and reputed, as
though never any such thing had been thought, nor wrought. And this to be
extended, not only to all his Majesty's subjects now living, but to their
Heirs, Executors, Successors, and all others whom it may concern in any time
to come. And for that end, that by the tenor of this Statute, all Judges,
Officers, and Magistrates whatsoever, be prohibited and discharged of directing
of Warrants for citation, processing, or executing any sentence or judgment
upon Record, or any way molesting any of his Majesty's lieges concerning the
premises in all time coming. Like as that his Majesty for himself and his
Successors, promises in verbo Principis, never to come in the contrary of
this Statute and Sanction, nor any thing therein contained, but to hold the
same in all points, firm, and stable, And shall cause it to be truly observed
by all His Majesty's Lieges, according to the tenor and intent thereof for now
and ever, And that in all time coming these presents shall have the full force
and strength of a true and perfect security, as if they were extended in most
ample and legal form. Providing that the benefit of the said Statute shall no
ways be extended to any of the Scottish Prelates, or to John Earl of Traquair,
Sir Robert Spotswood, Sir John Hay, and Master Walter Balcanquall, cited and
pursued as Incendiaries betwixt the Kingdoms, and betwixt the King and his
People, and for bribery, corruption, and many other gross crimes contained in
their charges general and special, nor to any other persons, who are cited,
and shall be found by the Parliament of Scotland, in his Majesty or his
Commissioners their own hearing, to be so extraordinarily guilty of these and
the like crimes, as they cannot in justice, and with the honor of the King,
and Country, pass from them. Provided further that the benefit of this Act
shall not be understood to extend to the favor of Thieves, Robbers,
Murderers, Broken men, Sorners, Out-lawes, nor their Receptors, With
reservation also of the legal pursuits and processes of the Scots in Ireland,
for the reparation of their losses according to justice, against such who have
illegally wronged and persecuted them, since by one of the Articles of the
Treaty they are appointed to be restored to their means and estate. It is also
to be understood, that nothing is meant hereby to be done in prejudice either
of the payment of the debts owing upon promise or security, by the Scottish
Army to any of the Counties, or to any person there, (the same being instructed
before the removal of the Scottish Army) or of the Arrears due to the Scottish
Army, or to that brotherly assistance granted them by the Parliament of England.

That the great blessing of a constant and friendly conjunction of the two
Kingdoms now united by allegiance, and loyal subjection to one Sovereign
and Head, may be firmly observed, and continued to all Posterity, it is agreed
that an Act be past in the Parliament of England that the Kingdoms of England
or Ireland, shall not denounce, nor make war against the Kingdom of
Scotland, without consent of the Parliament of England, As on the other part it
shall be enacted there, that the Kingdom of Scotland shall not denounce nor
make war against the Kingdoms of England or Ireland, without consent of the
Parliament of Scotland. No ships either of the Kings or Free-booters, or
others, shall stop the trade of the Kingdom, or hinder, or harm their
neighbor Kingdom without consent of Parliament declaring a breach of Peace,
And if any armies shall be levied, or trade stopped and Neighbors harmed, or
wronged, the States of the Country by which it is done to be obliged to
pursue, take, and punish the offenders with all rigor, And if any of the
Kingdoms assist, receive, or harbor them, they are to be punished as breakers
of the Peace, And if after complaint and remonstrance to the Commissioners
after mentioned, and to the Parliament, redress, and reparation be not made,
then, and in that case, the same to be counted a breach of the Peace by the
whole Kingdom, And in case any of the subjects of any of the Kingdoms shall
rise in arms, or make war against any other of the Kingdoms, and subjects
thereof, without consent of the Parliament of that Kingdom, whereof they are
subjects, or upon which they do depend, that they shall be held, reputed, and
demained as traitors to the States whereof they are subjects, And that both
the Kingdoms in the cases aforesaid be bound to concur in the repressing of
these that shall happen to arise in Arms, or make war without consent of
their own Parliament, And that the way of conveening Forces for suppressing
such as levy war be as in case of Invasion, Provided that this be not
extended to particular quarrels upon the borders, And that it be enacted that
in such case, It shall be lawful for any of the subjects to conveene to
suppress such evil affected persons, And that each Kingdom shall be bound
by public faith punctually to perform this Article: And if either parliament
shall denounce war, they shall give three months warning.

That the Peace to be now established may be inviolably observed in all time to
come, It is agreed, that some shall be appointed by his Majesty, and the
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, who in the interim betwixt the sitting of the
Parliaments may be careful that the peace, now happily concluded, may be
continued, and who shall endeavor by all means to prevent all trouble and
division: And if any debate or difference shall happen to arise to the
disturbance of the common peace, they shall labor to remove, or compose them
according to their power, It being supposed, that for all their proceedings of
this kind they shall be answerable to the Kings Majesty, and the Parliaments:
And if any thing shall fall forth, which is above their power, and cannot be
remedied by them, they shall inform themselves in the particulars, and
represent the same to the Kings Majesty, and the ensuing Parliaments, that by
their wisdom and authority all occasions, and causes of troubles being
removed, the peace of the Kingdom may be perpetual to all Posterity. And it
is declared, that the power of the Commission shall be restrained to the
articles of peace in this treaty.

Whereas it is desired, that an Act may be made in the Parliament of England
for ratifying of the Treaty, and all the Articles thereof, which is likewise
to be ratified in the Parliament of Ireland (which in all the Articles is
comprehended under the name of England) and after the Treaty is confirmed in
the said English Parliament, and all other necessary conditions performed, and
Armies on both sides shall at a certain day to be appointed for that effect,
remove and disband: So that when the Scottish Army shall remove from
New Castle, the English Army shall likewise be disbanded, and repair home to
their several Countries, and places of their residence, and the Irish Army to
disband before that time, that hereafter a quiet and durable peace may be kept
according to the Articles. And that this Treaty and whole proceedings thereof
may be likewise ratified in the Parliament of Scotland, and a firm Peace
established, It is desired, that his Majesty may be graciously pleased now to
declare, That the ensuing Parliament of Scotland shall have full and free
power, as the nature of a free Parliament of that Kingdom does of it self
import, to ratify and confirm the Treaty, and whole Articles thereof, and to
receive account of all Commissions granted by them, examine their proceedings,
and grant exonerations thereupon, And to treat, deliberate, conclude and enact
whatsoever shall be found conducible to the settling of the good and peace of
that Kingdom. And that his Majesty's Commissioners shall be authorized with
full power to approve whatsoever Acts and Statutes which upon mature
deliberation shall happen to be accorded unto by the Estates in that behalf,
and shall sit and continue without interruption or prorogation, while all
things necessary for that effect be determined, enacted and brought to a final
conclusion, unless for better conveniencie of affairs his Majesty's
Commissioner, with the special advice and consent of the Estates shall think
fit to adjourne the same to any other time, which shall no ways derogate from
the full and perfect concluding of the whole premises, before the said
Parliament be dissolved.

This whole Article is assented unto, but in so far as concerns the days and
circumstances of disbanding to be agreed upon.

Forasmuch as the several jurisdictions, and administrations of Justice in
either Realm may be deluded or frustrated by delinquents for their own
impunity, if they shall commit any offense in the one Realm, and thereafter
remove their persons, and make their abode in the other: Therefore that no
person sentenced by the Parliament of either Nation as Incendiaries betwixt the
Nations, or betwixt the King and his people, shall enjoy any benefit, Civil or
Ecclesiastical, or have any shelter, or protection in any other of his
Majesty's Dominions, Like as where Malefactors, and Criminals guilty of the
crimes mentioned in the Act of Parliament 1612. Cap. 2. and others of that
nature, and committed by Scottishmen within the Kingdom of England or Ireland,
or any part thereof, are taken and apprehended in England or Ireland, that it
shall be lawful to the Justiciars of England or Ireland to remand them to
Scotland, as the Act bears: And further, if any Malefactors committing crimes
in Scotland, England, or Ireland, being duly processed in the Kingdom where
the crimes are committed, and being Fugitives, and remaining in any other of
the Kingdoms foresaid, that the Judges of either Kingdoms shall be holden at
the instance, and suit of the party offended, to take and remand the Criminals
and Malefactors to the Kingdoms where the Crimes were committed, And the like
Act to be made in Scotland, and this Act would be extended as well to debts as
crimes: And what further is requisite concerning this and other particulars,
for settling of Peace in the middle shires, and accelerating Justice upon
delinquents, both Civil and Criminal, Is to be considered by the Committee
to be appointed for that effect.

It is answered, that such persons as shall be Natives in either Kingdom, and
shall commit any offense in the Realm whereof they shall be Natives, and shall
afterward remove their persons into the other, and such persons as shall be
inhabitants in either Kingdom, and shall commit any offense in the Realm,
where they shall be inhabitants during the time of their habitation there, and
shall afterward remove their persons into the other, and shall be for that
same censured by the Parliament of that Nation where the offense was committed,
as Incendiaries betwixt the Nations, or betwixt the King and his people, shall
not enjoy any benefit, Civil or Ecclesiastical, or have any protection in any
other of his Majesty's Dominions, And that such Scottish Natives, incensing the
King of England against the Kingdom of Scotland, shall be remanded at the
desire of the Scottish Parliament into Scotland to abide their trial and
censurethere, so that the same be reciprocal to both Nations, but other
Criminalls and Debts to be referred to the Laws.

THE PROPOSITIONS AND ARTICLES Given in by the Scots Commissioners, after the
Lord Loudoun his return from the Parliament of Scotland.
THat the Treaty of Peace may be brought to a speedy and happy close, we did
offer to your Lordships consideration the particulars following:

1 That so soon as the Scottish Army shall remove out of England to Scotland,
the English Garrisons of Barwick and Carlisle should remove, simul and semel.

2 Lest Malefactors, who have committed Theft, Murder, and the like crimes,
crave the benefit of the Act of Pacification and Oblivion, (for whom it is no
ways intended) there would be an exception from the said Act of all Legal
pursuit intended or to be intended within the space of an year after the date
of the Treaty. Again, all Thieves, Sorners; Outlaws, Fugitives, Murderers,
Broken men, or their Receptors for whatsoever Theft, Reifs, Harships,
Oppressions, Depredations, or Murder done or committed by them, and all
lawful Decrees given, or to be given by the Parliament, or any Commissioners
to be appointed by them for that effect, who shall have power to dignosce and
take cognition, whether the same falls within the said Act of Pacification and
Oblivion, or not.

3 It is desired, that the demand concerning the not making or denouncing of
war with Forraigners, without consent of both Parliaments, may be
condescended unto by the King and Parliament of England, which is ordinary and
universally observed in all mutual Leagues which are both defensive and
offensive. And because the wars denounced by one of the Kingdoms with
Forraigners, although made without consent of the other Kingdom, will engage
them by necessary consequence, or if the consideration of that Proposition
shall require longer time then the present condition of the important affairs
of the Parliament may permit, and lest the speedy close of the Treaty be
thereby impeded, It is desired, that this Demand, with the two other Articles
of the same nature, the one concerning Leagues and Confederations, and the
other concerning mutual supply in case of foreign invasion, may all three be
remitted to Commissioners, to be chosen by both Parliaments, who shall have
power to treat and advise there upon for the good of both Kingdoms, and to
report to the Parliaments respective.

4. It is desired, That the Articles concerning Trade and Commerce,
Naturalization, mutual Privilege and Capacity, and others of that nature
already demanded, may be condescended unto by the King and Parliament of
England, And namely, that demand about the pressing of ships or men by Sea or
Land: Or if shortness of time and exigencie of affairs may not permit the
present determination of these Demands, It is desired that the same (except so
many of them as are already agreed unto by the Commissioners for Trade) may be
remitted to the Commissioners to be chosen by both Parliaments, who shall have
power to treat and advise thereof for the good of both Kingdoms, And to make
report to the Parliaments respectively. And that the Charters or Warrants of
the Scottish Nation for freedom of shipping in England or Ireland, from all
Customs, Imposts, Duties, and Fees, more then are paid by the Natives of
England and Ireland, granted by King James under the broad Seal of England,
upon the eleventh of April, the thirteenth year of his Reign, and confirmed
by King Charles, the nineteenth of April, the eighth year of his Reign, may
be ratified and enacted in the Parliament of England.

5. That the extracts of Bands and Decreets put upon Record and Register in
Scotland, may have the like faith and execution as the French Tabelliones have
in England or Ireland, seeing they are of alike nature, and deserve more
credit: and if this cannot be done at this time, that it be remitted to the
former Commission from both Parliaments.

6. The manner of safe conduct for transporting the money from England to
Scotland by Sea, or Land, would be condescended upon in such a way as the
charges be not exorbitant.

7. The tenor of the Commission for conserving of peace would be condescended
unto, together with the times and places of meetings, and whole frame thereof:
the draught whereof, when it is drawn up in England, is to be represented to
the Parliament of Scotland, that they may make like Commission, and name their
Commissioners for that effect.

8. The Parliament of Scotland do join their earnest and hearty desire, and
crave the Parliament of Englands concurrence, that none be in place about the
Prince his Highness, but such as are of the reformed religion.

9. That an Act of Parliament of public faith for payment of the 220000.
pounds of the brotherly assistance which is arrear, may be presently framed,
and expedited according to the terms agreed upon.

10. It is desired, that the Quorum to whom the Scots should address
themselves for payment of 220000. pounds, be condescended upon.

11. That the order for recalling all Proclamations etc. made against his
Majesty's subjects of Scotland, be drawn up, and intimated in due form and
time, with the public thanksgiving at all the Parish Churches of his Majesty's
Dominions.

12. It is desired, that the Articles concerning the Castle of Edinburgh, and
other strengths of that Kingdom may be understood to be, that the same shall
be disposed of for the weal of the Kingdom, as the King and Parliament shall
think expedient.

THE ENGLISH LORDS COMmissioners answer.
THat upon the disbanding of the Scottish Army, the Garrisons of Barwick and
Carlisle shall be removed, according to the Article of the Treaty on that
behalf.

The second Article is condescended unto, according to the provision added to
the Act of Oblivion and Pacification.

3.4.5.6. The third demand concerning the making of war with foreigners, with
the other two Articles concerning Leagues and Confederations, and concerning
mutual supply and assistance against foreign invasion, is agreed to be
referred to Commissioners to be chosen by his Majesty and the Parliaments. As
likewise the 4.5. and 6. Articles, concerning Trade, Commerce, Naturalization,
mutual privilege and capacity, and others of that nature, and the demands
concerning the extracts of Bands and Decreets, and the manner of safe conduct
for transporting of moneys from England to Scotland, are all referred to be
taken in consideration by the Commissioners to be appointed by both
Parliaments, who shall have power to advise and treat thereupon, and report to
the Parliaments respectively.

7 It is just that the tenor of the Commission for conserving of peace should
be agreed upon by mutual consent, but the closing of the treaty not to stay
hereupon, but to be left to the Commissioners to be named.

8 To that desire concerning such as should be placed about the Prince; the
King has already given a clear and satisfactory answer.

9 That there be an Act of Parliament of public faith, for securing the
payment of 220000 pounds, which is arreare of the brotherly assistance, is
just, and order is given for it accordingly. And it shall be communicated with
the Scottish Commissioners that it may be a perfect security.

10 The tenth, for appointing a Quorum for attending the payment of the money,
is already moved to the parliament, and will be done as is desired.

11 The eleventh article is very just, and order shall be given accordingly for
recalling all Proclamations, etc. and for public Thanksgiving.

12 This Article for the Castle of Edinburgh and other strengths of Scotland,
is to be settled betwixt his Majesty and the Commissioners of Scotland, or by
his Majesty and Parliament of Scotland.

All which Articles are assented unto, and approved by his Majesty, with
advice of the Parliament of England, and by the Committees of the Parliament of
Scotland, and are necessary, for public declaration of mutual consent, and
for firm observation, to be confirmed and ratified in the Parliaments of both
Kingdoms.

BE it therefore enacted by his Majesty, with the assent of the Lords and the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled, that the said Treaty, and all the
Articles thereof, assented to, as aforesaid, be and stand for ever ratified,
and established, and have the force, vigor, strength and authority of a Law,
Statute, and Act of Parliament.

Like as this afore-written Treaty, and whole Articles thereof, are by his
Majesty and the States of the Parliament of Scotland, enacted and ordained to
have in all time coming the full force and strength of a true and perfect
security, and Act of the said Parliament.

And his Majesty for himself, and his Successors does promise, in verbo
principis, never to come in the contrair of this Statute and Sanction, nor any
thing therein contained, but to hold the same in all points firm and stable,
and shall cause it to be truly observed by all his Majesty's Leiges, according
to the tenor and intent thereof for now and ever.

Like as the Parliament of both Kingdoms give full assurance, and do make
public faith in name of both Kingdoms respectively, for the true and
faithful observance of this Treaty, and whole Articles thereof inviolably,
hinc inde, in all times to come.

Like as his Majesty, with advice of the estates of Parliament, commands the
clerk of Parliament, to insert and registate the same in the books of
Parliament, and to give the extract of this Act under his hand to the director
of the chancellary, Whom they command to write the same to the great Seal, and
the keeper of the great Seal to append the great Seal thereto. And declares
that the same being so sealed and returned to the Parliament of England, is and
shall be unto them a full and perfect security, By this their act, given at
Edinburgh the 26. of August 1641. years.

ACT. VII. ACT DISCHARGING JAMES BANNATINE His patent of the pearling. Ultimo
Augusti, 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, having read and considered the
reasons, grievances and prejudices given in, and complained upon in this
present Parliament against the gift and patent granted to James Bannatine in
leith anent the pearling, and finding the famine gift and patent hurtful and
prejudicial to the country and lieges: Have therefore rescinded, retreited,
cassed, annulled and discharged, and by the tenor hereof, rescinds, retreits,
casses, annuls and discharges simpliciter, the foresaid gift and patent granted
to the said James Bannatine anent pearling, And declares the famine gift and
patent to be extinct, null and ineffectuall in all time coming. And also our
said Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the estates of Parliament,
prohibits and discharges all importation and inbringing of foreign pearling
within this kingdom in any time coming, under the pain of confiscation
thereof to his Majesty's use. And siclike our said Sovereign Lord, with advice
foresaid renewes the act of Parliament made, in anno, one thousand six hundred
twenty one years, Entitled anent banqueting and apparel, in the second
head and article thereof, viz. That no person of whatsoever degree shall have
pearling or ribbining upon their ruffes, bands, serkes, napkins and socks,
except the persons privileged in that act: And the pearling and ribbining to
be so women by them (if any be) to be of these made within the kingdom of
Scotland, under the pain of an hundred pounds toties quoties, as the said act
in that article thereof bears: And ordains the famine act in that head and
article foresaid, to have full strength, force and execution, and to stand as a
Law, conform to the tenor thereof.

ACT VIII. ACT DISCHARGING UNLAWFUL Marriages, 1. September, 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of this present Parliament, considering the
great abuse and dangerous evil that has followed, and may follow upon
frequent marriages of the persons Inhabitants within this kingdom, going to
the neighbor Kingdoms for getting themselves married there, which they could
not obtain in this Kingdom by the laws and constitutions thereof, Therefore,
and for remedy of that evil, and for preventing such in time coming,
prohibites and discharges all men and women, having both their ordinary
residence within this Kingdom, to get marriage to themselves with others
within the Kingdom of England, or Ireland, without Proclamation of Banes here
in Scotland, and against the order and constitutions of this Church or
Kingdom, under the paies following: viz. for ilk Nobleman so married, one
thousand pounds, for ilk landed Gentleman one thousand marks, for ilk Burges
five hundred pounds, and for ilk other substantious person five hundred marks,
for a Yeoman one hundred pounds, for ilk person of inferior quality one
hundred marks: The one half of the which penalties shall belong to the King,
the other to the Parish or Parishes where the married parties did reside: And
ordains the King and Kirks Advocate to pursue before the civil Judge
therefore: And in case of the poor condition of any man married in manner
foresaid, Ordains him to be punished by stocks or irons: Which pains corporal
and pecunial shall no ways be prejudicial or derogate from the order and
censures of the Kirk, to be inflicted against the delinquents.

ACT IX. ACT ANENT NON-COVENANTING Patrons, 2. September 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering, that all his
Majesty's subjects within this Kingdom are by Acts of Parliament ordained to
subscribe their National Oath and Covenant, Therefore his Majesty and Estates
ratify and approve the Act of Parliament made by his Majesty's dearest Father
of blessed memory, Parl. 1. c. 9. whereby it is ordained, that no person be
Judge; Procurator, Notar, or Member of Court, who professes not the true
Religion, together with the Act of ratification thereof, with the addition and
declaration thereof therein contained, made by his Majesty's said umwhile
Father, Parl. 20. cap. 3. And finds and declares, that the said Acts shall be
extended to all persons whatsoever, who have not subscribed, or refuse to
subscribe the said National Oath and Covenant. And such like finds and
declares, That where any of the said refusers to subscribe have right to
presentation of Kirks, that it shall not be lawful to them, to present any
persons to the Kirks vacand, but that the planting of the said Kirks and
admitting of Ministers thereto, and to the stipends and provisions thereof,
upon sure and calling of the Congregation, shall pertain pleno jure, to the
Presbyteries, within the which the said Kirks lie, ay and while the said
patrons subscribe the said National oath and Covenant.

ACT X. ACT FOR FREEING OF VICCARAGES, Provided to Ministers for their
stipends, of taxations. 2. September, 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, conside^^ng the distractions
that Ministers are brought into, and other prejudices and losses sustained by
them, by taxations craved of viccarages, which are assigned and provided to
them as a part of their stipends, in so far as they are assigned and provided:
and that it is against all reason and equity, and former Acts of Parliament,
That Ministers stipends should be burdened with impositions and taxations:
Therefore Statutes and Ordaines (for eschewing of these inconveniences and
prejudices) that no viccarages teinds, nor rents thereof assigned and provided,
or to be assigned and provided to Ministers as a part of their stipends, be
burdened or affected with any taxations of impositions bygone, resting, owing,
unpayed, or in time coming, in so far as can be extended to the said teinds,
and rents of viccarages assigned, or to be assigned to them, and whereof they
are, or shall be in possession by the said assignations: But declares the same
to be free thereof in all time coming.

ACT XI. ACT ANENT RAISING OF MALICIOUS Suspensions, against Ministers,
Colleges, Schools and Hospitals. 9. September 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering the great
inconveniences that the Ministers of this Kirk are brought into, by malicious
delays, or refusing of the payment of their stipends, by unreasonable
suspensions, or by contempt of decreets obtained against persons oblished for
payment of their stipends, and that the Ministers charges are so exor^itant in
the suit of law, that their stipends craved will not defray the ^ame, and that
they are exceedingly distracted from their callings, to the great prejudice of
their congregations, and that they do suffer many other prejudices and losses:
Therefore Statutes and Ordaines, that no suspensions be hereafter granted
against Ministers charging for their stipends, without consignation of the
sums of money charged for, if the stipend consist in money: or of an hundredth
marks for ilk chalder of victual, and of the just proportion of an hundredth
marks for ilk quantity of victual under a chalder, if the stipend consist in
victual, where the same is not converted: and where the same is converted,
upon the consignation of these sums whereunto the victual is liquidate and
converted. Which consignation of money for victual as abovesaid, is without
prejudice to the judges, to decerne the greater or lesser price for victual
charged for, according to the probation: Providing always, that if the person
charged make real and timous offer to the minister at his dwelling house, or
(at the least) at the place where he is obliged or accustomed to deliver the
said victual, before a notar and two witnesses, at the least, of the whole
victual adebted or charged for, in good and sufficient stuff at the terms of
payment thereof, lawful requisition being first made to the minister to receive
the same before a notar and witnesses, as said is, then the person charged for,
shall not be astricted to consigne money for victual in manner foresaid. And
such like it is provided, that the judge shall discern twenty marks of
expenses for ilk hundred marks (at the least) against the malicious charger or
suspender. And in case any person charged for ministers stipends shall
contemptuously go to the horn and lie thereat, Our Sovereign Lord and
Estates foresaid, Statutes and ordaines, that the donators to the single or
life-rent escheat of the rebel, having writ either from his Majesty or any
Lords of regality, or any superiors whatsoever intrometters with the said
escheat, goods and geir, mails and duties of Lands, or Tithes falling within
the compass of the said escheate, single or life-rent, and all and whatsoever
intrometters shall be liable in payment of the ministers stipends, and of all
charges, penalties and damage which the said rebel should have been liable to
himself, and that actions shall be competent therefore against them, Providing
the causes of the horning, whereupon the gift is taken, and the expenses of the
passing thereof be first satisfied, and that the donator has intrometted or
might have intrometted with as much as might have paid the ministers stipend:
and that no suspension shall be granted of decreets obtained against the said
donators and intrometters but in the manner foresaid. And our Sovereign Lord
and Estates foresaid declares, that this Act shall be extended to universities,
colleges, schools and hospitals, masters and members thereof, for the more
ready and thankful payment to them of their stipends, provisions,
mortifications, revenues, and their duties whatsoever.

ACT XII. ACT FOR ABOLISHING OF MONUMENTS Of Idolatry. 10. September. 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord with consent of the Estates of Parliament, understanding,
that the general Assembly of the Kirk has by their special Act, made 30.
July, 1640. Sess. 3. Ordained all Idolatrous Images, Crucifixes, Pictures of
Christ, and all other Idolatrous Pictures, to be demolished and removed forth,
and from all Kirks, Colleges, Chapels, and other public places. Therefore
ordaines all Presbyteries to take diligent trial of all idolatrous Pictures
and Images, being within Kirkes, Colleges, Chapels, and other public places,
and after trial intimate the same, first to the owners and parties themselves,
that they may remove the fame: and in case they do neither appeal presently
from the presbytery in the ordinary way to the Synod and general Assembly,
nor remove them within the space of three months, then to intimate the same to
all Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailiffs, Magistrates of Burghs or Regalities, within
the which the same shall be found: and ordaines them upon the requisition to be
made to them by the said Presbyteries, Moderator, or Brethren thereof, to
raze, demolish, abolish, cast down or deface all these Idolatrous Images,
Pictures, and other idolatrous monuments foresaids, according as they shall be
enjoined and directed from the said Presbyteries from time to time, ilk one of
them, within their own bounds and jurisdiction respective, except in the case
of appellation aforesaid: And if the Presbyteries be negligent, that they be
censured by the Synods and general Assemblies, and the Sheriffs, and other
officers foresaid (in case of their negligence,) to be censured by the secret
Council, as they shall think reasonable: And prohibites, and discharges all
making of any such Images or idols, and all up-putting of the same in all time
coming under all highest pains, to be inflicted upon the contraveeners
thereof.

ACT XIII. ACT ANENT NON-COMMUNICANTS And Excommunicate Persons. 10. September
1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Ratifies the two Acts of
Parliament anent the escheats of excommunicate persons made by his Majesty's
Father of blessed memory, one thereof Par. 14. cap. 197. and the other Par. 20.
cap. 3. with the addition and declaration following, that no gift of escheat
past or to be past upon excommunication, or horning upon excommunication shall
be vallid, but the samine is declared to have been, and to be null in all time
coming, by way of exception or reply: and declares the said two Acts
ratified, as said is, with the addition foresaid made thereto, to be extended
to all excommunication pronounced, or to be pronounced against whatsoever
person or persons, and for whatsoever causes: And further, His Majesty and
Estates foresaid, Ratifies and approves the Act made by his Majesty's Father,
Par. 16. cap. 17. anent non-communicants every year once, with this declaration
and addition, that the penalties of the contraveeners, modified in the said
Act, be payable in all time coming to the several Presbyteries within the
Jurisdiction, whereof the contraveeners dwell, to be applied by them ad pios
usus: And that the said Presbyteries, or any they appoint, shall have power to
crave, receive and pursue for the same. And further, Our Sovereign Lord and
Estates foresaids, for the greater terror and the more effectual reclaiming of
all excommunicate persons, declares that all persons whatsoever, according to
the degrees and qualities mentioned in the said Act, lying under the sentence
of excommunication, shall be liable to the pains and penalties therein
contained, and that yearly after the sentence of excommunication, ay and while
they be relaxed therefrom, and reconciled to the Kirk: And also declares, that
the said yearly penalties against excommunicate persons shall pertain to every
paroch Kirk, and Kirk session, in burgh or land-ward, within their own bounds,
to be applied ad pios usus: And that they, or any person they appoint, shall
have power to crave, receive, and pursue the famine, to be applied to the pious
uses of the several paroch Kirk sessions, where the contraveeners dwell: And
in case of the paroch kirk sessions their slacknesse, the Presbytery to exact
after the expiration of year and day after the contraveening. And further
declares the donators to the excommunicate persons their simple escheat and
liferent, and all other intrometters with their goods and geir and livings,
shall be liable to the payment of the said pains and penalties in the samine
manner, as the excommunicate persons are liable themselves. And because in the
said Act there is no particular penalty modified against Burgesses, Therefore
His Majesty and Estates foresaids, ordaines every Burges that bears, or has
borne office of Magistracy, so often as he shall contraveene the said Act, To
pay the sum of two hundred marks, and every other burges the sum of forty
pounds: And such like ordaines the said persons, to be liable in the said
penalties respective, not only for their own personal contraveening of the
said Act, but also so often as the same shall be contraveened by their wives
respective, and also so often as the same shall be contraveened by their
children, they shall incur the fifth part of the said pains, respective, for
every bairne, not forisfamiliat, and of the age of fifteen years complete, and
that toties quoties they shall contraveene the said Act: And such like, that
every servant so often as he shall contraveene the said Act, shall pay one years
fee, toties quoties, lawful requisition being always made to the said Wives,
Children and Servants by their Pastor or Presbytery to give obedience to the
said Act.

ACT XIIII. ACT ANENT THE BULLION. 10. September, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering that one of the
chief ways for bringing in of money into this Kingdom, has been bullion,
which now for lack of the true way of managing thereof, is become
unprofitable. Therefore our Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the
said Estates, Statutes and Ordaines that in time coming all and every
Merchant passing forth of this Kingdom with any Merchandise, or sending the
same forth of this Country, at the customing of the said goods, shall find
sufficient security to the customers, for importing and inbringing such
quantity and proportion of Bullion as by the Laws of this Kingdom is due for
the said goods transported by them, and shall accordingly deliver the same,
and cause be delivered to the Master of the Coin house, and shall receive back
again his Majesty's coin of this Kingdom: And shall make faith, that the same
was brought by them from foreign parts, or by others in their name: and
discharges all payment of Bullion before the hand, and all pactions made anent
Bullion one with another, and paying of the same with his Majesty's coin, or
with any silver that is within the Country already, under the pain of doubling
of the said Bullion: As also because the Bullion is ordained to be paid to the
master of His Majesty's coin house, who has his only residence in Edinburgh,
and that thereby many Merchants who dwell not within the said Burgh will be put
to great and unnecessary charges, for a small matter of Bulion, Therefore it is
declared, that it shall be lawful to the said Merchants to send the famine to
the said Master of the coin house, providing he send therewith an attestation
under his oath and hand, if he can write, and under his mark if he cannot
write, and both before two subscribing witnesses of Magistrates, or Council of
the Burghs where they dwell, that the said Bullion due by him was brought
within this Kingdom from foreign parts, and that the same was not acquired
nor bought by him within the same.

ACT XV. ACT ANENT THE ELECTION OF Officers of Estate, Counselors, and
Sessioners. 16. September, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and the Estates of Parliament, considering, that whereas
there was an Article in the Treaty anent the manner of choosing and placing of
Officers of State, Counselors, and Sessioners, whereof the answer was
remitted to be determined by his Majesty and this Parliament: And his Majesty
being willing to give this his ancient and native Kingdom all satisfaction
possible, That fit and qualified persons shall ever fill these places, And
considering that his Majesty's residence (because of his great affairs) will
be more ordinary in England then here, whereby the qualification of persons may
not at all times be so well known to him: Therefore his Majesty, with advice
and consent of the Estates of Parliament, Declares for himself and his
Successors, That he will nominate and make choice of such able and qualified
persons to fill these places, as shall be fittest for his service, and may give
most contentment to the Estates of Parliament: Which nomination and choice His
Majesty will make, with the advice and approbation of the said Estates of
Parliament, during their sitting: And if any of the said places shall happen
to vake, and must be provided in the intervall betwixt Parliaments, his
Majesty will choose and nominate Officers of State and Counselors, with the
advice and approbation of the Council, all that number being warned upon 15.
days calling to meet thereanent, and most part of the whole consenting: And in
like manner the Sessioners, with the advice and approbation of the most part of
that House. Which elections, made in the intervall, shall be allowed or
disallowed in the next ensuing Parliament, as the Kings Majesty and the
Parliament shall think expedient: And the Officers of State, Counselors, and
Lords of Session, so nominated and chosen by his Majesty and the Parliament,
or allowed by his Majesty and them, shall be provided ad vitam vel culparn,
and they all shall be liable to the censure of the Kings Majesty and
Parliament.

ACT XVI. ACT ANENT THE ELECTION OF THE Lord LOWDOUN to be Chancellor. Ultimo
Septembris, 1641.
THE which day the Kings Majesty, with the advice and approbation of the
Estates of Parliament, did nominate and elect John Lord Lowdoun to exerce and
discharge the place and office of High Chancellor of this his Highness
ancient native Kingdom, and gave and disponed to him, during all the days of
his life time, the said office, with all honors, dignities, profits,
liberties, and privileges, which have been possessed and bruiked by any
preceding Chancellours, and which may be now bruiked by the Laws of this
Kingdom: Like as his Majesty, with advice and approbation foresaid, makes and
constitutes the said John Lord Lowdoun, during all the days of his life time,
High Chancellor of this his said Kingdom, to be bruiked and enjoyed by him,
with all dignities, honors, commodities, liberties, and privileges, which
have been possessed and bruiked by any preceding Chancellours, and which may be
now bruiked by the Laws of this Kingdom: and ordaines a gift and patent to be
past under His Highness great Seal to the said John Lord Lowdoun thereupon.

ACT XVII. ACT ANENT THE CHANGE OF THE Terms. 29. October, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering the great prejudice
his Majesty's Lieges do sustain by the inconveniencie of the present usual
terms of payment of their debts and annual Rents at Whitsunday and Martinmas
heretofore; Where as if the samine were altered and changed to Lammas and
Candlemas yearly, they might get in their own rents and duties to pay their
lawful creditors therewith, more easily at the said Terms of Lammas and
Candlemas, then at the former terms of Whitsunday and Martinmas: Therefore Our
Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, have now altered and changed the
foresaid former course of the Terms of payment from Whitsunday and Martinmas,
to the Terms of Lammas and Candlemas, in all time hereafter, And ordains the
same to be the usual Terms of payment of all debts and annual, and for using
of all order of Redemption, and ordains all Premonitions and Requisitions to be
made before the said Terms of Lammas and Candlemas, in place of the Terms of
Whitsunday and Martinmas, in time coming: Notwithstanding of any clauses of
Redemption, Premonition, or Requisition, contained in any Bands or other Writs,
bearing the samine to be made or done, either before Whitsunday or Martinmas,
in manner therein specified. Whereanent our Sovereign Lord and Estates of
Parliament dispenses for ever, Beginning the first Terms Redemption,
Premonition, or Requisition, at and before Candlemas next, in place of the
Term of Martinmas, and the next Term at and before Lammas next, for and in
place of Whitsunday, and so forth yearly and tearmly in all time coming, But
prejudice to all creditors of all their just annual rents that shall be due to
them from Martinmas next to Candlemas next to come, and from Whitsunday to
Lammas, which is declared to be one quarters annual, And likewise but
prejudice to them of all other bygone annual, resting, owing to them of
whatsoever other years or terms preceding, which are and shall be paid at the
Term of Candlemas next: And this Act to be understood only for borrowing and
lending of moneys, upon band or infeftment, and payment of annual rents, and
the former Terms of Whitsunday and Martinmas to stand for redemptions, proper
woodsets, flitting and removing of Tenants, both in Burgh and Land.

ACT XVIII. ACT ANENT THE CHARGES AND Expenses of the Commissioners for the
Barons, 11. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament ratify and approve the Acts
made by his Majesty's Predecessors, King James the first of worthy memory, in
his 7. Parl. and 101. Act thereof: and the Act made by his Majesty's umwhile
dearest Father of worthy memory in his 22. Parl. anent the Commissioners of
small Barons in Parliament, in the whole Heads, Clauses, and Articles thereof:
And specially that Article of the said last Act, bearing, that all Freeholders
be taxed for the expenses of the Commissioners of the Shires, passing to
Parliaments or General Councels: And letters of horning and pounding to be
direct for payment of the sums taxed for that effect, upon a simple charge of
six days allanerly, With this addition for clearing of the quantity and manner
of the said taxation, that there shall be allowed to every one of the said
Commissioners, for their whole charges and expenses, five pounds every day for
their expenses upon any parliaments, or general councels, counting the first
and last days, from the down sitting and rising of the said Parliaments: with
such other days allowed for the Commissioners of every shire, for their coming
to the said Parliaments or general Councels, and returning therefrom, from
time to time as they shall sit or be adjourned, viz. for the Commissioners of
the sheriffdome of Edinburgh for their coming and going, one day: of Fife, two
days: of Linlithgow, two days: of Clydesdail, four days: of Nithisdail,
four days: of Dumbartane, four days: of Sterling, two days: of Hadingtoun,
one day: of Bervik, four days: of Clakmannane, two days: of Kinroshire, two
days: of Peiblis, two days: of Bute, six days: of Angus, four days: of
Pearth, four days: of Mearnes, four days: of Air, four days: of Wigtoun,
six days: of Kirkcudbryght, four days: of Roxburgh, four days: of Aberdene,
eight days: of Renfrew, four days: of Selkirk, two days: of Bamff, eight
days: of Elgine, ten days: of Narne, ten days: of Argyle, eight days: of
Innernes, twelve days: of Caithnes, sixteen days: of Sutherland, fourteen
days: of Orkney, thirty days: The which daily allowance, after the rising of
the said Parliaments or general Councels, shall be calculate and put in a
sum by the Clerk of Parliament under his hand, to be divided and imposed
proportionally upon the whole freeholders, heritors and life-renters, holding
of the Kings Majesty and the Prince, according to the proportion of their
Lands and Rents, lying within the shire, Excepting always forth of this Act,
all the Lands belonging to the Noblemen or their immediate Vassals: And
therefore declares, that their Lands holden of his Majesty or Prince, and their
Vassals, to be free of the said tax, notwithstanding of this present Act, or
any Act preceding: And that letters be direct thereupon by the Lords of
Session, to charge the Freeholders, heritors and life-renters holding of his
Majesty and the Prince, to conveene at the head Burgh of every shire, upon one
special day, for dividing and setting down the proportion thereof in manner
foresaid: With power also to stent the said freeholders, heritors, and
life-renters, for the tenth penny more of the said whole sum, so calculate for
the expenses of the letters to be raised therefore, and others charges in the
collection thereof, with certification that such as shall conveene, shall have
power to proceed, notwithstanding of the absence of the rest: And that letters
of horning and pounding be direct thereupon, at the instance of the said
Commissioners, for payment thereof, in manner above-written: And if payment be
not made within the days contained in the charge, so that the Commissioners be
forced to pound therefore, Then and in that case, it shall be lawful to pound
for the double of the sum charged for, by and attour the Sheriff. And that
no suspension pass thereupon, but upon consignation allanerlie, and if the
suspension discuss against the suspender, in that case the suspender shall be
ordained to make payment to the Commissioners of the double of the sum
charged for by and attour the Commissioners others charges, and expenses in
discussing the suspension, And this Act to take effect, for the commissioners
of this present Parliament, and all Parliaments ^ereafter.

ACT XIX. ACT IN FAVORS OF THE COMMISsioners for the Sherifdome of Sutherland,
11. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering that by an Act of
the date of their presents made anent the expenses of Commissioners of Shires
passing to Parliaments, or General Councels and Conventions, allowance shall
be given to the said Commissioners for their whole charges and expenses, in
manner specified in the said Act: And that the daily allowance appointed for
ilk Commissioner, in manner mentioned and divided in the said Act, after the
rising of the said Parliaments, or general Councels, shall be calculate and
put in a sum by the Clerks of Parliament, under their hand, to be divided and
imposed proportionally upon the whole Freeholders of the Kings Majesty and the
Prince, according to the stent of their lands lying within the Shire: And that
letters be direct thereupon by the Lords of Session to charge the said
Freeholders of his Majesty and Prince, to conveen at the head Burgh of every
Shire upon a special day, for dividing and setting down the proportion thereof,
in manner foresaid, as the said Act made in favors of the said whole
Commissioners of small Barons and Shires at more length bears. And his Majesty
and the said Estates, considering, that in the Parliament in the year of God
1633. a particular Act of Parliament was made in favors of the Free Barons,
and others Inhabitants within the Sherifdome of Sutherland, giving power to
them to elect and choose their own Commissioners for the said Sherifdome, to
compeir at Parliaments, meetings, and general Conventions within this kingdom,
at all occasions, And considering likewise, that by the said Act, made in
favors of the said whole Commissioners, the Commissioner chosen and attending
this present Parliament for the Sherifdome of Sutherland, and the Commissioners
who shall be chosen and sent from the said Sherifdome of Sutherland to attend
their Parliaments, General Councels, and other General meetings and
Conventions of Estates hereafter in all time coming, shall have no allowance
of their expenses and charges to be depurst by them in the said service, albeit
the said Shire be one of the remotest and farthest distance in the Kingdom:
Because there is only two Inhabitants within the said Shire holding Lands of
the Kings Majesty, the whole remanent heritors being either Vassals to the
Earl of Sutherland, or holding their Lands of some other Superior: And so
according to the said general Act, the allowance of the Commissioner of that
Shire cannot be divided, not imposed for payment and satisfaction of his
charges and expenses, except the samine be extended against the Heritors,
Fewars, and Freeholders within the said Sherifdome, holding lands of other
Superiors in manner under written. Therefore His Majesty, and Estates of
Parliament, ordains the allowance appointed by the said general Act, in
favors of the Commissioners of the said Sherifdome of Sutherland, to be
extended, divided, and imposed proportionally upon all and sundry Heritors,
Fewars, Life-renters, and Freeholders within the said Shire, whether they be
Vassals to his Majesty, or holding their lands of any other Superiors
whatsoever, according to the stent of their lands lying within the said Shire:
and that letters be direct thereupon by the Lords of Session, to charge all and
sundry the Heritors, Fewars, Life-renters, and Freeholders within the said
Shire, holding of any Superior whatsoever, to conveene at Dornoch, being the
head Burgh of the said Shire, upon a special day, for dividing and setting
down the proportion thereof, in manner foresaid: With power also to stent all
and sundry the said Heritors, Fewars, Life-renters, and Freeholders, holding
of whatsoever, Superior within the said Shire, for the tenth penny more of the
said whole sums so calculted for the expenses of the letters to be raised
therefore, and others charges in collecting thereof: With certification that
such as shall conveene, shall have power to proceed, notwithstanding of the
absence of the rest: And that letters of horning and pounding be direct
thereupon at the instances of the said Commissioners for payment thereof, in
manner above written: And if payment be not made within the days contained in
the charge, so that the said Commissioners shall be forced to pound therefore,
then, and in that case it shall be lawful to pound for the double of the sum
charged for by and attour the Sheriff: And that no suspension pass thereupon,
but upon consignation allanerly. And if the suspension shall discuss against
the Suspender, in that case the Suspender shall be ordained to make payment to
the Commissioners of the double of the sum charged for, by and attour the
Commissioners others charges and expenses in discussing the suspension: And
this Act to take effect for the Commissioners of this present Parliament, and
all Parliaments hereafter.

ACT XX. ACT ANENT THE NOMINATION And election of the Officers of Estate. 13.
November, 1641.
THe which day the Kings Majesty, with advice and approbation of the Estates of
Parliament, conveened in Parliament, nominated and elected the persons
underwritten to the places and offices of Estates of this Kingdom respective
after mentioned, formerly possessed by them: viz. Robert Earl of Roxburgh, to
the place and office of Privy Seal: William Earl of Lanerk, to the place and
office of Secretary: Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall, to the place and office of
his Highness Advocate: Sir James Carmichaell, to the place and office of
Treasurer depute: and Sir John Hamiltoun of Orbestoun, to the place and office
of Justice Clerk, and that ad vitam vel culpam, conform to the Act of this
present Parliament made anent the election of Officers of Estate, Counselors,
and Sessioners, upon the sixteenth day of September last bypast, Like as his
Majesty, with advice and approbation foresaid, gives and dispones to the
forenamed persons, and ilk one of them, ad vitam vel culpam, as said is, the
foresaids Offices respective above mentioned, whereunto they are nominate and
elected in manner foresaid. Together with all honors, dignities, profits,
benefits, liberties, and privileges, which have been possessed and bruiked by
any preceding Officers of Estate, of the foresaids offices above written, and
which may be now bruiked by the Laws of this Kingdom: And ordaines a gift to
be past and exped under his Highness great Seal to ilk one of the persons
above named, of the foresaid offices respective above written, whereunto they
are nominate and elected, in manner before rehearsed.

ACT XXI. ACT ANENT THE NOMINATION AND Election of Sir Alexander Gibson, to be
Clerk Register. 13. November, 1641.
THe which day the Kings Majesty, with advice and approbation of the Estates
of Parliament, nominated and elected Mr. Alexander Gibson younger of Durie, to
the place and office of Clerk of Register of this his Highness ancient and
native Kingdom of Scotland, and that ad vitam vel culpam, conform to the Act
of this present Parliament, made anent the election of Officers of Estate,
Counselors and Sessioners, upon the sixteenth day of September last bypast:
Like as his Majesty, with advice and approbation foresaid, gives and dispones
to the said Mr. Alexander Gibson younger of Durie, ad vitam vel culpam, as said
is, the foresaid office of Clerk of Register, with all honors, dignities,
privileges, profits, casualities and liberties, pertaining to the said office,
conform to the foresaid Act, and to the gift to be granted to him of the
samine office under his Highness great Seal, to be bruiked and possessed by him
as the samine has been possessed and bruiked by any preceding Clerk of Register,
and which may be now bruiked by the Laws of this Kingdom, And ordains a gift
to be past and exped under his Highness great Seal, to the said Mr. Alexander
Gibson, of the foresaid office of Clerk of Register, with all honors,
dignities, profits, casualities, liberties and privileges, belonging thereto.

ACT XXII. ACT ANENT THE NOMINATION AND Election of the Counselors. 13. Novem.
1641.
THe which day the Kings Majesty, with advice and approbation of the Estates
of Parliament, conveened in plain Parliament, nominated and elected the
Persons underwritten, viz. Lord Lowdoun Chancellor, Duke of Lennox, Marquis
of Hammiltoun, Earl of Argyle, Earl Marshall, Earl of Sutherland, Earl of
Mar, Earl of Mortoun, Earl of Eglintoun, Earl of Cassils, Earl of
Glencairne, Earl of Murray, Earl of Perth, Earl of Dumfermling, Earl of
Wigtoun, Earl of Kinghorne, Earl of Roxburgh, Earl of Seaforth, Earl of
Lauderdale, Earl of Lothian, Earl of Kynnowll, Earl of Southesk, Earl of
Weymes, Earl of Dalhoussie, Earl of Findlater, Earl of Lanerk, Earl of
Levin, Lord Angus, Lord Lindesay, Lord Yester, Lord Sinclare, Lord
Elphingstoun, Lord Balmerino, Lord Burghlie, Lord Amont, Lord Balcarras, the
Clerk of Register, Advocate, Justice Clerk, Thesaurer depute, Master of
requests, Sir Robert Gordoun, Sir William Douglas of Cavers, Sir Patrik
Hepburne of Wauchetoun, Lord of Dundas, Lord of Fintrie, Lord of Cambo,
Lord of Dun, Lord of Innes, Lord of Morphie, and the Provest of Edinburgh,
for the time being, To be of the Council ad vitam aut culpam, conform to the
Act made in this present Parliament, upon the 16. day of September last
bypast, anent the nomination and election of the Officers of Estate,
Counselors and Sessioners, and conform to the Commission to be granted by the
Kings Majesty, with the advice and approbation of the Estates of Parliament,
to the said Lords and others of his Majesty's secret Council above named, for
government of this Kingdom in all affairs, concerning the peace, good and
happiness thereof, which by the Laws and Custom of this Kingdom, pertain
to his Majesty's secret Council: Like as his Majesty, with advice and
approbation foresaid, likewise nominated and elected the Earl of Arrundel, the
Earl of Pembroke, the Earl of Salisbury, and the Earl of Holland, to be
supernumerarie Counselors of his Majesty's Privy Council of this Kingdom,
and to be contained in the foresaid commission to be granted to the Council,
as supernumerarie there-intill: And his Majesty, with advice and approbation
foresaid, gives and grantes to the said Counselors above named, and every one
of them, all honors, dignities, liberties, immunities, and privileges
whatsoever belonging to the Lords and others of his Highness Privy Council
of this his ancient and native Kingdom, To be bruiked and possessed by them,
siclike and with all respects, as the samine have been bruiked by any
preceding Counselors of his Majesty's Privy Council foresaid, and which may
be now bruiked and enjoyed by them, by the Laws of this Kingdom, conform to
the foresaid Act of the sixteenth day of September last bypast, and to the
commission to be granted to the said Lords, and others of his Majesty's Privy
Council, as said is.

ACT XXIII. ACT ANENT THE NOMINATION AND Election of the Lords of Session
ordinary and extraordinary. 13 November 1641.
THe which day the Kings Majesty, with advice and approbation of the Estates
of Parliament, conveened in plain Parliament, nominated and elected, Sir
George Erskene of Innerteil, Sir Alexander Gibson of Durie, Sir Andro Fletcher
of Innerpeffer, Sir John Hamiltoun of Orbestoun, Justice Clerk, Sir James
Carmichaell, of that ilk The saurer depute, Sir James Leirmonth of Balcomie,
Sir James Macgill of Crastoun Riddell, Sir George Halyburtoun of Fodderance,
Sir John Hope of Craighall, Sir John Scot of Scottistatbet, Sir Alexander
Falconer younger of Hackertoun, Sir John Leslie of Newtoun, and Sir Thomas Hope
of Kerse, Knights, Mr. Archibald Johnstoun of Warristoun, and Mr. Adam Hepburne
of Humbie: To be the fifteen ordinair Lords of Session, and Senators of the
College of Justice, and that ad vitam vel culpam, and Judges for
administration of Justice, to the lieges, conform to the foundation and
erection of that Sovereign Judicatorie of the College of Justice: Like as his
Majesty, with advice and approbation of the said Estates of Parliament, gave
and disponed, and hereby gives and dispones to the said fifteen ordinair Lords
of Session above named, and to ilk one of them, ad vitam vel culpam, as said
is, the fifteen ordinary places of the said ordinair Lords and Senators of the
College of Justice, with all fees, honors, dignities, profits, casualities,
immunities, liberties, and privileges whatsoever, pertaining, and belonging to
the ordinair Lords and Senators of the College of Justice, and their places
thereof to be bruiked, and possessed by the persons above named, now nominate and
lected thereto, as said is: And ilk one of them siclike, and with all respects
and privileges, fees, casualities, immunities, liberties, and profits
whatsoever, as the samine has been possessed and bruiked by any preceding Lords
and Senators of the said College of justice, and which the said Lords and
Senators foresaids may now bruike and enjoy by the Laws of this Kingdom, and
that ad vitam vel culpam, conform to the Act of this present Parliament made
hereanent upon the sixteenth day of September last bypast. Like as his
Majesty, with advice and approbation foresaid, likewise nominated and elected
Archibald Earl of Argyle, Archibald Lord Angus, John Lord Lindsay, and John
Lord Balmerino, to be the four extraordinair Lords of Session, and Senators of
the said College of justice, conform to the foresaid Act made anent the
nomination and election of the Officers of Estate, Counselors, and
Sessioners, of the date the 16. day of September last bypast. And His Majesty,
with advice and approbation of the said Estates, gave and disponed, and hereby
gives and dispones to the said four extraordinair Lords of Session above
named, and to ilk one of them, the four extraordinair places of the said
extraordinair Lords and Senators of the College of justice, with all honors,
dignities, immunities, liberties, and privileges whatsoever, belonging to the
extraordinair Lords of Session, and their places thereof, to be bruiked and
possessed by the foresaids four Lords above named, now nominated and elected
thereto, siclike and with all respects as the famine have been possessed and
bruiked by any preceding extraordinair Lords of the Session, and which may be
now bruiked and enjoyed by them by the Laws of this Kingdom.

ACT XXIV. COMMISSION FOR REGULATING The common burdens of the Kingdom. 15.
November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering, that during the
time of the late troubles of this Kingdom, there were many great sums and
burdens contracted, undertaken and advanced for the outreiking and maintenance
of the Armies, and for other public affairs: As likewise considering that the
courts of the common burdens of the Kingdom, and the accounts of the tenth
penny, and of the other debts, resting due and payable to the public: Together
with the accounts and intromissions of all Commissioners, Collectors, and
others persons, who have had any charge or intromission with any thing
pertaining to the public, as well in the Country as at the Army, and other
parts abroad, are not yet fully closed, cleared, counted for, paid, nor
reduced in order: And seeing it is absolutely necessary, that all the debts
contracted and advanced for the public use, either within the Kingdom or
without the famine, be known, satisfied, paid, and relieved, As also that
every thing resting to the public, be counted for, paid and brought in for
relief of the common burdens, and that the whole counts of the Armies, and
other counts within and without the Kingdom, together with the accounts of the
monthly maintenance of the Army, and Brotherly assistance granted by the
Parliament of England, for relief of the common burdens of this Kingdom, at
least so much thereof, as is already paid, be all cleared, fitted and closed,
and that the rest and superplus of the said brotherly assistance yet resting,
may be craved, uplifted and received for the public use: And it being likewise
necessary, that all and every person, who have had any trust and intromission
with any thing pertaining to the public, either within the Country, or at the
Army, or any other place, be called to an account, for their intromission: and
that the General Officers, and others, who have served in the public be
satisfied and recompensed for their service, according to their demerits, As
also that the losses sustained, by the particular persons whose ships and goods
were taken at Sea, either in England or Ireland, be taken to consideration, To
the effect, that the whole burdens and debts resting by the public being
known, and all that is due to the public being counted for, paid and brought
in for relief of the common burdens, the estate and condition of the public
affairs may be the better known, and according lie such course taken
thereanent, as may best conduce for the good and weal of the country: And
seeing the clearing and settling of the premises will necessarily draw to such
a length of time, as his Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, cannot in this
present Parliament receive, call for, nor examine the said accounts and common
burdens of the Kingdom, and settle and order every thing concerning the same;
In respect whereof, Our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, have
found it necessary and expedient, that a select number of the several Estates
of the Kingdom, be nominated, authorized and appointed, for clearing and
settling of the whole premises, and for directing, settling and ordering of
every thing which may concern the same, Or which may offer and come in
consideration thereanent. Therefore His Majesty and Estates of Parliament
presently conveened, do by virtue of their presents, elect, nominate, choose,
authorize and appoint the persons after specified, viz. John Earl of Lowdoun,
High Chancellor of Scotland, Archbald Marquis of Argyle, Alexander Earl of
Eglintoun, John Earl of Cassils, William Earl of Glencairne, John Earl of
Lauderdaill, William Earl of Lothian, John Earl of Lindesay, David Earl of
Southesk, James Earl of Findlater, John Lord Sinclair, John Lord Balmerino,
Robert Lord Burghlie, George Lord Forrester, Sir Charles Erskene of Bandeth,
Sir David Hoome of Wedderburne, Sir Robert Innes of that ilk, Sir George Dundas
of that ilk, Sir William Cunyngham of Capringtoun, Sir John Wauchope of Nidrie,
Sir Alexander Erskene of Dun, Sir Gilbert Ramsey of Balymayne, Sir Duncane
Campbell of Auchinbrek, Sir William Forbes of Craigievare, Sir Robert Greirsone
of Lag, Master George Douglas of Bonjedburt, William Rig of Ethernie, Alexander
Gordoun of Earlstoun, John Binnie Burges of Edinburgh, Thomas Durham Burges of
Pearth, Patrik Leslie Burges of Aberdene, George Bell Burges of Linlithgow,
Patrik Bell Burges of Glasgow, James Sword Burges of Saint Andrews, John
Kennedye Burges of Air, John Sempell Burges of Dumbartane, William Glendoning
Burges of Kirkcudbright, James Scot Burges of Montrose, Master Robert Barclay
Burges of Irving, James Anderson Burges of Couper, George Gardine Burges of
Bruntiland, and Master Alexander Douglas Burges of Bamff, Together with
Alexander Earl of Levin, and Sir Adam Hepburne of Humbie, one of the Senators
of the College of Justice, whom His Majesty and Estates of Parliament add to
the foresaid number, as ordinair members with the rest, to be Commissioners
from his Majesty and the Parliament, to the effect above and after specified:
Of the which persons, any twelve of them shall be a Quorum, there being always
three of them of ilk Estate: To whom our said Sovereign Lord and Estates, and
whole body of the present Parliament, Gives, grants, and commits full power,
warrant and commission, to meet and conveen within the burgh of Edinburgh, or
such other places as they shall think expedient, Betwixt and the (...) day of
(...) next to come at farthest: and there to call for, examine, consider,
clear, fit, allow and count the whole debts and burdens contracted, and
undertaken, advanced, furnished and applied for the public use, And siclike,
with power to them, to reduce the whole debts, counts and burdens resting by
the public, either within the Kingdom or without the famine, to be a full and
complete order: And for that effect, to call all persons interest and concerned
therein before them, for the better trying, clearing and expeding of the
famine, or of any difficulty which may offer and occur in the settling and
clearing of the said common burdens and debts: And with power to the said
Commissioners or Quorum foresaid of them, to fit, examine, close, settle,
control and allow the whole counts and intromissions of all commissars,
collectors and their deputes and substitutes, and of all other persons who have
had any charge, trust, intromission or meddling with any thing pertaining to the
public, or in any public trust and charge, either within the Kingdom, or
without the famine, not already approven and allowed by the late Committees of
Estate, or either of them: And for that effect Our said Sovereign Lord and
Estates of Parliament, grants full power and warrant to the said
Commissioners, to call before them or their Quorum foresaid, all commissars,
collectors and others, who have had any trust, intromission, or meddling, or who
are resting any thing due, and pertaining to the public, at such dyets and
times, and in such manner as they shall prescribe and find expedient, And to
call for, examine, control and allow the whole regiment counts, and other
counts of the Army, within and without the Country, with the accounts of all
Victual, Money, Goods, or other commodities and furniture furnished, received,
expended and given out for making up, outreiking and entertainment of the
armies, and of all other public expeditions and employments, and to allow and
disallow of the famine as they shall find them to be just and reasonable, And
with power to the said Commissioners and their Quorum foresaid, to nominate
and appoint Collectors, Commissars, and all other public servants necessary
for clearing, ingathering and recovering of the public dues, debts and rests
due, and payable to the public, and to prescribe orders to them, and to call
all others, either authorized already, or to be appointed by them, And to
prescribe, direct, and give forth such orders, letters, execution, and other
dispatches for clearing of the whole premises, and for recovery of the debts
and burdens resting to the public, as they shall think expedient, And with
power to the said Commissioners or such as shall be authorized and warranted
by them or their Quorum foresaid, to crave, receive, uplift and intromet with
that sum of two hundred and twenty thousand pounds sterling yet resting,
unpayed by the Parliament of England, of the foresaid brotherly assistance,
promised and obliged to be paid by the Kingdom of England, for relief and
defrayment of the said common burdens of this Kingdom, and to grant
discharges upon the receipt thereof, in whole, or in part, which shall be als
sufficient as if the famine were granted by his Majesty, and the whole body of
the parliament of this Kingdom, And with power to them to settle, accord and
agree upon ways and means, how the said brotherly assistance may be most
timously and commodiously paid and advanced for defrayment and relief of the
said common burdens, either by exchange, advancement, or any other manner of
way, which may be most conduceable for the relief and good of the public, And
with power to the said Commissioners or their Quorum foresaid, to take an
exact count of the whole ammunition, artillery, arms, and other furniture,
either brought home, made, or brought within this Kingdom for the use, and upon
the common expenses of the public, and for the reiking out of the Armies and
Regiments of foot and horse, and to take course and prescribe orders for
keeping and preserving thereof, for the use and defense of the Kingdom, and to
appoint and constitute such persons of trust and best experience for keeping
and preserving of the famine, as they shall think expedient, and to appoint and
allow to them convenient fees and maintenance for the same, As also with power
to them to take consideration and course anent the said losses sustained by
particular persons in their ships and goods taken at Sea, either in England or
Ireland, With power also to them to consider every man his losses, that they
sustained for the public, and accordingly give them such satisfaction as they
shall find just and reasonable, that they have sustained in spuilyes, robbery
and hearships by the enemies of the country, And as moneys and other
commodities due to the public can be gotten in, With power to them, to give
orders for distributing thereof for defraying of the said common burdens: and
where moneys cannot be gotten in timouslie for relief and payment foresaid,
With power to the said Commissioners or their Quorum, to borrow and lift
moneys where ever the famine may be had, for relief and payment of such urgent
debts and creditors of the public as cannot suffer delay. Which sums so to
be lifted and employed for the use and effect foresaid, His Majesty and
Estates of Parliament declares hereby to be the public debts and burdens of
the country, and binds and obliges the estates and whole body of this Kingdom,
to pay and defray the same, and to relieve the said commissioners or any other
persons who shall give bands or securities for the same, of the foresaids
sums and bands, and of all peril and danger that may follow thereupon: and
siclike, with power to the said commissioners and their Quorum foresaid, to
give orders, for valuing of all Presbyteries, Paroches, Lands, and other Rents
and trade not already valued, Conform to the preceding statutes, acts and
orders made there anent, to the effect, that the tenth penny thereof may be
known, and payment may be exacted accordingly. Like as his Majesty and Estates
declares, that such persons, presbyteries, burghs and others, who are yet
resting their said tenth penny, are and shall be liable in payment of annual
rents for the same, from the term of Whitsunday, 1640. years, and in time
coming, aye and while the complete payment of the famine: And in respect there
was diverse and sundry Commissions, Letters, and other execution and warrants,
directed and given forth by the late Committees of Estates residing at
Edinburgh, and by the Commissar principal, and Collector general, and others
having power and warrant for that effect, to Collectors, Commissars, and other
public Servants, for ingathering and recovering of payment of the debts and
rests payable to the public: which letters and warrants are not yet fully
execute, neither yet is there complete payment recovered, conform thereto.
Therefore our said Sovereign Lord and Estates foresaids, ordaines the famine
Commissions, Letters, and other Warrants, emitted and given forth thereanent,
to stand in full force: And the persons entrusted with the managing and
executing thereof, to do their exact and best diligence thereanent, aye and
while their warrants be recalled and discharged by the said Commissioners, or
their Quorum foresaid, It is hereby declared that amongst the rest of the
common and public dues and debts due to the public, that the whole rents of
all Bishops and others beneficed persons, whether deposed, fugitives, or
opposites to the common cause, for the full cropts and years of God 1639. and
1640. years, are and shall be due to the public, Together with all rests of the
said rents preceding the said two cropts not truly paid nor discharged, where
there are not true Creditors to affect the said preceding rests: Which
Creditors shall have preferance from the said rests of the cropped 1638. and
precedings allanerly. And farther, if there be any part of the said rents
uplifted by public order of the cropped 1641. years, his Majesty and Estates
foresaids hereby dispences therewith in favors of the public: And generally,
our Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament do hereby grant full power,
warrant, and commission to the said Commissioners, and their Quorum foresaid,
to do, act, exerce, prescribe, prosecute, and follow forth, all and every thing
necessary and behoofeful, as well for clearing, allowing, fitting, and closing
of the whole common burdens and debts due by the country, and contracted and
advanced for the public use foresaid, and for reducing them in order, and for
relief, payment and defrayment of the famine, and for clearing the accounts of
all others, who have had intromission or public charge either within or
without the Country, and for calling of them and all others a debted to the
public in any sums, goods, victual, or other commodities whatsoever, to a
full account, and to do, act, and prescribe all other courses, orders and ways
necessar, concerning the whole premises, or concerning any thing which may
come in consideration thereanent, or which may fall under the counts of the
famine: And what ever debts and burdens shall be approven and allowed by the
said Commissioners or their Quorum, His Majesty and Estates finds and
declares the famine to be lawful debts and burdens, To affect and burden the
Estates of this Kingdom, and oblige the said Estates, and whole body thereof,
To pay, relieve and defray the same: Like as whatsoever counts shall be
approven and allowed, or disallowed by them, the famine shall be sufficient for
the exoneration and clearing of the persons comptars and others contained
thereintill: And what ever discharges be is granted by them, or any others
collectors, commissars, or others, to be substitute, authorized and warranted
by them, shall be sufficient exonerations and securities to the receivers of
the famine: It is hereby declared, That such counts as are already approved and
allowed by the late Committees of Estate, or either of them, shall stand good
and vallid, and shall not be quarrelled by the said Commissioners, without
prejudice to them, to call for, and peruse the famine accounts for the better
ordering and clearing of the common counts and burdens of the Kingdom: And
with power likewise to the forenamed Commissioners and their Quorum foresaid,
to prescribe ways and rules to the particular shires, presbyteries and
divisions for relief, stenting and payment amongst themselves, of all public
debursments, advancements and engagements, contracted, undertaken, furnished,
or debursed by the said shires, presbyteries and divisions, or by their
committees of war, or any particular persons among them, for the common use
and behoof of the said shires, divisions, and presbyteries, either for Arms,
the twentieth penny, forty days, and Officers pay, or for any public use
within the said Shires or Divisions, to the effect that all the Heritors and
Inhabitants within the famine may be equally stented and burdened with the
common burdens of their own Shire and Division where they dwell, and to cause
put the said orders for the said common relief to due execution. And our
Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament finding it just and equitable that the
said Commissioners, their charges and expenses in attending and exercing of
the foresaid trust and commission put upon them, should be paid and defrayed
by the public: Therefore our said Sovereign Lord and Estates foresaids do
hereby modifie and allow to the said Commissioners, and ilk one of them, in
their several degrees, according to the time and space of their attendance
respective, the like fees and allowance as were formerly allowed by the Estates
conveened in January last, to the members of the late Committee of Estates,
conform to an Act made thereanent of the date the (...) day of the said month
of January last, Which fees and allowances shall be paid to them, and every
one of them, according to the time and space of their exact attendance, to be
cleared by the sederunt book of the dyets of their meetings, testified or
subscribed by the Clerk of the said Committee or his deputes, under their
hands, testifying the time and space of ilk person their attendance, which
shall be a sufficient warrant to the Commissars or Collectors of the public
dues, to pay the same allowance to the said Commissioners, ilk one of them for
their own parts: And shall be allowed to the said Commissars, Collectors, or
their Deputes in their accounts. And it being necessary that there be an able,
qualified and trusty Clerk nominated and appointed for the foresaid Committee,
and for keeping of all the papers, warrants, records, and registers concerning
the whole premises, And his Majesty and Estates foresaids having the proof
and experience of the trust and ability of Robert Hepburne Advocate, for
discharging of the foresaid office and place as Clerk to the said Committee:
Therefore our said Sovereign Lord and Estates foresaids do hereby nominate
and constitute the said Robert Hepburne to be Clerk to the said Committee, and
ordaines the former fee and allowance appointed for the said Robert as Clerk to
the said late Committee of Estates residing at Edinburgh, to continue and be
paid to him during his service in the foresaid office: And with power to him
to appoint substitutes and deputes, for whom he shall be answerable for serving
in the foresaid place, Granting to him and them, all privileges, fees,
liberties, and immunities belonging to the foresaid office: Which Clerk and
his foresaids shall have the charge, trust, keeping and ordering of all the
papers, warrants, records, and others which concern the premises: And the
Acts, extracts, records, and warrants to be subscribed by the said Clerk and
his substitutes, shall bear als full faith as the acts or extracts of any
other Clerk within this Kingdom. And in like manner, with power to the said
Commissioners or their Quorum, to appoint, allow, and modifie competent fees,
allowances, and recompenses, to the general Officers and all others persons
who have been employed in the public service, and whose fees and recompenses
are not already allowed and appointed: And also with power to them to allow and
appoint such fees and recompenses to all others who shall necessarily be
employed and entrusted by them, as they shall find reasonable. And in case any
of the above named Commissioners shall happen to depart this life during the
indurance thereof, It shall be leasome to the rest of the said Commissioners of
that Estate, or most part thereof, to elect, nominate, and appoint others in
the place of these who shall happen to depart, ilk Estate choosing
Commissioners in place of these who shall happen to decease of their own
estate. Like as our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament do hereby
require and command all and every person within this Kingdom, and all others
whom the famine may concern, as they will answer at their highest peril, that
they give exact and ready obedience to such orders, warrants, letters and
directions, as shall be given forth, ordered, and directed by the said
Commissioners, or their quorum foresaid, anent the whole premises: Requiring
also all Sheriffs of Shires, Magistrates of Buroughs, Stewards of
Stewartries, Bailiffes of Regalities, Provosts and Bailiffes of Burghs, and all
others persons whatsoever, upon their highest peril, as they shall be
required, to assist and concur to the executing and obeying of such orders,
warrants, and other dispatches, as shall be directed and given forth by the
said Commissioners to the effect above specified: With power likewise to the
said Commissioners, and their Quorum, to call for the assistance, advice, and
information of any persons within this Kingdom, of whatsoever quality, for
clearing of whatsoever questions, doubts, or scruples which may arise and
occur in any particular concerning the premises, as occasion shall offer,
who are hereby required to assist the said Commissioners by their presence,
counsel, information, and advice, as they shall be desired for that effect.
And it is ordained, that horning, pounding, and caption, and all other manner
of execution personal and real, shall be directed upon all warrants, acts,
and orders of the said Commissioners, and their Quorum, for the better obeying
and executing of the famine: and for the more ready and timous payment of the
said public dues: Which Commissioners above named are and shall be liable and
countable to his Majesty and the Parliament, for their exact diligence, and
constant attendance, And for their carriage in the right discharging of this
present Commission entrusted to them, and every part and particular thereof,
Like as they shall be obliged to report and represent to the next Parliament a
full account of their proceedings and deportments anent the premises, Together
with the true estate and condition of the burdens and affairs of the public,
to the effect that his Majesty and the Parliament, after consideration of the
premises, and of their proceedings and carriage thereintill, may take such
farther course thereanent, as shall be found expedient: And it is also hereby
declared, That the nomination made by his Majesty and the Parliament of a
Clerk to this Commission, is, and shall be but prejudice of the Clerk of the
Registers right to depute Clerks to all other Commissions from the Parliament,
seeing the present Clerk Register consented to the Parliaments choosing of a
Clerk to this Commission, in respect the present Clerk Register being general
Commissar to the late Army, is a principal party to count to this Commission
for his charge and discharge, and so could not depute a Clerk to this
judicatorie, where he is to make his own compts.

ACT XXV. ACT OF APPROBATION TO THE Committee of Estates. 15. November, 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
considering that forsameikle as the Estates of Parliament in June 1640. for the
reasons and considerations at that time moving them, did nominate, elect,
choose and appoint umwhile John Earl of Rothes, John Earl of Cassils, Charles
Earl of Dumfermling, John Earl of Wigtoun, William Earl of Lothian, John
Lord Lindesay, John Lord Balmerino, Robert Lord Burghlie, James Lord Couper,
John Lord Loure, Sir Alexander Gibson of Durie, Sir John Hope of Craighall, Sir
John Scot of Scotistarbet, Senators of the College of Justice, Sir Patrik
Hepburne of Wauchtoun, Sir David Home of Wedderburne, Sir Patrik Murray of
Elibank, Sir Patrik Hamiltoun of Little-prestoun, Sir William Cunyngham of
Capringtoun, Sir William Douglas of Cavers, Sir Thomas Nicholson of Carnok,
James Chalmers of Gadgerth, Sir Thomas Hope of Kerse, -- Drummond of
Riccartoun, John Forbes of Leslie, Mr. George Dundasse of Manner, John Smyth,
Edward Edgar, Thomas Paterson, Richard Maxwell, Burgesses of Edinburgh, Mr.
Alexander Wedderburne Clerk of Dundie, Mr. Alexander Jaffray, Burgess of
Aberdene, or Mr. William More, in his absence, William Hamiltoun, Bailiffe of
Linlithgow, James Sword, Burgess of Saint Andrews, George Porterfield,
Bailiffe of Glasgow, Hugh Kennedie, Bailiffe of Air, James Scot, Burgess of
Montrose, and John Rutherfurd, Provest of Jedburgh, and certain other persons
to be Commissioners from the said Estates, to whom they gave and granted full
power, warrant, and commission, to do, order, direct, act, and put in
execution every thing necessary, expedient and incumbent, as well for the
preservation and maintenance of the Armies, both Horse and Foot, by Sea and
Land, as for the ordering of the Country, and whole Body and Inhabitants
thereof, deciding of questions and debates, which should happen to arise, or
fall out in any business, which should occasion or offer within the Kingdom,
concerning the peace and quiet thereof: But prejudice of the ordinary
judicatories, established within this Kingdom, by Acts of Parliament, And with
power to them to borrow, up-take, and levy moneys for the use of the public,
and to give, and prescribe order and directions for disbursing thereof: And
generality, did give them full power, To do all and sundry other things,
requisite anent the ordering, directing, managing, prosecuting, and executing
of all affairs and business of this Kingdom, which might or should conduce
to the weal of the famine, or any part thereof, and which might, or could be
needful to be done by them for maintenance, and preservation of the religion,
and liberties of this Kingdom, anent the premises, as the said commission, of
the date the 11. day of June, 1640. in the same at more length bears: And
siclike, the said Estates did nominate and constitute Mr. Adam Hepburne of
Humbie, to be Clerk to the said Commission, and gave him power to substitute
deputes, one or more: And his Majesty, and the said Estates, now presently
conveened, having taken to consideration the pains taken by the said
Noblemen, Barons, Burgess, and other particularly above rehearsed, als well
these who remained at Edinburgh, as these who went along with the Army, and
resided at the Camp, or sent as Commissioners to Rippon and London, and of the
said Mr. Adam Hepburne, and Robert Hepburne his Colleage, who served as Clerks
in the said Commission: They find that they have walked uprightly, faithfully,
diligently and carefully, in the discharge of the said Commission, answerable
to the trust imposed upon them, And therefore his Majesty, with advice and
consent of the said Estates, has approven, and by their presents approves
their proceedings and carriage therein, And declares them, and every one of
them, to have done good service to his Majesty, and this Kingdom, and that
they have behaved themselves as good Christians, loyal Subjects, and well
deserving Patriots.

ACT XXVI. ACT FOR RELIEF OF THOSE WHO Have given band for the use of the
public. 15. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering that the members of
the late Committees from the said Estates of Parliament, to whom the
furnishing of the Arms, and all other necessary expenses concerning the
public was entrusted, conform to the power and commission given to them, as
likewise others, who were not of the Committee, and also the general Commissar
or his deputes, Having borrowed and undertaken great sums of money for the
necessair use and behoof of the public, for the which sums and debts,
contracted by the said Committees, They have given security to the parties,
partly by public acts, in name of the Estates, And where many persons were
difficile and scrupulous, to advance and lend moneys, and other necessairs upon
the public security, These of the said Committees, and others foresaids, have
given their own particular bands, and have moved diverse others persons to give
band and security to the lenders of the said sums, bearing borrowed money
without any relation to the public: Likeas diverse Noblemen, Barons and
Burrowes, and others, before the establishing of the said Committees of
Estates, did willingly, for advancement of the public service, give their
particular bands for great sums of money for the public use, and which were
given in to the Commissars and Collectors, and counted for by them in their
accounts, whereby the forenamed persons who have granted such bands, may be
distressed for payment of the said sums, at the instance of the persons to
whom they are bound, So as for their furtherance and affection to the
advancement of the public service, their Estates and Credit may both be
endangered, unless remeed be provided: And his Majesty and Estates foresaid,
being careful that neither the members of the said Committees, nor any others
persons may suffer prejudice in their estates or credit, by or through any
bands granted by them to any persons for lent money, silver plate, or any other
necessary commodity, furnished and advanced for the public use, But that they
and every one of them, their heirs and executors, be freed and relieved by the
said Estates of the famine, and of all damage, peril and danger which they
may incur and sustain there through, It being made appear, that the sums
of money, or other commodities, for the which they have given band, as said is,
are counted for, or applied for the use of the public, and approven by public
act, order and warrant: Therefore Our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of
Parliament, by virtue of this present Act, do hereby bind and oblige the
Estates of this Kingdom, to warrant and relieve the said members of the said
Committees of Estate, and all others persons whatsoever, who have given band
and security for any sums of money, or other commodities for the use of the
public, and whereof count and reckoning is, or shall be made and approven,
whereby it may appear, that the famine are employed for the use of the public,
by public warrant, as said is: And for their better relief of the same, The
said Estates of Parliament, binds and obliges them and the whole body of this
Kingdom, to make payment to the persons creditors, to whom the said bands and
securities are given of the same sums, and others commodities or prices
thereof, and that at the terms of payment, appointed by the said bands, with
the interest thereof, conform thereto in all points, And to purchase and
deliver to ilk person so bound, as said is, their said bands given by them, or
sufficient discharges of the famine, with all convenient diligence, and in the
mean time to keep them harmless and skaithlesse of the famine bands, and of
all execution, peril and danger which may follow thereupon: So being that the
sums and goods contained in the said bands have been applied to the public
use, by public order and warrant, as said is, and are, or shall be counted
for, and approven in the accounts of the common burdens of this Kingdom: Which
bands so contracted and undertaken, are hereby declared to be public debts
upon the Estates, and shall affect and burden them, notwithstanding that the
famine be given by particular persons, without relation to the public, in
manner foresaid.

ACT XXVII. COMMISSION FOR RECEIVING OF THE Brotherly assistance from the
Parliament of England, 15. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, and the Estates of this present Parliament, Considering
that of the brotherly assistance promised, and obliged to be paid by the
Parliament and Kingdom of England, to this Kingdom of Scotland, for relief
and defrayment of the common burdens and losses of the famine, There is yet
resting the sum of two hundredth and twenty thousand pounds sterling money,
conform to the articles of the late treaty, and an act of public faith,
granted by the Parliament of England, for payment thereof, at the terms
therein contained: Therefore our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of
Parliament, Do hereby grant full power, warrant, and commission, and appoints,
nominants, and authorizes the persons particularly after nominated, viz. John
Earl of Lowdoun, Chancellor of Scotland, Archbald Marquis of Argyle,
Alexander Earl of Eglintoun, John Earl of Cassils, William Earl of
Glencairne, John Earl of Lauderdail, William Earl of Lothian, John Earl of
Lindesay, David Earl of Southesk, James Earl of Findlater, John Lord
Sinclair, John Lord Balmerino, Robert Lord Burghlie, George Lord Forrester, Sir
Charles Erskene of Bandeth, Sir David Home of Wedderburne, Sir Robert Innes of
that ilk, Sir George Dundas of that ilk, Sir William Cunyngham of Capringtoun,
Sir John Wauchope of Nidrie, Sir Alexander Erskene of Dun, Sir Gilbert Ramsay
of Balymayne, Sir Duncane Campbell of Auchinbrek, Sir William Forbes of
Craigievare, Sir Robert Griersone of Lag, Mr. George Douglas of Bonjedburgh,
William Rig of Ethernie, Alexander Gordoun of Earlstoun, John Binnie Burgess
of Edinburgh, Thomas Durham Burgess of Pearth, Patrik Leslie Burgess of
Aberdene, George Bell Burgess of Linlithgow, Patrik Bell Burgess of Glasgow,
James Sword Burgess of Saint Andrews, John Kennedye Burgess of Air, John
Semple Burgess of Dumbartane, William Glendoning Burgess of Kirkcudbright,
James Scot Burgess of Montrose, Mr. Robert Barclay Burgess of Irving, James
Anderson Burgess of Couper, George Gardine Burgess of Bruntiland, and Mr.
Alexander Douglas Burgess of Bamff, Together with Alexander Earl of Levin,
and Sir Adam Hepburne of Humbie, one of the Senators of the College of
Justice, whom his Majesty and Estates of Parliament adds to the foresaid
number as ordinair members with the rest, to be Commissioners from his Majesty
and the Parliament, to the effect after specified, Granting and committing,
like as his Majesty and Estates foresaids, do by virtue of their presents grant
full power, warrant and commission to the forenamed persons, or to any twelve
of them, who shall be a quorum, there being always three of them of ilk
estate, either by themselves, or by such others persons, as shall be entrusted
and authorized by them, or their Quorum foresaid, for that effect, to crave,
receive, uplift, and intromet with the foresaid sum of two hundredth and
twenty thousand pounds sterling money foresaid, yet resting unpayed of the
said brotherly assistance, promised and obliged to be paid by the said
Parliament of England, in manner foresaid: And with power to the said
Commissioners, or such as shall be appointed by them, as said is, to give and
grant discharges upon the receipt of the said sum in whole, or in part, which
shall be als vallid and sufficient, as if the famine were granted by his
Majesty, and whole body of this present Parliament, And with power to them, to
setle, accord and agree upon the best ways and courses how the said brotherly
assistance may be most timously and conveniently paid at the terms of payment
appointed for that effect, or otherwise, how the famine may be advanced, either
by exchange or otherwise, for defrayment and relief of the said common
burdens, as may be most conducible for the relief and good of the public. And
whatever acquittances or discharges the forenamed persons, or such other
persons as shall be authorized by them, shall grant and subscribe upon the
receipt of the said sum, or any part thereof, or whatever other course they
shall accord and agree upon concerning the famine, his Majesty and the Estates
of Parliament do by these presents approve and authorize the same, and if need
be, shall ratify the famine in the next ensuing Parliament: And generally,
our said Sovereign Lord and Estates foresaids, grants and commits full power
and commission to the forenamed persons and their Quorum foresaid, and to these
who shall be authorized by them, as said is, to do, exerce, accord, and agree
upon all, and every thing necessary, anent the payment and recoverie of the
foresaids sums, and every thing else, which may concern the samine, in all
respects needful and expedient, Whereanent our said Sovereign Lord and
Estates of Parliament, declares that their presents shall be a good and
sufficient warrant for them, and all others whom the samine may concern, the
forenamed Commissioners, and these to be authorized and appointed by them for
the effect above specified, being always comptable and answerable for their
carriage and proceedings in the premises.

ACT XXVIII. ACT AGAINST GOING OF Salt-pans and Mils on the Lords day, and
other prophanations of that day. 15. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering notwithstanding the
Acts of the General Assembly, ratified in this present Parliament, June 1640.
against the profaning of the Lords day, by going of Salt-pans, Salmond
fishings, Kills, Mils, and hyring of shearers on the said day, yet the said
abuses are not left off, but rather increased: Therefore Our Sovereign Lord and
Estates foresaids, for the better restraint of the said abuses and
prophanations, do again inhibite and discharge all going of Salt-pans, or
Mils, and all working of works thereintill upon the Lords day, and all hyring
and conditioning of shearers on the said day, and that under the pains and
penalties following, to be paid to the particular Sessions of every paroch
wherein the abuses before specified are committed, to be employed to pious
uses, viz. The sum of twenty pounds for ilk day foresaid, working in manner
foresaid, of ilk Salt pan; of ilk days fishing of Salmond; and of ilk Mill; to
be paid by the heritors and possessors thereof, for the time, and the masters
to be answerable for their servants, And the sum of ten pounds for ilk
shearer and fisher of Salmond on the Lords day; the one half to be paid by
the hyrers and conducers, the other half by the persons hired, toties quoties:
And ordaines the magistrates of the town, to keep the transgressors in ward
while they pay the said penalties, for the which the Magistrates shall be
answerable to their sessions. And further, Our said Sovereign Lord and Estates,
do hereby inhibite and discharge all Markets, using of Merchandise, carrying of
loads upon the Lords day, and all other prophanations or abuses thereof
whatsoever. And that under the same pain of ten pounds, to be paid by every
transgressour to their Sessions respective, for the uses foresaid toties
quoties: And ordaines the said penalties respective above specified, to be
exacted, by and attour the confiscation of the salt, corn, merchandise, loads,
and other goods whatsoever, employed, used, gained, or made and wrought, in the
profaning and a busing of the said Lords day, which pain is also hereby
ordained, And if the transgressors be not able to pay the penalties foresaids,
ordaines them to be punished exemplarly in their bodies, according to the merit
of their fault, toties quoties.

ACT XXIX. ACT ANENT THE NOMINATION AND Election of Sir James Galloway to be
Master of Requests. 15. November. 1641.
THe which day the Kings Majesty, with advice and approbation of the Estates of
Parliament, nominated and elected, Sir James Galloway, to be Master of
Requests, of this His Highness Ancient and Native Kingdom of Scotland, and that
ad vitam vel culpam, conform to the Act of this present Parliament made anent
the Election of Officers of Estate, Councillors and Sessioners, upon the
sixteenth day of September, last by past: Like as His Majesty, with advice and
approbation foresaid, Gives and dispones to the said Sir James Galloway, ad
vitam vel culpam, as said is, the foresaid office, To be Master of Requests of
this His Majesty's Kingdom: With all Honors, Dignities, Privileges, Profits,
Casualities and Liberties pertaining to the samine office, which have been
possessed and bruiked by any preceding Master of Requests, and which may be now
bruiked by the Laws of this Kingdom: And ordains a gift to be past and exped,
under his Highness great seal, to the said Sir James Galloway, of the foresaid
office: With all Honors, Dignities, Profits, Casualities, Liberties and
Privileges pertaining and belonging thereto, as said is.

ACT XXX. ACT ANENT THE COMMISSION FOR Plantation of Kirks, and Valuation of
teinds. 15. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering the humble
Supplication of the general Assembly, presented by the Commissioners thereof,
for planting of Kirks, uniting or dis-uniting of Paroches, and for other pious
and good works mentioned thereintill: For the which, and other causes after
specified, It is necessair, That power and commission be given from His Majesty
and Estates to the effect underwritten, And therefore His Majesty and Estates
foresaid, have granted, and by these presents grant full power and commission
to the persons after following, viz. John Lord Lowdoun Chancellor, Archbald
Earl of Argyle, Alexander Earl of Eglintoun, John Earl of Cassils, William
Earl of Glencairn, John Earl of Lauderdail, William Earl of Lothian, David
Earl of Southesk, James Earl of Findlater, John Lord Lindesay, John Lord
Sinclair, John Lord Balmerino, Robert Lord Burghly, George Lord Forrester, Sir
George Dundas of that ilk, Sir John Wauchope of Nidrie, Sir David Home of
Wedderburn, Sir William Forbes of Craigievare, Sir Gilbert Ramsay of Balymayn,
Sir William Cunyngham of Caprintoun, William Rig of Ethernie, Sir Duncan
Campbel of Auchinbrek, Sir Alexander Erskene of Dun, Sir Charles Erskene of
Bandeth, Sir Robert Innes of that ilk, Alexander Gordoun of Earlstoun, Sir
Robert Griersone of Lag, Master George Douglas of Bonjedburgh, John Binnie for
Edinburgh, Thomas Durham for Pearth, Patrik Leslie for Aberdene, George Bell
for Linlithgow, James Sword for Saint Andrews, Patrik Bell for Glasgow, John
Kennedy for Air, John Semple for Dumbartan, William Glandoning for
Kirkcudbright, James Scot for Montrose, Master Robert Barclay for Irving, James
Anderson for Couper, George Gardine for Bruntiland, Master Alexander Douglas
for Bamff, Robert Earl of Roxburgh Lord Privie-Seal, Sir Alexander Gibson
younger of Durie clerk Register, Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall Advocate, Sir
James Carmichael, Thesaurer Depute, Sir John Hamiltoun Justice clerk, and Sir
Andrew Fletcher of Innerpeffer, Sir Thomas Hope of Kers, and Sir Adam Hepburn
of Humbie, three of the Senators of the College of Justice, To meet and
conveene at Halyrude-house, or Edinburgh, or such other places as shall be
appointed by them, at such times and dyets as they shall appoint, And to value,
and cause value whatsoever teinds, great or small, Personage or Viccarage of
whatsoever Lands, and others within this Kingdom, liable to the payment of
teinds, of whatsoever nature and quality the famine be of, which are yet
unvalued: Providing the Ministers serving the cure, who do lead tithes, be
secured of good and thankful payment of so much victual, or money, answerable
to the worth of the said tithes, as the tithes shall be valued to: And als to
receive the reports from the Sub-commissioners appointed within ilk Presbytery
of the valuations of whatsoever teinds of lands and others, liable to teind, as
said is, led and deduced before them, according to the tenor of the
Sub-commissions direct to that effect, And to allow or disallow the famine,
according as the same shall be found agreeable, or disagreeable from the tenor
of their Sub-commissions, And for the better expeding, and advancing of the
said valuations, with power to appoint Committees or Sub-committees of their
own number, to receive the reports of the said valuations made, or to be
made, and to receive, admit and examine witnesses, And to take parties oath
with their depositions, where the same is referred to oath, and to give such
farther power to the said Committees or Sub-committees of their own number,
as they shall think fit for the good of the work and speedy finishing of the
same: And siclike, with power to them, if need be, to appoint
Sub-commissioners who are not of their own number within any Parochine, or
Presbytery of the Country, for leading and deducing of the said valuations,
and to receive the reports thereof, allow, or disallow of the samine: And
generally, with power to them, to set down whatsoever other order or course,
which shall be thought fit and expedient for dispatch of the faids valuations
rectifiying thereof, and for final closing of the same: And siclike with power
to the said Commissioners, or any fifteen of them, there being four thereof
for every Estate, after closing and allowance of the valuations of ilke Kirk
and Parish, or at least the exact diligence of the Ministers done to that
effect, to appoint, modifie and set down a constant, and local stipend, and
maintenance to ilke Minister (his present stipend being allowed in the first
end thereof) to be paid out of the teinds thereof: And to grant augmentations
to ilke Ministers of other Kirks nor Bishops Kirkes, who got not the benefit of
the former Commission, and have not the full quantity of eight chalders
victual, or eight hundred marks according to the tenor of the Acts of
Parliament made, in anno 1633. wherein that is found to be the lowest
proportion for the maintenance of the Ministers, except such particular Kirkes
occur, wherein there shall be just, reasonable, and expedient causes to go
beneath the said quantity, which is hereby also referred to the conscionable
consideration of the Commissioners before expressed, And to grant augmentations
to Ministers of Kirkes, which were provided by the former Commission, but to a
less quantity nor eight chalders victual or eight hundred marks in the cases
after following allanerly, viz. where the teinds in whole or in part are fewed
with the lands cum decimis inclusis, whereby the Ministers were debarred of the
full quantity foresaid, or where the valuations already led, the time of the
provision of these Kirkes shall happen to be reduced as unjustly valued, or
where it can be proved by writ or oath of party, that the less quantity
foresaid proceeded from pactions betwixt the Titular and the Ministers, or
Titular and Parochiners in prejudice of the Ministers Successors, or where the
honest Incumbents for the time were impeded by the Prelates for their never
practicing conformity, to obtain the full quantity in the former Commission,
albeit there was sufficiency of teinds within the Paroch: In the which cases,
or any of them, it is hereby declared, that the Ministers provided by the
former Commission, shall be supplied to the full quantity foresaid: Like as
hereby it is declared, that all Bishops Kirkes, whether or not provided at all,
or provided by the former Commission, but beneath the quantity foresaid, shall
be supplied to the full quantity of eight chalders victual, or eight hundred
marks, out of the tithes of their own Parish, and where the same cannot be
had, then out of the teinds of the other Kirkes of that Bishopric: And that
all Kirks that had greater quantity of stipend before the restitution of
Bishops nor they now have (except they have been diminished by just
valuations) shall be supplied, and brought to the same quantity whereof they
were in possession before the said restitution, to be paid out of their own
Paroch, and where it is in-lacking, to be paid out of the tithes of the
Bishops Kirkes: For the which effect, the Kings Majesty and Estates of
Parliament grants power to the Commissioners foresaid or any Quorum of them,
and als gives power to the said Commissioners, to dis-joyne too large and
spacious Kirks, and plant them severally, and to cause build, and erect new
Kirks, and appoint competent provisions for the Ministers to change Kirks
incommodiously situate, to a more commodious part of the Paroche, to dis-joyne
and dismember such parts and portions of parochins lying contigue, and whereof
ane part is far distant from the proper Paroche Kirk, and more near and
ewest to the next adjacent and contiguous Paroche Kirk, from their own proper
paroch Kirk, from the which the parts and portions are farther distant, and to
unite and adjoine them to the other paroch Kirk, to the which they are more
ewest: And als to unite Kirks and parochines lying so near other, and being so
little bounds, and small number of Parochiners, that the union of them shall be
found more useful and conducible for the good and ease of the Parochiners of
both the Kirks, and their edification: Providing that the dividing of large
parochs, the dis-membring of ane part of the said parochines in case foresaid,
and the uniting of Kirks and parochines of the quality above specified, be
done upon the special recommendation of the Presbytery, Synod, or General
Assembly, given-in in writ, and after the Commissioners have cited and heard
the Parochiners of both Kirks thereanent, and no otherwise: And to set down a
solid order, and take course for furnishing the elements to the Communion twice
in the year, or oftener, where they are not provided at all, or not sufficiently
provided: And als to take order for paying of the charges of the Commissioners
to the general Assemblies, without burdening the Ministers stipends therewith.
And siclike, with power to them to advise, take course, and determine in all
things referred to them by any particular act or reference from the general
Assembly to this Parliament, or from the Parliament to them: And because the
Kings Majesty, considering that the names and titles of Bishops and Bishoprics
by the Acts and Statutes of Kirk and Kingdom, are abolished and suppressed,
and that thereby the tithes, parsonage and viccarage, and teind duties of
whatsoever Kirks or Titles, pertaining to the said Bishoprics, are become in
his Majesty's hands, and at his Majesty's disposing, And his Majesty being
graciously pleased, out of his pious and royal affection to the maintenance of
the true Religion, and purity thereof, presently established within this his
Majesty's ancient Kingdom, to take such a course with the said teinds and
teind duties, pertaining to the said Bishoprics, and of all teinds and Kirks
annexed thereto, that the famine may be applied to the use and benefit of the
Ministers serving the cure of the said Kirks, and to the maintenance and
supply of Universities, Colleges, and Schools: Like as his Majesty before his
coming to this his ancient Kingdom, in his own royal person, sent and
directed his letters to the General Assembly of the Kirk, conveened at
Edinburgh in July last, whereby his Majesty declared his constant purpose and
resolution to employ the teinds of the said Bishoprics to the uses above
specified: And therefore his Majesty, according to his royal promise, and for
performance thereof, has declared, and by their presents declares, by advice
and consent of the Estate, that the teinds and teind duties of all and
whatsoever Kirkes, parsonage, and viccarage thereof, and teinds of whatsoever
nature pertaining to the said Bishoprics, shall be applied to the maintenance
of the Ministry, and of the Universities and Colleges, and other pious uses,
and to no othet use, and that according as the same shall be particularly
distributed by the Commissioners foresaid, to whom his Majesty and Estates
grants power for this effect, And declares all gifts granted, or to be granted
by his Majesty, to whatsoever person or persons of the foresaid teinds and
teind duties, or any part thereof, except to the uses foresaid, to be null in
the self: Excepting always all gifts already granted by his Majesty to
whatsoever person or persons of their own teinds, and to the maintenance of
Universities and Colleges, they and every one of them always being liable to
the plantation of the Kirks to the full quantity contained in the Acts made
thereanent. Likeas it is declared hereby, that all teinds and teind duties
which belonged to Chapters, Deanes, Sub-deanes, and other dignities of the
Chapters, shall be liable to the like provisions of the Kirks which were
annexed thereto, according to the proportion of eight Chalders victual, or
eight hundred marks, forth of the teinds of their own parochins allanerly,
according to the Act of Parliament. And sicklike, with power to the said
Commissioners, as said is, to take order that every heritor and life-renter of
land, having right thereto by infeftment of life-rent, right of terre, or by
band for infeftment of liferent, shall have the leading of their own teinds,
personage, and viccarage thereof, they paying the price contained in the act
above-specified, Incase they be willing to buy the same from the titular,
having power to sell, or otherwise, Paying the rate of teind expressed in the
acts made thereanent. And to that effect with power to the said Commissioners,
to set down, the price of sellable teinds, according to the worth thereof in
each part of the country, where the famine grow and are bred. And als with
power to them, to set down such good and ample securities as may stand by law,
both for the buyers of the teinds, to the effect the titulars may be fully
denuded in their favors, And also for security to the titulars and sellers of
the price due to be paid to them for the said teinds, And also to set down
the security in favors of the titulars and of the ministers, so far as
concerns the maintenance assigned to them for good, thankful, and timous
payment of the rate of teinds where the famine are not or cannot be sold: And
siclike, with power to the said Commissioners, To discuss and determine all
questions which may arise betwixt the titulars, and heritors, anent the price
of teinds, according to the nature and quality of the rights to be sold,
whether the same be heretable or temporal, and to proportionate the price
accordingly: And also to divide the price of teind betwixt the heretors and
life-renters thereof, and betwixt titulars and taksmen, and others who have
several and distinct rights to the said teinds, sellable according to the
quality of the rights, And also with power to them to cause the titulars who
sell their said teinds, to exhibit their rights and titles, to the effect they
may be lawfully denuded thereof, in favors of the said heretors and
life-renters respective, without prejudice always to his Majesty's annuitie to
be paid forth of the said teinds, by the said titulars of teinds or heretors
or life-renters of lands, according to the tenor of the act of annuity: And
generally, with power to the said Commissioners to decide and determine in all
other points which may concern the leiding and drawing of teinds, the selling
and buying of the same, or payment of the rates thereof, contained in the acts
of Parliament made thereanent: And whereas it may fall out that some of the
Commissioners now appointed by his Majesty and Estates, may be unable to attend
the service through death, sickness, or some other notar and known
impediments, Therefore his Majesty and Estates declares such other persons
shall fill their places as his Majesty shall think fit, by advice of the
remanent Commissioners who must receive and admit them upon the said
Commission, and take their oaths for faithful discharge of the same: And his
Majesty and Estates ordaines this present Commission to endure unto the (...)
ay and while the famine be expressly discharged by his Majesty's warrant, with
consent of the Estates for that effect: And his Majesty with consent of the
Estates foresaid, finds, declares, and ordaines the acts, decreets and
ordinances of the Commissioners foresaid, and of the other persons who shall be
surrogate in their places by his Majesty in manner foresaid, in the whole
particulars above specified, and every one of them, to have the force, strength
and effect of a decree, sentence, and Act of Parliament: And ordaines the Lords
of Session, to grant and direct letters of horning, pounding, and others
thereupon, upon a simple charge of ten days, or otherwise as shall be found
necessary: Attour for clearing of all doubts and difficulties, which may arise
anent the rectifying of valuations, or other particular heads following, His
Majesty and Estates have declared, and declares, that where valuations are
lawfully led against all parties, having interest, and allowed by the former
Commissioners, according to the order reserved by them, that the famine shall
not be drawn in question, nor rectified upon pretense of enorm lesioun, at the
instance of the Minister, not being titular, or at the instance of his
Majesty's Advocate, for and in respect of his Majesty's annuity, except it be
proved, that collusion was used betwixt the titular and heretor, or betwixt the
Procutor Fiscall, and heretors, and titular, which collusion is declared to be
where the valuations are led, with diminution of the third of the just rent,
presently paid: And which diminution shall be proved by the parties oaths: It
is always declared, that the provisions of the former Commission, so far as
they are conceived in favors of the Colleges, Hospitals, and Ministers, are
herein renewed: As also that Ministers serving the cure, who lead their
teinds: And that Colleges, Schools, and Hospitals, be not constrained to
sell, set, nor dispone their teindes in prejudice of their successors,
notwithstanding of the valuations thereof: Like as the Kings Majesty and
Estates, grants power to the said Commissioners, to do every thing necessary,
for settling and establishing the right of any teinds of the prelacies,
appointed by them, in favors of the said Kirks, Schools, Universities, and
Colleges, according to their several divisions, as also to set down rules,
and ways, how the same shall not thereafter be delapidate, or made worse by
the titulars for the time, And his Majesty and Estates declares, That all his
Majesty's subjects, who are willing to buy their teinds, shall be oblisht to
pay the price thereof contained in the Act made thereanent, within the space of
two years after the famine beis valued and approven before the said
Commissioners: And that after the expiring of the said time, the titular shall
not be compelled to sell the famine, except they do it of their own good
will, With this declaration always, that in case the impediment enduring the
space foresaid, flow from the titular, by reason of his minority, or other
inability, in that case the Heretor, who offers himself ready to buy his
own teind within the space foresaid, shall have place so soon as the
impediment is removed, to buy his teinds notwithstanding of the expiring of the
years, and space above expressed: And it is declared, that if the heretors be
minor, and his tutors neglect the buying of his teinds within the space
foresaid, The minor shall have action for two years after his minority to
compel the titular for selling of the said teinds. Likeas his Majesty and
Estates of Parliament grants power to the said Commissioners to give
recompense to parties for the augmentation of stipends to be imposed by this
present Commission in the same way as was done by some former Commissions, as
1617. years: Likeas it is hereby declared, that where by mistaking and wrong
compting, there was a greater quantity assigned to the minister out of any
man's teinds nor is due by proportion according to the valuation, that the
Commissioners may rectify the same without diminishing the ministers stipend,
or wronging his possession, until it be given out of other teinds in the
paroch: Likeas it is declared, that where the assignations are made wrong in
the quality that the same might be reduced to the just number of bols of meal,
beire, and wheat, answerable to the valuation, With power also to the said
Commissioners to assign the few duties of the parts of land; called Parsons
and Viccars gleibes, to the ministers and others serving the cure.

ACT XXXI. COMMISSION ANENT THE ARTICLES Referred to Consideration by the
Treaty. 16. November, 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with consent of the Estates of Parliament, Considering
that there are sundry heads of the Articles of the Treaty of peace betwixt his
Majesty and his Subjects, and betwixt his Majesty's Kingdoms of Scotland and
England, which are referred to be taken in consideration by the Commissionars,
to be appointed by his Majesty with consent of both Parliaments, who shall
have power to advise and treat thereupon, and to report their proceedings
therein to his Majesty and to the Parliament of both Kingdoms respective, and
specially the articles after specified: And his Majesty with consent foresaid
being willing, that a Commission be exped on their part for advising and
treating upon the said Articles, with the Commissioners chosen, or to be
chosen by his Majesty with consent of the Parliament of England, within which
is included the Kingdom of Ireland: Therefore his Majesty, with advise and
consent of the Estates, gives and grants full power and Commission to the
persons after specified, William Earl of Lothiane, John Earl of Lindesay,
Lord Parbrothe and Struther, John Lord Balmerino, Sir Thomas Myretoun of Cambo,
Sir Thomas Hope of Kerse, Sir Archbald Johnstoun of Wariestoun, Sir John Smyth
of Grottell Burgess of Edinburgh, Patrik Bell Merchant Burgess of Glasgow,
and Mr. Robert Barclay Burgess of Irving, as also to John Earl of Lowdoun
Chancellor of Scotland, and Archbald Marquess of Argyle, Earl of Kintyre,
Lord Lorne, or any of them two, who beis at Court, To be of the Commission
with the remanent Commissioners above named: With power to the said whole
Commissioners above named, or any five of them, there being one thereof at
least of every Estate, to conveene with the Commissioners chosen or to be
chosen by his Majesty with consent of the Parliament of England (within which
is included the Parliament of Ireland, as said is) at whatsoever places and
times convenient to be accorded amongst them, and there to consult, advise,
treat, and agree upon the special Heads and Articles following: viz. Anent the
Demand concerning the making war with Foreigners, and anent Leagues and
Confederations to be made with foreign Princes and Estates, and concerning
mutual Supply in case of foreign Invasion, and also concerning mutual Trade
and Commerce betwixt the Kingdom of Scotland, England, and Ireland, and anent
the pressing of Ships, and men, by sea or land, and als anent Naturalization
and mutual Capacity of the Subjects of both Kingdoms, who either of them,
respective, of all Dignities, Liberties, Privileges, and other Benefits
Ecclesiastical or civil, and others of that nature, and concerning the
lawfullnesse and solemnity of the extracts of Bands or Decreets in either of
the said Kingdoms: And als concerning the manner of safe conduct for
transporting from England to Scotland by sea or land, in such a way as may be
most secure and least chargeable to the estate of Scotland, of the moneys given
and promitted by way of brotherly supply, and assistance to the Estate and
Kingdom of Scotland by the Parliament of England: And concerning what
assistance Scotland shall give to England for suppressing of the Rebellion in
Ireland, or to the Prince Elector, conform to the instructions given, or to
be given to them for that effect, by the Lords of secret Council, to whom his
Majesty and Estates of Parliament remits the same: And what the said
Commissioners their treaties with the said Commissioners of England and
Ireland, resolves and concludes upon, that they may make timous and due report
thereof to his Majesty and the Estates of this Kingdom.

ACT XXXII. COMMISSION FOR CONSERVING OF The Articles of Treaty. 16. November,
1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, Considering, That by the late Articles of Treaty,
concluded betwixt the Commissioners of His Majesty's Kingdom of Scotland and
England, Ratified by Parliaments of both Kingdoms: It is thought fit and
necessary for observing the said Articles of Treaty, made for establishing a
firm and constant peace, That Power and Commission be granted by his Majesty,
by advice of the Estates of Parliament of both Kingdoms, to the effect
contained in the said Articles of Treaty, for performance whereof upon the part
of His Majesty's said Kingdom of Scotland, His Majesty with consent of the
Estates of the said Kingdom by their presents, Gives and grants power and
Commission to the persons after-specified, viz. John Lord Lowdoun Chancellor,
James Duke of Lennox, James Marquess of Hammiltoun, Archbald Earl of Argyle,
William Earl of Mortoun, Alexander Earl of Eglintoun, William Earl of
Glencairne, Charles Earl of Dumfermling, Robert Earl of Roxburgh, William
Earl of Lothian, John Earl of Lauderdaill, George Earl of Kynnowll, William
Earl of Lanerk, Alexander Earl of Levin, John Lord Lindesay, John Lord
Balmerino, James Lord Almond, Sir Patrik Hepburne of Wauchtoun, Sir George
Dundas of that ilk, Sir Thomas Myretoun of Cambo, Sir Patrik Hammiltoun, Sir
Thomas Hope of Kerse, Sir Robert Innes of that ilk, Sir Archbald Johnstoun, Sir
Alexander Erskene of Dun, Sir David Home of Wedderburne, Sir Robert Griersone
of Lag, Sir William Scot of Harden, Sir John Charters of Amisfeild, (...)
Ruthven of Frieland, (...) Campbell of Cessnok, Sir David Grahame of Morphie,
Sir Hary Montgomrie of Giffen, Sir William Forbes of Craigievare, Sir William
Douglas of Cavers, Edward Edgar, Patrik Bell, William Glendoning, John Smith,
Master Robert Barclay, Thomas Durham, James Fletcher, Patrik Leslie, Thomas
Bruce, George Bell, James Sword, John Rutherford, Master John Corser, Hugh
Kennedye, John Semple, Master Robert Cunyngham, Master Alexander Douglas,
Richard Maxwell, or any twelve of them, With power to them, or any twelve of
them, as said is, there being at least two of every Estate at any time or times
in the Interim betwixt the sitting of the Parliaments, To conveene amongst
themselves, or with the Commissioners chosen, or to be chosen to the same
effect by His Majesty, with consent of the Parliament of England, within which
is included the Kingdom of Ireland, at whatsoever places and times convenient
to be accorded unto amongst themselves, And to be careful, that the peace, now
happily concluded, may be continued, And to endeavor by all lawful means,
for preserving and keeping of the said Articles of peace concluded in the
foresaid Treaty allanerly, And therewith to use all their care to preveen all
trouble and division which may arise by the breaking and violating of any of
the said Articles, concluded in the said Treaty, as said is: And if any debate
or difference shall happen to arise, to the disturbance of the said common
peace, That they labor to remove or compose the famine, according to their
power granted to them in manner foresaid, and no other ways: It being always
provided, That for all their proceedings in this kind, they shall be
answerable for the lawfulness thereof to the Kings Majesty and the Parliament
respective: and if any thing fall forth beyond their power, and which cannot be
remedied by them, that they inform themselves of the particulars thereof, and
represent the same to his Majesty, and to the ensuing Parliaments respective,
That by his Majesty's wisdom and authority, and theirs, all occasions and
causes of troubles being removed, the peace of the Kingdom may be perpetual
to all posterity: And it is declared, that the power of this Commission shall be
restrained to the Articles of peace, concluded in the said Treaty, as said is,
and shall endure for the interim betwixt Parliaments allanerly, and shall
expire at the next ensuing Parliament, at the which the said Commissioners
shall be holden, to give an account of their diligence and proceeding in the
premises.

ACT XXXIII. ACT ANENT THE FIVE INCENDIARIES And the Plotters, And the Kings
declaration there-anent. 16 November, 1641.
THe Estates of Parliament, considering that whereas albeit John Earl of
Traquhair, Sir Robert Spottiswood of Donipace knight, Sir John Hay of Baro
knight, late Clerk register, Doctor Walter Balcanquell, and Mr. John Maxwell
sometime, pretended Bishop of Rosse, are cited before them, and accused as
guilty of diverse heinous and treasonable crimes perpetrated and committed by
them against the Common wealth, contained in their several ditties, which they
have just reason to prosecute: Nevertheless the said estates of Parliament,
taking into their consideration his Majesty's gracious goodness toward this
his native kingdom, and his fatherly care and wisdom in composing of all
past differences, and providing for the future, to the great joy and happiness
of all his Subjects, do in retribution thereof, with an unanimous consent to
testify their high respect and thankfulness to his Majesty, and that his
Majesty may joyfully return a contented prince from a contented people, to the
settling of his royal affairs in his other dominions, believing that the
famine will be acceptable to his Majesty, and conduceable to the good and peace
of the kingdom, Declare, that for acquitting themselves of their oath, they
will only proceed to the exact trial of the said parties by a committee to
be appointed and authorized by the king and Parliament, in respect of the
present necessity of their other affairs, And after trial shall be taken of
the said persons, and of the crimes whereof they are accused, the Parliament
declares, that they will not proceed to a final sentence, nor insist upon the
punishment of those persons, but that they do for the reasons foresaids freely
remit them to his Majesty.

The Estates of Parliament considering, that whereas albeit James Earl of
Montrose, Archbald Lord Naper, Sir George Stirling of keir knight, Sir Archbald
Stewart of Black hall (...) are cited before them, and accused as guilty of
diverse crimes and misdemeanors committed by them, to the just offense of the
Estates of Parliament, and derogatorie to the great trust and confidence had of
them, And albeit the Parliament have just reason to prosecute their processes,
yet nevertheless the said Estates of Parliament, taking into their
consideration his Majesty's gracious goodness toward this his native Kingdom,
and fatherly care and wisdom in composing all past differences, and providing
for the future, to the great joy and happiness of all his subjects, Do in
retribution thereof, with an unanimous consent, to testify their high respect
and thankfulness to his Majesty, and that his Majesty may joyfully return, a
contented prince from a contented people, to the settling of his royal affairs
in his other dominions, believing that the famine will be acceptable to his
Majesty, and conduceable to the good and peace of the kingdom, Declare, that
for acquitting themselves of their oath, they will only proceed to the exact
trial of the said parties by a committee to be appointed and authorized by
the King and Parliament, in respect of the present necessity of their other
affairs, and after trial shall be taken of the said persons, and of the
crimes whereof they are accused, The Parliament declares, that they will not
proceed to a final sentence, nor insist upon the punishment of the said
persons, but that they do for the reasons foresaids freely remit them to his
Majesty.

At Edinburgh the sixteenth day of November, the year of God 1641 years, the
Parliament having expressed their respect and thankfulness to his Majesty, by
remitting unto him these that are cited as Incendiaries, and others, according
to their above written declaration, he was graciously pleased (the better to
testify his Princely care, and to prevent any fears that may be conceived
from the meddling of those persons in the affairs of State or Court) to make
this Declaration following:

I Taking in good part the respect and thankfulness of this Parliament, in
remitting to me these who are cited as Incendiaries, and others, according to
their Declarations, Do declare, that I will not employ any of these persons in
offices or places of Court or State, without consent of Parliament, nor grant
them access to my person, whereby they may interrupt or disturb the firm
peace which is now so happily concluded.

ACT XXXIV. ACT AND COMMISSION FOR TRYING The Incendiaries and Plotters. 16.
November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, having taken to consideration,
That in the Session of Parliament conveened by his Majesty's authority upon
the eleventh day of June 1640. years, full power and warrant was given and
granted to the Preses and Quorum of the Committee of Estates therein appointed
for directing, in the Kings Majesty's name, and in name of the Estates of
Parliament, summonds and precepts to the Lion King at Arms, and his brethren
Heralds, Pursevants, and Maissars, to warn and charge the persons under
written, viz. John Earl of Traquaire, Sir Robert Spottiswood of Donipace
knight, Sir John Hay of Lands, late Clerk Register, Doctor Walter Balcanquell,
and Master John Maxwell, sometime pretended Bishop of Rosse, to compeir
personally before the Parliament at certain days and diets bygone: And that
conform to the said warrant of Parliament, summonds were raised and intended
at the instance of Sir Thomas Hope of Craighall Knight baronet, his Majesty's
Advocate; and at the instance of Sir Thomas Nicolson of Carnock, Knight
Baronet; Masters, Roger Mowat, Alexander Peirson, James Baird, and Thomas
Nicolson, Procutors of the Estate, to compeire before the Kings Majesty and
Estates of Parliament at certain days and diets now bygone, to answer for
the crimes of Treason, and other crimes contained in the said summonds and
precepts, of the date the (...) day of (...) years. And als our Sovereign
Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering that summonds and actions are
depending before our said Sovereign Lord and the Estates of this present
Parliament, against James Earl of Montrose, Archbald Lord Naper, Sir George
Stirling of Keir, Knight, Sir Archbald Stuart of Blakhall (...) as having been
plotters, devisers, and machinators of courses against the public weal, and
as having been the committers of other several crimes and forefaults,
particularly specified and contained in the said summonds, raised and depending
against the said Earl of Montrose, Lord Naper, Lairds of Keir, and Blakhall
(...) Before the Kings Majesty and Estates of this present Parliament of the
date the (...) day of (...) 1641. years, as the famine at more length bears,
Therefore our Sovereign Lord and the Estates of this present Parliament, for
the further examination and trial of the persons above specified their
guiltiness of the points and crimes above written, contained in the summonds
particularly and respectively above mentioned, Gives and grants by their
presents full power, authority and commission to the persons after mentioned,
viz. John Lord Lowdoun Chancellor, John Earl of Lauderdaill, (...) Earl of
Weymes, Robert Lord Burghly, James Lord Couper, George Lord Forrester, Sir John
Hammiltoun of Preston, Sir William Cokburne Lord Langtoun, Harie Montgomrie of
Gifin, Sir George Dundas of that ilk, Sir John Wauchope of Nidrie, William Rig
of Ethernie, George Bell for the town of Linlithgow, Thomas Bruce for
Stirling, Mr. George Gray for Hadingtoun, George Gardine for Bruntiland, and
Robert Cunnyngham for Kinghorne, James Sword for Saint Andrews, and Sir
Alexander Gibson of Durie, and Sir Adam Hepburne of Humbie, two of the ordinary
Senators of the College of justice, or to any Quorum of the said number of the
said persons, being present for the time, which Quorum shall consist of nine,
two being for ilk estate, by the said two Judges above named, to proceed in
all further examination of the points of the said crimes consisting in facto:
And that by examination of witnesses, and by writ, or other probation competent
of the Law against so many of the said persons as are not compeiring, without
all farther citation, in respect of their absence and contumacie: And als to
call and conveene before them the foresaids persons above rehearsed in the said
summonds particularly and respectively above written, so many of them as are
incarcerate, before them, at such days and diets as they most conveniently
shall appoint at Edinburgh the fourth day of January next to come, which is
appointed to be the first diet of their meeting: And ordaines these who are
incarcerate to be cited personally, and these who are out of the Country, at
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, Peire and Shore of Leith, To answer before the
said persons Commissioners, appointed by their presents, for the crimes
particularly and respective contained in the said Summonds above written, to
the effect they may be further examined by them, and may object against such
witnesses as shall be cited to compeire to depone in the said matter, With full
power and Commission to the said persons, or Quorum foresaid, to proceed in
the cognition and trial of the crimes particularly and respective above
written, to the discussing of the relevancie of the Summonds particularly and
respective above written, and to the receiving of all lawful probation in the
said crimes above written against the said persons, particularly summond, as
is above written: And to that effect, to direct their Precepts and Summonds for
summoning of witnesses in the particular crimes respective above specified,
under the pain of horning, and generally, all and sundry other things to do
for the exact trial of the said persons: Providing always, that the said
persons Commissioners, as is above specified, appointed by their presents, shall
not proceed, Like as our Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament presently
conveened, by their presents discharges the said Commissioners and Quorum
foresaid, to proceed to any decision in the said points or crimes, or to
pronounce any sentence convictive against the said persons particularly above
written, summoned to this present Parliament particularly and respective, as
said is, but only that the Commissioners foresaids shall do their diligence
in the points particularly above specified, committed to them, in discussing
the relevancie of the said Summonds particularly and respective above written,
and in receiving all legal probation thereupon, And the Commissioners or
Quorum foresaid to proceed with all diligence, and make their report concerning
the relevancie, and how far they shall find the same proved, or not, without
pronouncing any farther sentence against them, or any of them, and that they
finish the process and trial before the first day of March next to come.

ACT XXXV. ACT ANENT THE PASSING FROM These who are cited to the Parliament as
unfriends. 16. November, 1641.
THe Estates of Parliament, Considering that whereas there are diverse and
sundry persons indicted and accused before this Parliament, as guilty of certain
crimes committed by them, against the State, and to the prejudice of the peace
of this Kingdom, Nevertheless the said Estates of Parliament, considering
that by Gods mercy and providence, and by his Majesty's great wisdom, all our
tempests are turned into the calm of an happy peace, And that trial is taken
anent the persuits and processes for which the said persons are cited to the
Parliament, Do hereby, out of their respect to His Majesty, to whom they know
the famine will be acceptable, Declare that they have acquitted and discharged,
And hereby acquits and discharges, all other persons, cited and called to
appear before them, To answer for whatsoever crime or misdemeanour committed,
during the late troubles: And declares the Act of Pacification and Oblivion,
and benefit thereof, to be extended to them, siclike as if they had not been
cited before this present Parliament: And but prejudice always of the
restitution to private parties, conform to the said Act of Pacification
contained in the Treaty, And of all lawful sentences recovered against any of
the said persons, before the Committee of Estates: And declares, that this Act
does not extend to the Incendiaries or plotters, but only to such others who
are cited to the Parliament as unfriends.

ACT XXXVI ACT FOR SELLING OF YARNE BY WEIGHT. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates presently assembled, Understanding how necessar
and convenient it is, that all yarn be bought and sold by weight: Therefore Our
Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the said Estates, Ratifies and
approves the Acts of His Majesty's Council, Ordaining the same to be sold by
weight, in all the heads, clauses and articles thereof, dated at Halyrude-house
the 28. of July, 1631. years, and ordaines the famine to stand as a Law, and to
take effect in all time coming.

ACT XXXVII. ACT ANENT LINEN CLOTH And breadth thereof. 16. November 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates presently assembled, finding that linen cloth
is become one of the prime commodities of this kingdom, whereby many peoare
put to work, and money is brought within the same, which partly through the
deceit used by the bleitchers, in lyming thereof, and partly by the
incertaintie of the breadth, is likely to come in contempt abroad, to the great
prejudice of this kingdom: Therefore his Majesty, with consent of the said
Estates, Statutes and ordaines that no makers of linen cloth, nor no others
whatsoever, present to market, or other ways, make or sell any linen cloth of
the price of ten shillings the elne or above, of less breadth then an elne,
And all under the said price, to be of no less breadth then three quarters of
ane elne, under pain of confiscation of all such linen presented to marker,
or other ways sold, which shall be found not to be of the breadth abovenamed,
And ordaines the magistrates, within whose bounds and jurisdictons the said
linen cloth, made contrair to this statute, shall happen to come, to
confiscate and escheat the same, And for this effect, to search all the markets
within their bounds: As also discharges and inhibites all our Sovereign Lords
lieges and subjects, that none of them presume nor take upon hand to bleitch
any cloth with lyme, under pain to be punished in their persons and goods at
the will of the Magistrate, within whose bounds they dwell: And last, it is
stature and ordained, that all linen cloth shall be taken up by the selvedge
and not by the rig, and so to be presented to the market, and ordaines the
sheriff of the shires and Magistrates within burgh, to put this statute to
execution within their several jurisdictions.

ACT XXXVIII. DIS CHARGING THE IMPORTATION Of strong waters. 16. November 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord and estates of Parliament, understanding, that there is
diverse strong waters brought into this kingdom from foreign places, which
might be more conveniently made within the kingdom, to the benefit of the
natives thereof: Therefore his Majesty, which consent of the said Estates,
discharges all inbringing of aquavitie or strong waters, within this Kingdom,
under the pain of escheat thereof.

ACT XXXIX. ACT ANENT THE EXSISE OF Herring. 16. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering that his Majesty's
assise of all Herrings slain within the Reid-head, and Saint Tobs-head, is a
thousand Herrings forth of ilk boat, ilk dreave that holds: And finding the
collecting of these Herrings to be very hard and difficile, have thought
expedient to modifie the price of these Herrings, and convert the famine
thousand Herrings into money, And therefore our said Sovereign Lord, with the
advice of the Estates, modifies and converts the price of the said one thousand
Herrings, payable for assise, to the sum of six pounds money of this Realm,
and declares that to be the constant price thereof in time coming, without
respect of dear or cheap Herrings: And because the fishers residents in the
East Seas, and who dwell within the said bounds, on the North and South side
of Forth and Tay, by-west the Reid-head, and Saint Tobs-head, in respect of the
great hazard and danger they are in, in ventring to the North Isles with their
Ships and Barks, wherein they transport two Boats or Yolles, as pendicles of
the said Ships and Barks, and vehicles for their use and the better
accommodating of their voyage, were in use to pay only the sum of five pound
in satisfaction of the assise Herrings, ilk Tack that holds for ilk Ship or
Bark, without having respect to Ship-boats and Yolles, which are only
pendicles, and vehicles of the said Ships and Barks: Therefore his Majesty,
with advice of the Estates, being certainly persuaded, that it is unpossible to
the said fishers to accomplish their voyages, unless they have two Ship-boats
or Yolles carried in the said Ships or Barks, as pendicles and vehicles
thereto: Declares, that the said fishers, are and shall only be liable in the
said sum of six pounds, in full satisfaction of the assise in the North Isles,
for ilk Ship or Bark, ilk Tack that holds, not having regard of the said
ship-boats or Yolles, there being but two Boats to ilk ship at the farthest,
which they do hereby liberate and exeem from all payment of any duty: And
discharges all our Sovereign Lords Lieges for exacting or uplifting any other
assise from the said fishers, nor the particular duties above specified: And
ordaines the collectors thereof to uplift the same legally, after ilk dreave,
and to desist from troubling the fishers during the time thereof.

ACT XL. ACT ANENT LOYAL PACKING OF Salmond. 16. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates presently assembled, Understanding that the
Salmond fishings are one of the principal benefits whereby Trade is
maintained, and money brought in the Kingdom, and that through the evil
ordering thereof, both in the insufficiency of the Barrels, and alse in the
disloyal packing of the same, not only is the Merchants estate damnified
thereby, but also the Nation is dishonored abroad, and disappointed of what
should return thereby: Therefore Our said Sovereign Lord, with advice and
consent of the said Estates, Ordaines an act to be made, Ratifying and
approving all and sundry Acts of Parliament, Laws and Constitutions of this
Realm, made anent Salmond fishing, and the sufficiency of the barrels, and
loyal packing thereof, With this addition, That the whole Coupers within this
Kingdom, make the said Salmond Barrels of good and sufficient new Knappell,
wherefore he shall be answerable, without worme-holes, and white wood of
sufficient tichtnesse, for containing the pickle, and sufficient tichtnesse for
enduring all kind of stresse in the handling, and that the barrels contain no
less then ten gallons of the Stirling pint, conform to an act of His
Majesty's Council, of the date at Halyrude-house, the fifteenth day of July
1619. years, which His Majesty with consent foresaid, Ratifies and approves in
all the heads, clauses and articles thereof, to be ratified in this present
Parliament, under the pain of five pounds to be paid by the Couper for ilk
unsufficient barrel, and escheat, of the famine barrel, and that the famine
be well pyned in the pickle before the packing thereof, and thereafter the said
barrels, to be well tichted and double girted, before the transporting thereof
to foreign Nations. And that no barrel be sooner made and blown, but the
Coupers birne be set thereon, on the tapone staff thereof, in testimony of the
sufficiency of the tree, and that every couper be answerable and liable in
payment of such losses as happen to be laid on the fish at the Market, if it be
found to be in the default of the Couper, by the insufficiency of the tree, or
packing, or any other means in the Coupers fault, and that they keep right
jedge both in the length of the staves, the bilge girth, the wideness of the
head, and deepnesse of the chin, The barrel being made, marked, and thrice
gene in the packing, shall be marked with the marking iron, under a very
particular merchands mark, as use is, and that no burgh, or any other trading
with Salmond, shall presume to counterfeit the mark or birne of Aberdene, under
the pain of confiscation of the Salmond, by and attour the punishment of the
parties counterfeiters, at the pleasure of the judge ordinar, the one half of
the said pain to pertain to His Majesty, and the other half to the burgh so
wronged: And ordaines the Magistrates within burgh to put this act to execution.

ACT XLI. ACT ANENT THE KINGS MAJESTY'S Rents, uplifted by warrant of the
Committee of Estates for the public use. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering that during the time
of the late troubles of this Kingdom, there were some of his Majesty's rents,
customs and impost, uplifted and intrometted with, for serving of the present
necessities of the public affairs of this Kingdom, by warrant of the late
Committee of Estates, and by other public orders, and that there were sundry
bygone pensions and fees due to diverse of His Majesty's Pensioners and
Servants, satisfied and paid to them, conform to their rights and pensions by
order of the late Committee of Estates, residing at Edinburgh: And His Majesty
being graciously pleased to approve and allow of the foresaids intromissions
had, and payment made in manner, and for the causes above-written, Therefore
our said Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the said Estates of
Parliament, Ratifies, approves and dispenses with all such intromission with
His Majesty's rents, customs and impost, as have been uplifted, paid and
intrometted with, preceding the twenty ninth day of June last bypast, for the
uses and causes foresaid: Together with the payment of the same made by public
order, as said is: And declares that the famine payment made, and intromission
had by warrant from the said Committee of Estates, or by other public orders,
preceding the said twenty ninth day of June last bypast, are and shall be
sufficient exoneration to the payers of the said rents, customs and impost,
and to the receivers of the famine, by virtue of the said public orders, and
to all others concerned therein, like as the discharges upon the payment
thereof by public order foresaid, shall be allowed to the payers of the same,
in the accounts of their intromission, with his Majesty's rents, customs and
impost foresaid, to be made in His Majesty's exchequer, whereanent their
presents shall be a sufficient warrant to all that are concerned therintill,
and to the Lords and Commissioners of His Majesty's Exchequer, to allow and
defray the famine in the said accounts to be made in Exchequer by the
chalmerlands, intrometters with, and receivers of his Majesty's rents, customs
and impost foresaid, and ordaines count to be made of the said intromission in
Exchequer.

ACT XLII. ACT ANENT THE DISCHARGING OF Advocations for sums within an
hundred pounds. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates presently conveened, considering the manifold
prejudices and trouble arising to diverse of his Majesty's Lieges, in pursuing
of matters of small importance, by the too frequent granting of Advocations
from inferior Judges: Therefore our said Sovereign Lord, with advice and
consent of the said Estates, discharges the Lords of Session from giving and
granting Letters of Advocation of any actions intended or to be intended before
whatsoever inferior Judicatories, which may competently, by the Laws of the
Kingdom, be decided by the said inferior Judges, before whom the said action
is or shall be intended, for sums of money within an hundred pounds, or for
any other causes, whereunto by the Laws of the Kingdom the said inferior
Judges are appointed Judges.

ACT XLIII. ACT ANENT THE DIRECTING OF Cocquets within the Regalitie of Saint
Andrews, in the Kings Majesty's Name. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the three Estates of
Parliament, statutes and ordaines, That all Cocquets to be given forth within
the Regalitie of Saint Andrews, now holden of the Kings Majesty, through the
abolition of Bishops, be directed and granted by John Lord Lindsay, and his
Deputes, Cocquet-keepers, within the Regalitie foresaid, in all time coming,
in the Kings Majesty's name, whereas the famine were before directed in name of
the Archbishop of Saint Andrews.

ACT XLIV. ACT DISCHARGING THE TRANS. Portation of Eggs. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament find that it is necessary and
expedient, for the good of the public, that the transporting of eggs out of
this Kingdom be restrained, in respect it brings not any considerable moneys
into the Country, no ways comparable to the loss, considering the diet of
poor laboring servants, who eat only bread, and drink water, if eggs were
restrained, might be bettered, by getting eggs to his meat at an easy rate,
or of his own, The breed of Chickens, Hens, and Capons, would be in far
greater abundance, so that they might sell at two pence, a groat, and six
pence, where they are now two groats, twelve pence, and eighteen pence: And
where the eggs sell now at forty pennies, sometimes a groat, might be sold
for twelve pennies, or eighteen pennies: And where they give five shillings
six pence where the salt is made, they might sell their dearest for a two
pence: Therefore to grant a restraint under the pain of confiscation of the
eggs, and an hundred pound, toties quoties, to be incurred by the party
transporter, to be proved by witnesses, or oath of party.

ACT XLV. ACT AGAINST DESTROYERS OF Planting, and others. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, and Estates of Parliament, considering that Parks and
Plantings are great decorements, and much profitable to the Kingdom, and that
the demolishing and down-casting of the dikes of either, and spoiling of the
ground and planting enclosed within the famine, by these who are evil affected
to policy, is a great discouragement to many who are virtuously disposed to
Parking and Planting: Therefore his Majesty, with consent of the Estates,
discharges all hawkers, hunters, travelers, and others persons whatsoever, to
whom the samine Parking and Planting do not belong, from demolishing,
downcasting, climing, or any ways wronging of any of the Dikes foresaids,
Parks and Planting within the famine, under the pain of five pounds toties
quoties: Which fines, his Majesty and Estates foresaids declares to appertain
to the owners of the said Parks and Plantings, they or their servants
deprehending the failers: And if any other deprehend them, the one half to
appertain to the deprehender, the other to the heritor, With power to the
deprehender to pursue the contraveener before the ordinar Judge: And if it
shall happen the heritors own tenant to contraveen the Act foresaid, with power
to the heritors to unlaw them at their own pleasure, the penalty and unlaw
always not exceeding the pain foresaid.

ACT XLVI. ACT ORDAINING THE PURSUER OF The thief to be restored to his own
goods. 16. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, understanding, that when any
thieves were taken and executed for theft, or declared fugitives for not
entering and under-lying the law, therefore their whole escheat fell to the
Kings Majesty, and the goods stolen, pertaining to the pursuer of the said
thieves, and so the said party wronged was prejudged of his own geir:
Therefore, and for remeed whereof, our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of
Parliament statutes and ordaines, that any person, having any goods or geir
stolen from them, and having pursued the stealer thereof, shall have their
own goods again wherever the famine can be apprehended, although the thief
stealer thereof suffer: And where the said stolen goods cannot be had,
ordaines the pursuers of the said thief to have the just value, price, and
avail of the goods and geir stolen from him, out of the readiest of the
thieves goods: Together with the expenses they shall wair in the said pursuit,
the pursuers always pursuing the thief, usque ad sententiam, reserving to the
taker and Sheriff the expenses bestowed by them in the taking and execution of
the thief.

ACT XLVII. ACT ANENT COALE-HEWERS. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of this present Parliament, ratifies the
eleventh Act of the eighteenth Parliament of King James the sixth of worthy
memory, made anent Coale-hewers and Salters, with this addition, that because
Watermen who laves and draws water in the coale-heuch-head in this Kingdom,
and gaits-men who work the ways and passages in the said heuchs, are als
necessar to the owners and masters of the said coale-heuchs as the coale-hewers
and bearers, It is therefore statute and ordained, that no person shall hyre or
seduce any watermen, and winds-men, and gaits-men without a testimonial of
the master whom they serve, under the pains contained in the former Acts in all
points: And because it is found by experience, that the giving of great fees
has been a mean and way to seduce and bring coale-hewers from their masters,
It is therefore statute and ordained, that it shall not be lawful to any
coale-masters in this Kingdom to give any greater fee nor the sum of twenty
marks in fee, or bounteth, under any color or pretext: And because the said
coale-hewers, and salters, and others workmen in coale-heuchs within this
Kingdom, do lie from their work at Pasch, Yule, Whitsunday and certain
other times in the year, which times they employ in drinking and deboishrie,
to the great offense of God, and prejudice of their master, It is therefore
statute and ordained, that the said coale-hewers and salters, and others
workmen of coale-heuchs in this Kingdom, work all the six days of the
week, under the pains following, that is to say, That every coale-hewer or
salter who lies idle, shall pay twenty shillings for every day, by and attour
the prejudice sustained by their master, and other punishment of their bodies.

ACT XLVIII. ACT DISCHARGING THE MIXING OF TIN With lead. 16. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of this present Parliament, considering the
great hurt sustained by his Majesty's Lieges by the fraudulent dealing of
pewterers, in mixing the finer sort of tin brought from England, France,
Flanders, and other parts beyond sea, with baser and courser metal of tin and
lead, and their exacting greater prices betwixt the new cassin by them, and the
old, which they receive from the lieges: For remeed whereof, it is statute and
ordained, that the pewterer or founder of tin shall put the mark of the
thrissle, and his own name upon every piece of work that he happens to cast,
and that the same shall be of the finest of the pewter marked with the rose in
England: And in case the same be under the finesse of the said pewter of
England, that the same shall be confiscate, and he punished in his person at
the discretion of the Magistrates of the Burgh where he dwells: And to that
effect, that there be a visitor appointed by the Magistrates for trying of the
famine: As likewise that he shall take betwixt the pound of old tin and
pewter, marked with the rose foresaid which he receives from the Lieges, and
the pound of new cassin by him, eighteen pennies allanerly, under the pain
foresaid.

ACT XLIX. ANENT DOCQUETING AND PRESENTING Of Signators. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Considering that by the twentieth Act of his Majesty's dearest Father King
James the sixth his tenth Parliament, for avoiding the prejudice did then arise
by the subscribing of sundry Signators and Letters at the importunate suite and
desire of sundry persons, His Highness not being informed or timely warned to
the effect and contents thereof, Therefore his Majesty, with the advice of the
Estates conveened in Parliament, did statute and ordain, that no Signator nor
Letter whatsoever shall be presented to his Majesty in time coming, but by his
ordinary officers, unto whom the famine properly belongs, or who have power
of docqueting and presenting by their patents, as the Act at more length
bears: And his Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, also considering
how prejudicial it is to his Majesty's honor, and the peace and good of his
Majesty's Subjects, That Signators of one and the same thing without his
Majesty's certain knowledge, shall pass his Majesty's hand in favors of
several persons, or that Letters of contrary tenours shall be signed by his
Majesty, and directed to Officers and Judges within this Kingdom, The only
occasion thereof is, that others then the said Officers, or their Deputes, or
others foresaid, to whom the famine may belong, Takes upon them to present
Signators and Letters to his Majesty for their friends and acquaintance, either
not knowing the former Signator or Letters of contrary strain, or of set
knowledge to reverse what has been done before, without giving true
information or reasons to move his Majesty to sign these Signators, or wrest
contrary Letters: For remeed whereof, his Majesty, with advice and consent
foresaid, ratifies and approves the foresaid Act in all the points thereof, and
declares that it shall not be leisome or permitted to any person or persons
whatsoever, to present any Signator, Writ, Letters, or Warrant to be signed by
his Majesty, except by the said ordinary Officers, unto whose Office the
famine properly belongs, and by others foresaids, having power and warrant, as
said is: And that his Majesty may the better know what passes his highness
hand, and upon what grounds and reasons he signs the famine, it is expedient,
that any of the said officers that shall present any signator, writ, letter,
or warrant, to be signed by his Majesty, shall cause register the docquet of
the same in a Register, and send the just and authentike double thereof,
subscribed with their hand, to his Majesty's Secretary, who shall be obliged to
give his Majesty notice and timous warning of any prior deed, different or
contrair to the posterior, that his Majesty may either refuse the same, or
specify his Majesty's certain knowledge for passing and signing thereof.

ACT L. ACT ANENT THE ELECTION OF The President of Parliament. 16. November
1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering how necessary and
expedient it is, that in every Parliament to be holden within this Kingdom,
there be a President of Parliament chosen by his Majesty, or his Commissioner,
and Estates of Parliament, to proceed in all matters to be agitate in
Parliament, Therefore his Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, Statutes
and ordaines, that in all succeeding parliaments, after taking of the oath of
Parliament by all the members thereof, they shall make choice of the Lord
Chancellor, or any other the King, or his Commissioner, and the Estates shall
appoint, to be President of Parliament, who shall remain and continue
President als well in that Parliament wherein he is chosen, as in the next
Parliament subsequent, until the said oath be taken, and another chosen to be
President in his room.

ACT LI. ACT ANENT THE SUPERIORITY OF Lands, and others, which formerly held
of Bishops and their Chapters, to be now holden of the King. 16. November 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, for removing all doubts and
questions that may arise anent the superiorities of these lands, milnes,
fishings, heritable offices, and others which held of the late pretended
Bishops or of their chapters, by reason of the abolishing of Bishops and
chapters foresaid, forth of this Kirk and Kingdom, and to the effect the
subjects and vassals of these holdings may be put in assurance here-anent, have
statute, ordained, and declared, and by their presents statutes, ordaines and
declares, That all these superiorities which formerly pertained to the said
pretended Bishops and their chapters, now abolished, as said is, do now
pertain and belong, and shall hereafter pertain to our Sovereign Lord, and His
Highness Successors in all time coming: And that the Vassals of these Lands,
Mils, Fishings, heritable Offices, and others, which formerly held of the
famine Bishops and their chapters, do now, and shall in time coming hold the
famine of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty and His Successors, in the same
form and manner of holding, as they formerly held of the said Bishops and
their chapters, conform to the said vassals their infestments and rights, made
and pertaining to them, which are hereby declared to be unprejudged by the
abolishing of the said Bishops and their chapters, their former Superiors:
And siclike, Our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament declare all
these services of heirs to their defunct predecessors, to any of the Lands
and others, holden of the said Bishops (since the excommunication of Bishops,)
whereby these heirs are served to the said Lands to be holden of the Kings
Majesty, to be vallid and lawful services and rights led and done: And
ordaines all such services as are to be led and deduced hereafter, for serving
of the heirs of the vassals of the lands and others foresaids, as heirs in
the famine lands, to be served heirs thereintill, to be holden of the Kings
Majesty and His Successors foresaids, as their superiors of the famine Lands
and others above mentioned, in all time coming, with this provision, that the
few duties of these lands holden of the chapters now retained in titulo, shall
pertain and be paid them, during the present titulars life-times: And it is
declared, that this present act shall not be prejudicial to the infestment
granted by his Majesty to the Duke of Lennox of the superiority of the whole
Lands and Barronies which pertained to the temporality of the Archbishopric
of Glasgow, but that the said infestment shall stand vallid in the self, and
the vassals to hold their Lands of the said Duke of Lennox and his Successors,
as their superiors thereof in time coming: And also declares their presents,
neither act nor reservation foresaid, shall not be extended to the Deanrie or
Sub-deanrie of Glasgow, nor nothing holden of the Dean or Sub-dean: As also but
prejudice to the Earl of Lauderdaill, of his infestments of Stobo and
Ettilstoun, which is no ways prejudged by this act nor reservation foresaid,
Providing that this provision shall not better, nor strengthen the Earl of
Lauderdails right and infestment foresaid, But the famine to be in that famine
condition, as before the date of their presents.

ACT LII. COMMISSION FOR REVISING OF The Registers. 16. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering that this long time
bygone the Registers and Records of Parliament have not been visited, so that
some of the ancient Records might have been abstracted, vitiate, or disordered:
Therefore our Sovereign Lord and Estates foresaids, gives full power and
Commission to the persons following, viz. the Lord Chancellor, the Earl of
Argyle, Earl of Lauderdaill, and Clerk Register, to meet when the Lord
Chancellor shall appoint

To take inspection, and revise and look over all the whole Registers and
Records of Parliament, as well these in the Castle, as these in other men's
custody, and to call for the old Inventars thereof, and compare them with the
Registers, and to make two new authentic Inventars thereof, without copying of
the said Registers and Records: Which Inventars shall be subscribed by the
most part of the visitors, the one whereof shall be delivered to the Clerk
Register, to be kept by him, the other Inventar shall be laid up, either with
their Honors, or some other lockfast place, whereof the Lord Chancellor for
the time shall keep the key, and to cause make presses, boxes, buists, or other
necessaries fitting for keeping of the said Registers and Records, And also to
consider of the place and house where the said Registers lie, and to advise
and appoint the best ways and means for preserving and sure custody of the
said Registers and Records, With power also to them to mark and observe any
defect or wants in the said Registers and Records, and the vitiations thereof,
if any be: And siclike, to mark, number, and put in perfect order, the said
Registers and Records, with power also to make a perfect Index of all the
unprinted Acts of Parliament which do not concern particularly private
persons, but such as import and concern only generally the whole lieges: And
siclike, gives full power to the persons foresaids to lay up the principal
late Treaty amongst the said Records and Registers, and generally to do all
and sundry other things, whereby the said Registers and Records may be
preserved, and their perfections or imperfections may be notified: And ordaines
them to make report of their faithful and exact diligence hereintill at the
next Parliament. And our Sovereign Lord and Estates foresaid, declares their
presents is no ways prejudicial to the Clerk Register of receiving, keeping,
and using of the said Registers, and keys thereof, in the mean time conform
to his right and place.

ACT LIII. ACT ANENT COCQUETS, AND ENTRIES of Ships, modifying the entry to
23. shillings 4. pennies, and the Cocquet to 40. shillings. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates presently conveened, understanding there are
diverse abuses committed by the Customers and Receivers of entries of Ships, and
by the keepers of the Cocquet, in sometime exacting from Masters of Ships
greater sums of money than is due to them, and sometimes absenting
themselves, to the great prejudice of the Merchants estate, and to the hazard
of the loss of their voyage: Therefore our Sovereign Lord, with advice and
consent of the Estates, ordains, that there be no greater price exacted for
entering their Ships and Goods, then the sum of twenty three shillings four
pennies, and for the said Cocquet, then the sum of forty shillings: and that
the keepers of the said Cocquet attend by themselves, or their servants,
diligently and readily, to answer and give out Cocquets to all Merchants, and
Masters of Ships, under pain of losing their place, whenever they shall be
found, either to exact more then the said sum above written, or shall
occasion to the said Merchants and Masters more delay nor is needful for
writing of the same.

ACT LIVE. ACT ANENT DISCHARGING THE Registration of comprisings, and appointing
the recording and allowing of comprisings, and prices thereof. 16. November
1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, having taken to their
consideration, that the registration of Comprisings has put the lieges to
great, needless, and unnecessary charges and expenses, and that the famine
does neither add to the validity of the Comprisings, nor to the benefit of the
Comprisers: And therefore have discharged, and by the tenor hereof discharges
all registration of Comprisings, together with all gifts, Acts of Council, and
others warrants, consuetude or custom whatsoever, granted or observed
thereanent: And declares, that the famine Gifts, Acts of Council, and others
warrants, consuetude or custom, to be null and of none avail, force nor
effect, in all time coming. And siclike, our Sovereign Lord and Estates of
Parliament, considering, that a short Record of all Comprisings of lands and
rents, heritable bands, contracts, reversions, and others, and legals thereof,
viz. of the comprisers names and designations, The defenders names, the debt
for the which the comprising is used, the lands and others comprised, the
Maissers and Clerks names, the times of the denunciations and executions, and
witnesses thereto, and date of the comprisings, and of the superiors of the
lands comprised, is very necessar for the Lieges their informations: Therefore
statutes and ordaines, that all comprisers shall be obliged to bring their
comprisings to the clerk of the Bills, within threescore days after the date of
the comprisings, to the effect that the famine may be allowed by the Lords of
Council and Session, At the which time, ordaines the said clerk to the bills,
to make a record of the said comprisings in a book, wherein all comprisings
shall be recorded in manner above written: for the which allowance and
recording of the said comprising in manner above-written, the clerk shall have
forty shillings for the whole record of ilk comprising and allowance: And
siclike for the extract of ilk record of the said comprisings that shall be
extracted under the said clerk his hands, Our Sovereign Lord and Estates
ordaines the sum of twenty shillings for every extract, to be paid to the
said clerk of the bills, as due price competent to him therefore, Which sum,
the said clerk shall not transcend, under the pains contained in the acts of
Parliament.

ACT LV. ACT DISCHARGING THE LORDS OF Session, to exact twelve pennies for the
pound, and all other exactions. 16. November 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Considering that the Senators of the College of Justice, are sufficiently
provided by His Majesty and Estates, for serving their places without further
burden of the Lieges: Therefore His Majesty and Estates foresaids, discharges
in all time coming, all sentence silver, twelve pennies of the pound, and
other exactions imposed upon sentences and decreets to be pronounced by the
said Judges: And discharges all Acts, Statutes and Ordinances, made for
payment thereof: With power always to the said Judges, to modifie such
charges to the parties in whose favors the said decreets and sentences shall
be pronounced, as in equity and conscience they shall think reasonable, and as
the malicious and wilful pleyars, pursuers, or defenders shall deserve.

ACT LVI. ACT ANENT PARDON OF PENAL Statutes. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord considering, that the precise and rigorous exaction of the
pain arbitrary and pecuniall adjected to penal Statutes heretofore made,
would prove a burden to his Majesty's Lieges, heavy, and insupportable, if by
his Majesty's Grace and Favor they should not be eased and liberate of the
same: In consideration whereof, his Majesty being willing to give ease and
relief to his Subjects of the foresaid burden, Has therefore been graciously
pleased, with consent of the Estates of Parliament, to discharge freely, pardon
and remit, and by these presents discharges freely, pardons, and remitts all
contraveeners of any of the said penal Statutes, for all deeds done by them,
contrary to the tenor of the same Statutes in time bygone, Except only the
Statutes concerning the unlawful taking of usury, transporting of money and
gold, slaying of red and black fish, with the penalties incurred by the
concealers of annual rents, and wrongous up-givers of the inventars of their
money, which are no ways discharged by this present Act nor comprehended under
the same.

ACT LVII. ACT IN FAVORS OF ORPHANS, Fatherless, and others. 16. November
1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with the advice and consent of the Estates of this present
Parliament, Understanding many pitiful effects daily found and increasing,
Anent the misery and poverty of Orphans and Fatherless children, to have
been occasioned in this manner, That many ignorant people, the time of the
acquiring to them of bands, contracts, and other securities for payment of
sums of money, takes the famine to them, their herres, executors, and
assigns, with clause and condition of payment of annual rent therefore during
the not payment of the said principal sum, meaning thereby, that the famine
should no ways remain unprofitable during the not payment thereof, And no
ways that the said clause or condition should make the said sums and
securities thereof to pertain to the heir in prejudice of their bairnes and
others nearest of kin by the heir, whereas by the contrary by the
interpretation now observed, all such sums and securities bearing annual or
profit, are exponed to be heretable after the term of payment, and to pertain
to the heir, so that thereby the rest of the children nearest of kin, and
others having interest, are altogether therefrom secluded, and left pitifully
unprovided of any means to live on, As also the said bands and contracts, are
very often fraudfully concealed and abstracted, and never known to the true
owner thereof, that in due time they might make use of the same, Which is
against both equity and conscience, and the intention of the party acquirer of
the said securities, whereby great number of orphans, fatherless children
and others that are so prejudged of that's due to them, eitherby their natural
portion or otherwise adebted, are brought to great poverty, and misery, and
forced to become beggars, which is often found by pitiful experience. For remeed
whereof, our said Sovereign Lord, with advice of the said Estates, statutes
and ordaines, That all contracts, or bands, for sums of money payable to
parties, with condition of payment of annuall-rent or profit made at any time
hereafter, shall be holden, and estimate, to pertain to the bairnes and nearest
of kin to the defunct, except seasing follow thereupon in the life time of
the creditor acquirer thereof, or that by the tenor of the band or contract,
the famine be conceived to be payable to the heirs and assigns, secluding the
executors, or other ways that the said band or contract bear per expressum,
oblishment to infest, in either of the which excepted cases ordaines the said
sums to be heretable, and pertain to the heir, and out with the said
excepted cases, ordaines the said sums to be confirmed by the executor without
payment of any quote for the famine, And that to the end the nearest of kin
and others having interest, as said is, be no ways frustrate of what may be
due to them, nor yet the said bands or contracts fraudfully concealed and
abstracted from them, every one of them for their own parts, Providing always
that by virtue of this present act, The bands or contracts hereby ordained to
pertain to the nearest of kin to the defunct, and to be confirmed, shall not
fall under the compass of escheat, nor yet any part thereof pertain to the
relick jure relictae, But shall remain in the own nature quo ad siscum et
relictam, as they were before the making of this act.

ACT LVIII ACT ON FAVORS OF THE VASSALS Of ward Lands, holding of the King and
Prince. 16. November, 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Taking to consideration the
bounty and benevolence of his Majesty's most noble progenitors, King James the
2. and King James the 4. in giving their vassalls Liberty to set their ward
lands few, and herewith also remembering that by the 16. act of his Majesty's
first parliament, anno 1633. his Majesty and the prince his highness their
vassals of ward lands, are altogether secluded from that benefit of his
Majesty's bounty and benevolence foresaid, which prejudice is by the 37. act of
the session of this present parliament holden in June, 1640. years,
recommended to be considered at the next meeting thereafter of the said
parliament, and during that interim the force and execution of the said act
1633. is suspended and suppressed, And now his Majesty being graciously pleased
of his royal favor and bounty that the vassalls of ward lands holding of his
sacred Majesty and of the Prince his highness, may enjoy their former
liberty, with the benefit of his Majesty and his most noble progenitors
their bounty and benevolence foresaid, unprejudged or empared by foresaid act,
1633. Therefore our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament rescinds and
annulls the foresaid 16. Act of his Majesty's first Parliament, in anno 1633.
years, intitulate, Anent vassals holding ward, And declares the famine Act to
be null, of none avail, force, strength, nor effect in all time coming, in so
far as the famine Act is, or may be extended to the lands holden ward of the
King or Prince, as said is: And declares the vassals of the ward lands
foresaids, and others his Majesty's Lieges and Subjects, to be in that same
estate and condition, and have the same liberty concerning ward lands, which
they had before the making of the said Act, and as if the famine had never
been made, Which our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament declares to
be extinct, and of none avail, force, nor effect in all time hereafter.

ACT LIX. ANENT THE BREADTH OF PLAIDING. 16. November, 1641.
WHereas our Sovereign Lord and Estates presently assembled, understanding that
the plaiding of this Kingdom is one of the most ancient and prime commodities
thereof, which of late through the inconstancy of the breadth, is likely to
become of no estimation abroad. Therefore our Sovereign Lord, with advice of
the said Estates, ordains the makers thereof to make the same of no less
breadth then of three quarters of an elne, under pain of confiscation of all
that shall be found of a lesser breadth, And farther, understanding that the
Lords of his Majesty's Council had, for eschewing of the deceit in making
thereof, ordained the same to be presented in Folds and not in Rols to the
market, as it was used of before, Therefore his Majesty, with consent and
advice foresaid, ratifies and approves the said Act of Council dated at
Edinburgh the twenty fourth day of March, 1635. years, in all the heads,
clauses, and circumstances thereof, and ordaines the same to takefull
execution, and to stand as a law in all time coming.

ACT LX. ACT IN FAVORS OF LAICK PATRONES Of Provestries, Prebandries,
Chaplandries and Alterages. 16. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Ratifies and approves the Act of
Parliament made by King James the sixth His Majesty's Father of eternal memory,
Par. 1. cap. 12. anent Provestries, Prebandries, Alterages, Chaplandries and
collegiall Kirks, pertaining to laick Patrones, together with the act of
Parliament 12. cap. 158. ratifying the famine, and ordaines the said acts to
have full force and effect in all time coming, With this declaration always,
that in respect the vassals which held lands of the said Provests, Prebanders,
and others foresaids, are put to a great uncertainty of their Superiors, it
not being known to them, who are provided to the said Provestries,
Prebandries, Chaplandries, Alterages, and others foresaids, by reason there is
no public Register, to the which they may have recourse for knowledge and
notice thereof, and that the farthest that they can know by any registers, is
the infeftments and seasings made to these who are laick Patrons holding of His
Majesty: Therefore for securing of the vassals, who hold Lands, Mils,
Fishings, Tenements, annual rents of others whatsoever of the said
Provestries, Prebandries of collegiall Kirks, or of Chaplandries, Alterages and
others of that nature, at any time of before: It is Stature and ordained that
the entry of the said vassals by retour precept of clare constat, resignation,
comprysing, or other ways whatsoever, shall pertain to the laick Patrones and
their successors, who stands infest in the said laick patronages holding
immediately of His Majesty, and that the entry of the vassals by them, shall
be als vallid and sufficient to the said vassals receivers thereof, as if they
were entered by the Titulars of the said Provestries, Prebandries, Alterages,
Chaplandries, and others foresaids, and that the said laick Patrons shall be in
all time coming in their places as superior to the said vassals, and to have
the same power, to give infeftments to his Majesty's Subjects upon retour, or
by precept of clare constat, or by resignation, comprising, or any other manner
of way, with gifts de novo damus, and that without consent of persons,
provided, or to be provided to the said Provestries and Prebandries of
collegiall Kirks, Alterages, Chaplandries, or others titulars of collegiall
Kirks, and alse without consent of the chapter or convent of the said
Prebandries thereof, or most part of the same, which of before was in use and
custom, whereanent and anent all acts in the contrair his Majesty with consent
foresaid, dispences for ever, reserving always to the titulars of the said
Provestries, Prebandries, Alterages, Chaplandries, and others foresaids, the
fruits, rents, and emoluments of the said Provestries, Prebandries and others
foresaids, which are no ways prejudged by this present Act.

It is hereby father statute and ordained, where there is any Prebandries,
Chaplandries, Alterages, or others foundations of that nature above mentioned,
founded and situate within any burgh royal of this Kingdom, that the Provest,
Bayliffes, and Council of that Burgh where the famine are founded, are and
shall be in all time coming only indoubted Superiors, by whom, and by no
others, the vassals and tenants, enter in manner above specified, the Provest
and Bayliffes being always Patrons.

ACT LXI. ACT DISCHARGING QUOTES OF Testaments. 16. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
taking to consideration the great burden, hurt, and prejudice his Majesty's
lieges have sustained their many years bygone, by exacting of great quote the
time of the confirmation of the defuncts Testaments, to the wasting and
consuming of the means and estates of Minors in special, and to the general
grievance of persons of all sorts: Therefore our Sovereign Lord, with consent
foresaid, out of his Highness gracious care, and fatherly affection to the
weal and ease of all his Majesty's subjects, statutes and ordains, that no
quote shall hereafter be paid by any of his Majesty's subjects, for any
Testament of whatsoever quality, to be confirmed by them: And for that effect
discharges all Commissars, Commissars Clerks, Fischals, and others whom it
effeirs, not to exact nor uplift any quote, for whatsoever Testament to be
confirmed hereafter, the party confirmer paying allanerly the other ordinar
dues as appertain.

ACT LXII. COMMISSION FOR REGULATING OF Commissariates. 16. November, 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament, has
given and granted, and by the tenor hereof gives and grants full power and
Commission to these persons, who shall be nominate by the Lords of secret
Council, to whom his Majesty and Estates of Parliament remits and refers the
nomination of the Commissioners to the effect after specified, or any five of
the said Commissioners, to be nominate by the said Lords of Secret Council,
as said is, for ordering the Commissars jurisdiction, and clearing the bounds
and limits thereof, that there be no occasion of question betwixt them and
other inferior Judges, with power to the said Commissioners to regulate their
judicatories, and set down prices upon the Seals, Testaments, Summonds, Acts,
Decreets, and all other Writs concerning that Office, to be taken by
Commissars, their Clerk, or Procutor Fischall, all quotes of Testaments being
specially discharged to be exacted in any time coming, and to settle and
establish the fees of the Commissars of Edinburgh: and for that effect to meet
and conveen at Edinburgh the (...) day of (...) with power to them to appoint
diets as often as they shall think fit, until the said Commission take effect
anent the particulars foresaid: And whatsoever the said Commissioners, or
their Quorum, shall determine and conclude thereanent, our Sovereign Lord, with
advice foresaid, ratifies and approves, and ordains the same to have the
strength, force, and authority of an Act of Parliament.

ACT LXIII. ACT DISCHARGING MONOPOLIES. 16. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering the great hurt and
prejudice sustained by sundry his Majesty's lieges, by the Monopolies used and
exacted within this Kingdom, and which have been conferred to the use of any
particular person or persons, to the great hurt and prejudice of others his
Majesty's lieges, and specially the gift for selling Tobacco, granted to Sir
James Lesley, and Thomas Dalmahoy, the Patent of the Lether granted to the
Earl of Mar, the Patent of Pearling granted to (...) Bannatine, the Patent
of Pearl granted to Robert Buchane, the Patent of Armorie granted to Harrie
Mauld, Therefore our Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, by the tenor
hereof annuls, rescinds, and simply discharges the particular gifts foresaids,
granted to the persons above written, and all that may follow, or has followed
thereupon, And ordains the same and all other Patents of that nature, purchased
or to be purchased for the benefit of particular persons, in prejudice of the
public, to cease and be ineffectuall in all time coming.

ACT LXIV. COMMISSION FOR MANUFACTORIES. 16. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering how necessary,
expedient, and profitable the erecting and maintaining of Manufactories will be
for this kingdom, as well in keeping great quantities of money within the
same, which is now daily exported for wrought commodities, as in setting poor
ones on work, restraining of idle beggars, increase of virtue, and bringing of
moneys into the Country: And this being a matter of so great goodness,
wished by every man, and often times aimed at, to be brought to some perfection,
as witness many several acts of Parliament, acts of Convention and Council,
especially King James the sixth his seventh Parliament, cap. 113. Item King
James 6. his 15. Parliament, cap. 250. and 252. Item the acts of Council, May
1597. July 1600. November 1601. December 1601. May 1612. October. 1614. August
1616. July 1620. Feb. 1623. July 1623. Item the acts of Convention, June 1605.
November 1625. August 1626. yet the famine has not as yet made any
considerable progress, for want of cherishing, entertainment, and right order
for prosecution thereof: In consideration whereof, His Majesty and Estates of
Parliament, being resolved to use all ordinar means for erecting, cherishing,
and maintaining of Manufactories within this Kingdom, And His Majesty, with
advice and consent foresaid, being graciously pleased to grant all Liberties,
Privileges and Immunities to the erectors thereof, Therefore His Majesty and
Estates foresaid, gives, grants and commits to these persons, or Quorum
thereof, who shall be nominate by the Lords of secret Council, (to whom the
Kings Majesty and Parliament hereby gives the nomination of the said
Commissioners, and Quorum thereof foresaid, to the effect after specified,)
full power, warrant and commission, to meet and conveen at Edinburgh, or any
other place or places, at such days and times they or the said Quorum shall
think fitting, and there to consult, advise and determine upon the best rules,
overtures and propositions, and ways for erecting and maintaining of the said
manufactories of all sorts: With power to them, or the said Quorum To call and
conveen before and with them, any person or persons who can give them
information or assistance in the said businesses: As also with power to them,
or their said Quorum to appoint correction-houses in such parts of the
Kingdom, as they shall think most conduceable for the good of the said
Manufactories, and restraint of idle and masterlesse beggars: As also with
power to them to prescribe rules and ways for assisting, supplying, and
maintaining of these who have already, or shall, during the time of this
Commission, erect and entertain any of the said Manufactories, and to direct
letters against masterlesse people, and their receptars, as well to burgh as
land-ward, commanding them to work at such reasonable rates, as the said
Commissioners, or Quorum thereof, shall appoint: With power likewise to them to
make Corporations, and to grant them privileges, conform to the laws of the
Kingdom. And sicklike, his Majesty, with advice foresaid, out of his gracious
favor and bounty, does hereby, for the better encouragement to all these who
have undertaken, or shall undertake the erecting and maintaining of the said
Manufactories, or any one thereof, gives and grants to them the privileges and
immunities following, viz. all Spanish and foreign fine wool, for making of
fine cloth, shall be custom free: Item, all litster ware, oil, and others
necessaries for the use of the said works allanerly, shall be free of all
Customs and Impost: Item, all parcels of cloth, Seyes, and others, made by any
who have erected, or shall erect any of the said works, shall be Custom and
Impost free for the space of fifteen years after the erecting thereof: Item,
the workers of the said works erected, or to be erected, shall be free of any
taxation or imposition to be imposed on the Kingdom for any occasion bygone
or to come: Item, it shall not be leasome to any in the Kingdom to hire,
reset, or entertain any of the servants of the said works, without consent of
the Masters thereof.

ACT LXV. COMMISSION BY THE KING AND Parliament, to the Lords of secret
Council. 16. November, 1641.
OUr Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates of Parliament,
Considering that his Majesty being now actually present in his royal person
in this his native and ancient Kingdom, and willing before his return to
England (where his Majesty's more ordinat residence has been heretofore, and
will apparently be in time coming) to leave behind him such a pledge and
testimony of his tender respect, royal care, and fatherly affection for
establishing the good and happy government of this his Majesty's ancient
Kingdom, as in some measure may supply the want of his royal presence amongst
them, Has to this effect, out of his native goodness, condescended to an Act
made in this present Session of Parliament with consent of the Estates, whereby
his Majesty for himself and his Successors, has willed, enacted, and
ordained, that now and in all time coming, the Officers of State, Lords of
secret Council, and Lords of Session, on whose care, wisdom, and fidelity in
their several judicatories (which next unto the supreme Court of Parliament
are the chief and principal judicatories) depends the weal and happiness of
the government, shall be chosen now and in all time coming, by His Majesty and
his Successors, with advice and approbation of the Estates of Parliament when
they are sitting, and for the interim, with advice of the Lords of secret
Council and Session respective, as in the said Act of Parliament at more
length is contained: Therefore His Majesty has, with special advice and
approbation of the said Estates, nominated, elected and chosen the persons
after following, Lord Loudoun Chancellor, Duke of Lennox, Marquess of
Hammiltoun, Earl of Argyle, Earl Marshall, Earl of Sutherland, Earl of Mar,
Earl of Mortoun, Earl of Eglintoun, Earl of Cassils, Earl of Glencairn,
Earl of Murray, Earl of Pearth, Earl of Dumfermling, Earl of Wigtoun, Earl
of Kinghorne, Earl of Roxburgh, Earl of Sea-forth, Earl of Lauderdaill,
Earl of Lothian, Earl of Kinnowl, Earl of Southesk, Earl of Weymes, Earl
of Dalhoussie, Earl of Finlater, Earl of Lanerk, Earl of Levin, Lord Angus,
Lord Lindesay, Lord Yester, Lord Sinclair, Lord Elphingstoun, Lord Balmerino,
Lord Burghlie, Lord Almond, Lord Balcarras, Clerk Register, Advocate, Justice
Clerk, Thesaurer Depute, Master of Requests, Sir Robert Gordoun, Sir William
Douglas, Sir Patrike Hepburne, Lord Dundas, Lord Fintrie, Lord Cambo, Lord Dun,
Lord Innes, Lord Morphie, The Provest of Edinburgh for the time being, and their
supernumerarie Counselors English, viz. (...) Earl of Arundall, (...) Earl
of Pembroke, Earl of Salisbury, (...) Earl of Holland, To whom, or any nine
of them, by these supernumerary above named, His Majesty with advice and
consent of the said Estates has committed, and commits the administration and
government of this his Majesty's native Kingdom in all affairs concerning the
peace, good, and happiness thereof, which by the Laws and Custom of this
Kingdom, pertaines to the judgment, cognition, and determination of his
Majesty's privy Council, with power to them, or any nine of them, as said is,
to meet and conveen at the place appointed for the ordinair residence of his
Majesty's privy Council within the burgh of Edinburgh, or at any other place
or places, which by common consent in case of any necessity or urgent occasion
thereof, shall be found most fit and convenient, and there to advice, consult,
deliberate, conclude, decerne, and determine upon all and sundry affairs,
purposes, and actions, which may concern the good and peace of the Kingdom,
according to the Laws and Acts of Parliament established, or to be
established within the famine, and to hear, decide, and determine upon all
causes and actions betwixt Subject and Subject proper to be decided by the
Lords of his Majesty's privy Council, and that none be present at their
meetings but such as are of the privy Council, with the clerk of the privy
Council, whom his Majesty with advice foresaid continues in his place as of
before: His Majesty with advice and consent foresaid has likewise given and
granted, and by the tenor hereof gives and grants full power and Commission to
the said Council and every one of them upon any interveening occasion of
disorder or trouble in such parts of the Country, where they shall remain for
the time, To command and charge the person or persons committers of such
disorders to observe and keep his Majesty's peace, and to charge the
contraveeners thereof to enter their persons in ward, in such part or places,
or within such a short space, as the said Counselor shall think meet, there
to remain till order be taken by a full number of the Council in the matter
wherein they have offended, Providing always he be comptable to his Majesty
and the rest of the Council, and that no just cause of complaint be heard
against him: And if the person or persons so charged to ward, shall happen to
disobey and contemn the charge, his Majesty with advice and consent of the
said Estates declares, that upon report thereof to the Council, a pecuniall
sum shall be imposed upon the offender, according to the quality of his
person and nature of his offense, and the Council is to cause apprehend the
offenders, and commit them to ward, with power likewise to the said Council to
make and set down Acts and Ordinances for government of the Kingdom, and
suppressing of disorders within the same, With power likewise to the said
Council, to give and appoint Assessors to the Justice general and his
Deputies in case of necessity, and to give warrant to the said Justice, his
Deputes, and Assessors, for continuing execution after conviction, or for
mitigating the punishment of the Law in criminal causes, if the nature and
quality of the crimes shall require, and to grant Commissions of Justiciarie in
matters criminal, and other Commissions in matters concerning the weal of the
Kingdom, and als with power to them to give warrant to the said Justice
general, his Deputes and others Commissioners foresaids, for imponing of fines
or pecuniall sums upon the crimes of Adultery, bearing and wearing of Hagbuts
and Pistolets, usury, and such other transgressors of the acts of Parliament,
where the punishment by the Law is inflicted upon body or goods, or left to the
arbitriment of the Judge: And likewise with power to them, to grant exemptions
from hosts, raids, assizes and licenses, for departing out of the Kingdom,
according to the conditions contained in the act of Parliament: And alse with
power to the said Council, in case an open and avowed rebellion shall happen
to be raised within the said Kingdom, which cannot be redressed but by force,
To give commission of Lieutenantrie and Justitiarie for repressing of the said
rebellion, and to direct charges to such parts of the country as they shall
think fit for concurrence to be given in execution of the said commission, and
to give order and direction to furnish and advance the sums of money that
shall be requisite in such expeditions: With power likewise to the said
Council to raise the Session upon any interveening occasion or necessity, and
to appoint times and places of their down sitting: And generally, with power
to the said Council, to do, use and exerce all and every thing, which the
Council of the said Kingdom did, or might have done the time of his Majesty's
late Father: Providing always, like as his Majesty expressly provides, with
advice and consent foresaid, that this Commission shall no ways be
prejudicial to the commission of Exchequer: And it is declared that any nine
of the said Council shall be a sufficient number and make a Session, providing
the Lord Chancellor be one of the nine: and in case of the absence of the said
Lord Chancellor, it is declared that it shall be lawful to any nine or more of
the Council conveened in the ordinar place, and at the indicted time of
meeting, to choose one of the number conveened, who shall preside at the
meeting als often as the Lord Chancellor shall be absent. And his Majesty and
Estates, considering that the often absence of the most part of the Council,
and their not attendance upon the charge and trust concreded unto them, will be
a great impediment and hinderance to his Majesty's service, Therefore his
Majesty, with advice foresaid, declares, that it is his special pleasure and
command, that the Lord Chancellor, or President of the Council, to be elected
as said is, do see and provide that the Council be frequent, specially in
great and weighty matters of Estate: And if upon occasion that requires the
number of the Council to be more full then the said Quorum, the Lord
Chancellor, or President to be elected in manner foresaid, shall write to such
others of the Council as they think fit to be present, and give their
attendance: In which case, if any disobey, without a license obtained from his
Majesty, or the Quorum of the Council, or without some reasonable cause
(either of which shall excuse their absence) then and in that case his Majesty,
with advice foresaid, wills, that the absent shall be censured by the said
Council, as a neglecter of his Majesty's service, and that his Majesty be
advertised thereof. And it is declared, that if any of the said Councillors
places vaiks by decease, dimission, or deprivation, that his Majesty in the
interim shall nominate another of the same degree and quality in the vacant
place, with advice of the most part of the Lords of Privy Council, they being
all present at the said election, at the least lawfully warned to that effect,
upon fifteen days warning, conform to the Act of Parliament made thereanent:
Which election made in the interim, as said is, shall be allowed or disallowed
by his Majesty, with consent of the Estates in the next ensuing Parliament, as
they shall think expedient. And als his Majesty, with consent of the said
Estates, gives power to the said Lords of Secret Council, or any nine of
them, as said is, to set down such rules and orders for their meetings and
attendance, and spaces and times thereof, as they shall resolve, appoint, and
ordain amongst themselves: And wills and declares, that the said Lords of
Secret Council, now nominate, as said is, and these who shall be surrogate in
their places in the interim, in manner foresaid, shall have, bruik, and enjoy
their places ad vitam vel ad culpam, and shall be liable to the censure of his
Majesty and the Estates of Parliament, anent their proceedings therein, firm
and stable, holding whatever by the said Lords, or any nine of them, as said
is, shall be lawfully done in the premises: And decernes and ordaines all his
Majesty's lieges and subjects to reverence, acknowledge and obey the said
Lords of his Majesty's council in all things concerning the charge and trust
committed to them, as said is, under all highest pain and charge which after
may follow: And this Commission to endure to the next Parliament and longer, ay
and while the same be expressly discharged.

ACT LXVI. ACT DISCHARGING THE CUSTOM Of two and an half of the hundred, and
the Impost of four pounds on the Tun. 17. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, considering that the prices of
all Merchandise do daily rise to exceeding great dearths, which is alleged to
be occasioned through extraordinary Customs and Impositions: For remeed
whereof his Majesty, with advice and consent of his said Estates, does
discharge all and sundry whatsoever Customs and Impositions exacted by the
Customers, which are not allowed and approved by the Acts of Parliament, and
especially the late Custom of two and an half per Centum, and late new
Imposition of four pound upon the Tun of wine, and all raising of his
Majesty's Customs, directly or indirectly, without consent of Parliament. And
because that the too much troubling of Merchant estate, and drawing of Masters
and Mariners from their ordinary charges, does much impede the trade: Therefore
his Majesty, with advice and consent foresaid, discharges the taking of
Merchants, Masters, and Mariners oaths in the matter of Customs: and to the
end that the subject of trade may not be restrained with unnecessary customs,
therefore his Majesty, with consent foresaid, declares, that all goods and
Merchandise imported from foreign places to this kingdom and out, paying
inward Custom, shall be free of all outward Custom, according as is used in
England and Ireland. Like as his Majesty declares, that he consented to the
Act above written upon this condition, that commission and warrant be granted
to the Exchequer to establish the Book of Rates according as the prices of
merchandise now rules, and his Majesty permitted the option to the Burrowes:
Whereupon the Burrowes having advised, they made choice to be ruled by the
Book of Rates anent the Customs, and consented that Commission should be
granted to the Exchequer to establish the Book of Rates, according as the
prices of Merchandise now rules: In respect whereof, our Sovereign Lord and
Estates of Parliament ordain a Commission to be drawn up to the Exchequer to
the effect foresaid, and extracted thereupon, for establishing the Book of
Rates, according as the prices of Merchandise now rules. And therefore our said
Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, ordaines the Act above mentioned to
stand as a law in manner, and to the effect before rehearsed.

ACT LXVII. ACT IN FAVORS OF MINORS ANENT The duties of the lands comprised
from them. 17. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, with advice of Estates of Parliament, ratifies and
approves the Act of Parliament made in August 1621. cap. 6. in so far as the
famine concerns Minors, and declares, that the true meaning thereof was and
is, that Minors, having right to the legal reversion, should be no further
obliged, than during their minority of 21 years of age, but allanerly for the
annual rent of the sums contained in the comprisings, and that they tyne not
the right of the superplus of the mailes and duties of the lands, so far as
the famine exceeds the said annual rents enduring their said minority.

ACT LXVIII. ACT ORDAINING THE COMMISSIONERS For the Thesaurarie. 17. November
1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord, Considering that His Majesty was lately pleased to
condescend to the humble desire of His Majesty's Estates of Parliament, to
nominate by their advice and approbation, His Officers of Estate, of whom his
Majesty's high Thesaurer is one, And that His Majesty for the present is not
resolved upon the nomination of any particular person, to enjoy the said place,
but has with advice of the said Estates, taken present course to supply the
want of a principal Thesaurer, by a Committee, Therefore His Majesty with
consent of the said Estates, makes, nominates and constitutes, John Earl of
Loudoun, High Chancellor of this Kingdom, Archbald Earl of Argyle, Lord
Campbell and Lorne, William Earl of Glencairne Lord Kilmars, John Lord
Lindesay of Struther, and Sir James Carmichael of that ilk Knight, Thesaurer
Depute, his Majesty's Commissioners to the effect underwritten: And gives and
grants to them or any three of them, the full place and power of His Majesty's
high Thesaurer, Comptroller, Collector and Thesaurer of his Majesty's new
augmentations, with all liberties, privileges, immunities, benefits and
emoluments whatsoever pertaining to the said place of high Treasurer,
Comptroller, Collector and Thesaurer of his Majesty's new augmentations, and
that in as ample manner and quality, as the famine was in the Persons of any of
His Majesty's high Thesaurers, in any time of before: With power to them, or
any three of them, to uplift, gather, and intromet with all and sundry His
Majesty's rents, revenewes, customs, imposts, casualities, commodities,
duties, and others whatsoever, any ways belonging to his Majesty within this
Kingdom, or to his Majesty's dearest Son the Prince, and that of all years
and terms bygone, and yearly in time coming, and with power to them, or any
three of them, with advice of the remanent Commissioners of Exchequer,
contained in his Majesty's Commission under the great Seal, and according to
the tenor thereof, to compone, pass and subscribe signators, gifts,
confirmations, escheats, liferents, remissions, tutories, gifts by forfeiture,
recognition, wards, marriages, relief, non-entresses, legittimations,
presentations, taks, rentals, licenses, dispensations and others dispositions,
writs and securities whatsoever, pertaining to the said Offices, or any of
them, or to the power and privileges thereof, But prejudice always to the
said Sir James Carmichael Thesaurer Depute, of his gifts of the office of
Thesaurary Depute, whole liberties, power and privileges therein contained,
which are holden, as herein expressed, but adding or paring to him in the point
of receiving, and without derogation in any sort to this present act and
commission: And it is declared that the yearly fees and other casualities due
to his Majesty's principal Thesaurer, and especially the sum of four
thousand pounds scots money shall be divided equally amongst the said first
four of the said commissioners by the said Thesaurer Depute, who has right to
his own fee and casualities, by virtue of his gifts granted to him thereupon,
And His Majesty with consent foresaid, ordains the Lords of His Majesty's
Privy Council, Session or Exchequer, to grant and direct letters at the
instance of the said Commissioners, for answering and obeying them, their
chalmerlands, under receivers and officers of all and sundry of His Majesty's
rents, casualities, customs, imposts and duties belonging to the said office,
and that enduring the time of this present Commission which shall endure to the
next Parliament.

ACT LXIX. ACT ANENT RESTITUTION OF HORSE And Arms, to the Owners, out-putters
thereof. 17. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering that diverse
Soldiers, as well foot as horse, who were employed, reiked out and sent forth
with the Armies and Regiments levied during the time of the late troubles,
Having at their going forth and outreiking, received troup-horses, arms,
ammunition, horses, and baggage horses from the heritors of lands and others
who did reik and send them forth, and that the said Soldiers keepers up, and
withholders, or have put away the said horses and arms entrusted to them from
the owners thereof: Therefore Our said Sovereign Lord and Estates of
Parliament, do hereby grant full power and warrant to the Committee appointed
from the Parliament for regulating and settling of the common burdens and debts
of the Kingdom, and to all other Judges ordinair, as well to Burgh as Land
within this Kingdom, within whose bounds any such persons dwell, or can be
found, who have kept or detained either horses or arms. That the said
Judges do forthwith upon complaint of the party, owner of the said horses and
arms, call the receivers and detainers or out-putters of them, before them,
and to discern and ordain them to deliver the said horses and arms, to the
said owners or the prices of same, their receipt of them being lawfully proven:
And with power to the said judges, to do every thing as lawful and necessair,
anent the premises agreeable to Justice, and the Laws of the Country.

ACT LXX. ACT SALVO JURE CUIUSLIBET. 17. November, 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering that in the present
Parliament there are many particular Acts, and Acts of ratifications made in
favors of particular persons, which may be prejudicial to parties having
intrest, and not heard, albeit the meaning of the Estates be at this time, as
it was ever in all preceding Parliaments, That by no particular Act, or Act of
ratification granted to any particular person, any other parties should be
hurt or prejudged of their lawful rights and defenses, competent to them of
the Law: For remeed whereof, it is statute and ordained, that no ratification,
nor other particular Act whatsoever, made in favors of any particular person,
in this present Parliament, be prejudicial to any other parties rights or
defenses competent to them of the law: But that the said particular Acts, and
Acts of Ratification made in favors of particular persons, be always
understood salvo jure cujus^ibet.

ACT LXXI. ACT APPOINTING THE NEXT PARliament to conveen the first Tuesday of
June 1644. 17. November 1641.
OUR Sovereign Lord and Estates of Parliament, Considering, that forsameikle
as by the Act of Parliament made in the Session of this present Parliament
holden at Edinburgh in June 1640. anent trienniall Parliaments: It is statute
and ordained, that before the closure of every Parliament, the day of the next
subsequent Parliament shall be condescended upon. And because this present
Parliament is this day, by the assistance of God Almighty, and his Majesty's
great wisdom, to be brought to an happy conclusion: Therefore his Majesty
and Estates foresaids, appoint and ordain the first Tuesday of the month of
June in Anno 1644. years, to be the day of meeting and conveening of the next
trienniall Parliament, But prejudice always to his Majesty to appoint any
diets of Parliament betwixt and that day, as his Majesty shall think fitting:
And ordaines all the Members of Parliament to meet and conveene at Edinburgh
the said first Tuesday of June 1644. and all other persons interessed, without
any other or farther warning and premonition to be made for that effect:
declaring hereby, that the publication of this Act, with the rest of the Acts
of this present Session, shall be als sufficient for meeting and conveening of
the whole Members of Parliament, as if all former solemnities were used,
whereanent his Majesty and Estates hereby dispenses.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE PRINTED ACTS DONE IN THE SESSION Of the second Parliament of
our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES. etc.
Holden at EDINBURGH upon the eleventh day of June 1640. And in what Leaf and
Page the same is to be found.
1ACT anent the choosing of Robert Lord Burghly, to be President in this Court
and Session of Parliament, in respect of the absence of the Kings Commissioner.
page 3. 2 Act anent the constitution of the Parliament, and all subsequent
Parliaments. page 4. 3 Act anent the choosing of Committees out of each Estate.
page 5. 4 Act anent the ratification of the acts of the assembly. page 6. 5 Act
anent the ratification of the Covenant, and of the Assemblies Supplication, act
of Council, and act of Assembly concerning the Covenant. page 9. 6 Act
Recissorie. page 20. 7 Act for planting of Kirks unprovided with Ministers
through the Patrons default. page 22. 8 Act anent admission of Ministers to
Kirks which belonged to Bishoprics. page ib. 9 Act discharging the going of
Salt-pans and Mils on the Sunday. page 24. 10 Act discharging Salmond fishing
on the Sunday. page ibid. 11 Act against Papists. page 25. 12 Act discharging
Zule vacance, and appointing the Session to sit down the first day of November,
and rise the last of February, and thercafter to sit down the first of June,
and rise the last of July yearly. page 26. 13 Act discharging the Monday
Market in Edinburgh, Jedburgh, Drumfreis, Brechin, and Glasgow. page 27. 14 Act
for taking order with the abuses committed on the Sunday by the confluence of
people for hiring of Shearers. page 28. 15 Act for directing Letters of Horning
and Caption by the Lords of Session against excommunicate Prelates, and all
other excommunicate persons. page 29. 16 Act anent the large Declaration or
Manifesto. page ibid. 17 Act statutarie appointing Parliaments to be holden
once every three year. page 30. 18 Act anent the keepers of the Castles of
Edinburgh, Striviling, and Dumbartane. page ibid. 19 Act anent the Production
of the Registers, and Records of Parliament to the first Session of each
Parliament. page 31. 20. Act discharging all Proxies to be admitted in
Parliament, and that no foreign Noblemen shall have place and voice in
Parliament, unless they have ten thousand marks of land-rent within this
Kingdom. page 32. 21. Act discharging the granting of Protections by the Lords
of Council and Exchequer. page 33. 22. Act anent the Exchequer, declaring the
same, to be only Judges to matters concerning the managing of the Kings rents
and casualities. page 34. 23 Act in favors of those who held their lands of
Archbishops, Bishops, or of their chapters. page 35. 24. Act anent Vassals of
erections, that they be not subject in double payment, nor the Superiors
defrauded of their few duties. page 36. 25. Act appointing all grievances to be
given in plain Parliament. page 37. 26. Act for suppressing the distinction of
spiritual and temporal Lords of Session. page ibid. 27. Act against
liesing-makers, of whatsoever quality, office, place or dignity. page 38. 28.
Act anulling all unlawful and unjust Proclamations made under the pain of
treason, against the disobeyers. page 39. 29 Act explaining the preceding Acts
of Parliament made against Bands and Conventions amongst the Subjects: as also
declaring the Bands and Conventions made and kept since the beginning of the
present troubles to be legal and lawful. page ibid. 30. Act anent the ward
and marriage of these who shall happen to be killed in the defense of the
Religion, and liberties of Kirk and Kingdom. page 40. 31 Act ratifying the act
of the Lords of Session, made for supplying of the absence of the Signet, and
discharging the transporting thereof, or any other Seal in time coming. page
41. 32. Act discharging all custom of Ammunition brought home to the Lieges,
to their own use, for defense of Religion, and liberties of Kirk and Kingdom.
page 43. 33. Act for the Committees of Estates. page ibid. 34. Act anent the
common relief. page 48. 35. Act ordaining Summonds to be direct, and execute
against the persons who are culpable of the crimes and faults, contained in the
Act, to compeare before the next Session of Parliament. page 52. 36. Act in
favors of the Kings Vassals of ward-lands, recommending their prejudice by the
Act anno 1633. to the consideration of the next Parliament, and in the mean
time, while then, suspending the force and execution of that Act. page 53. 37.
Act appointing the fees for the Procuratour, the Clerk and Agent for the Kirk.
page 54. 38 Act ordaining the whole Subjects and Lieges of this Kingdom to
obey, maintain and defend the Conclusions, Acts and constitutions of this
present Session of Parliament, and to subscribe the band appointed for that
effect. page 55. 39. Act declaring the Parliament current and continuing the
same while the nineteenth day of November next. page 59.
A TABLE OF THE PRINTED ACTS WHICH WERE DONE IN THIS Session of the Parliament
which began the 15. of July 1641. and concluded the 17. of November 1641. With
the Acts of continuation of the said Parliament interveening betwixt the last
Session thereof holden in June 1640. and the said 15. day of July 1641.
19. November 1640. 1ACT of continuation of the Parliament from the 19. of
November 1640. to the 14. of January 1641. 61
14. Januarie 1641. 2 Act of continuation of the Parliament to the 13. of
April, 1641. 62
13. April 1641. 3 Act continuing the Parliament to the 25. of May 1641. 64
25. May 1641. 4 Act continuing the Parliament to the 15. of July 1641. 65
18. August 1641. 5 Act containing the Oath ordained to be taken by every
Member of Parliament before they proceed to any act or determination. 67
26. August 1641. 6 Act ratifying the Articles of the Treaty. 68
Ultimo Augusti 1641. 7 Act discharging James Bannatines Patent of pearling,
and wearing thereof. 87
1. September 1641. 8 Act discharging unlawful marriages. 88
2 September 1641. 9 Act anent non-covenanting Patrones, appointing the right
of presentation to their Kirks to pertain to the Presbytery ibid. 10 Act for
freeing of Viccarages provided to Ministers for their stipends of all payment
of taxations. 89
9 September 1641. 11 Act against suspensions for Ministers stipends, duties of
Colleges, Hospitals and Schools. ibid.
10. September 1641. 12 Act for abolishing the monuments of idolatry. 91 13 Act
anent non-communicants, and excommunicate persons. 92 14 Act anent the Bullion.
93
16. September 1641. 15 Act anent the election of the Officers of Estate,
Counselors, and Sessioners. 94
Ultimo Septembris 1641. 16 Act anent the nomination and election of the Lord
Lowdoun to be Chancellor. 95
29 October 1641. 17 Act anent the change of the terms from Whitsunday and
Martinmas to Candlemas and Lammas. ibid.
11 November 1641. 18 Act anent the charges of the Commissioners for the
Barons. 96 19 Act anent the charges of the Commissioners for the Sherifdome of
Sutherland. 98
13. November 1641. 20 Act anent the nomination and election of these Officers
of Estate retained in their places. 99 21 Act anent the nomination and election
of Sir Alexander Gibson younger of Durie to be Clerk Register. 100 22 Act anent
the nomination and election of the Counselors. 101 23 Act anent the
nomination and election of the ordinair and extraordinair Lords of the Session.
102
15. November 1641. 24 Act anent the Commission for the common burdens of the
Kingdom. 103 25 Act of approbation in favors of the Committee of Estates. 110
26 Act for relief of these who have given band for the use of the public.
112 27 Act for receiving of the remainder of the brotherly assistance from the
Parliament of England. 113 28 Act discharging the ganging of Salt-pans, Mills,
fishings, Kills, and other prophanations on the Lords day. 115 29. Act anent
the nomination and election of Sir James Galloway to be Master of Requests.
116 30 Commission for plantation of Kirks. 117
16. November 1641. 31 Commission anent the Articles of the Treaty, referred
to consideration by the Treaty. 123 32 Commission for conserving the articles
of the Treaty. 124 33 Act anent the five Incendiaries and Plotters, with the
Kings declaration thereanent. 126 34 Commission for trying the Incendiaries and
Plotters. 127 35 Act for passing from these who are cited to the Parliament as
unfriends. 130 36 Act anent selling yarne by weight. ib. 37 Act anent linen
cloth and breadth thereof. 131 38 Act discharging the importation of
strong water. ib. 39 Act anent the excise of herring. 132 40 Act anent loyal
packing of Salmond. 133 41 Act dispensing with the Kings rents uplifted by
warrant of the Committee for the public use. 134
16. November 1641. 42 Act discharging advocations for sums within a hundred
pound. 135 43 Act for directing of cocquets within the regality of Saint
Andrews in the Kings name. ib. 44 Act discharging transportation of eggs. 136
45 Act against destroyers of Planting, Parks, and others. ibid. 46 Act
ordaining the pursuer of the thief to be restored to his own goods. 137 47
Act anent coale-hewens. 138 48 Act discharging the mixing of tin with lead.
ibid. 49 Act anent presenting and docquetting of signators, letters, and
others. 139 50 Act anent the election of the President of Parliament. 140 51
Act anent superiority of lands which held of Bishops and their Chapters. ibid.
52 Commission for revising of the Registers. 142 53 Act anent Cocquets and
entries of Ships. 143 54 Act discharging the registration of Comprisings, and
appointing only recording and allowing thereof, and modifying 40. shillings
for both. ib. 55 Act discharging the Lords of the Session to exact twelve
pennies for the pound, and all other exactions imposed upon sentences to be
pronounced by them. 144 56 Act anent the pardon of penal Statutes. 145 57 Act
in favors of Orphans, fatherless children, and others. ibid. 58 Act in
favors of the vassals of ward lands holding of the King and Prince. 146 59 Act
anent the breadth of plaiding. 147 60 Act in favors of the Laicke Patrons of
Provostries, Prebendaries, Chaplainries, and Altarages. ibid. 61 Act
discharging the quotes of Testaments. 149 62 Commission for regulating the
Commissariats. ibid. 63 Act discharging Monopolies. 150 64 Commission for the
Manufactories. ibid. 65 Commission for the Secret Council. 152
17. November 1641. 66 Act discharging the Custom of two and an half on the
hundred, and the impost of four pound on the Tun. 155 67 Act in favors of
Minors, anent the duties of the lands comprised from them. 156 68 Commission
for the Thesaurarie. 157 69 Act anent the restitution of the horse and arms to
the owners out-putters thereof. 158 70 Act Salvo jure cujuslibet. 159 71 Act
appointing the next Parliament to conveene the first Tuesday of June 1644.
ibid.

THE TABLE OF THE UNPRINTED ACTS AND RATIFICATIONS PAST IN This Parliament
which began the last day of August 1639. and did conclude the 17. of November
1641.
1 DEclaration by the Estates of Parliament premitted by them to their acts and
proceedings made in that session of Parliament holden 11. of June 1640. 2 Act
in favors of the Lady Loudoun and her children, 11. of June 1640. 3 Act and
declaration anent the closure of that Session of Parliament 11. of June 1640. 4
Ratification of General Lesleys Commission to be General. 5 Act approving his
proceedings as General, in anno 1639. 6 Ratification of Colonel Hammiltouns
commission to be General of the Artilerie. 7 Ratification of General Major
Baily his commission. 8 Ratification of General Major Munros gift. 9
Ratification of the General Commissars gift. 10 Act against the Keepers of the
Castle of Dumbartan, 11 Act against the Keepers of the Castle of Thrave. 12
Decree of forfeiture against General Ruthven, and others therein contained.
13 Reference in favors of Robert Scot of Dryhoip to the Committee of Estates.
14 Reference Lord of Kinhilt to the Committee of Estates. 15 Reference for
James Arnot to the Committee of Estates. 16 Reference for Master William
Cunnyngham to the Committee of Estates. 17 Protestation by William Dick Provest
of Edinburgh anent the custom of ammunition. 18 Reference in favors of Sir
John Hammiltoun of Reidhouse to the Committee of Estates. 19 Instrument and
protestation for the Queenes-ferrie. 20 Declaration of the Estates anent the
Earl of Glencairne his sitting and voycing in this session of Parliament. 21
Articles for ordering the house of Parliament. 22 Act to the Kings Advocate and
Procutors for the Estate, for raising summonds against the Earl of Montrose,
Lord Naper, Lairds of Keir and Blakhall. 23 Commission for concluding and
subscribing the treaty at London. 24 Supplications Constable of Scotland and
Town of Edinburgh, with the Parliaments deliverance thereupon. 25 Declaration
of the Assembly anent a Band subscribed by some Noblemen, which is now
cancelled. 26 Warrant for the Kings Advocate his in-coming to the Parliament
house. 27 Ratification of the act of Exchequer for relief of these who are
bound for the 100000. marks therein contained. 28 Act in favors of the Lord
of Lochend, for entering of him to his Lands gratis. 29 Act in favors of Sir
William Dik against Lord Aickin. 30 Protestation by the Kings Advocate anent
his place, liberties and privileges. 31 Declaration by the Paraliament anent
the Kings Manifest concerning the Prince Elector Palatine. 32 Act and warrant
for publishing and printing of the Acts made in June 1640. 33 Act and warrant
for causing print his Majesty's Manifest anent the Prince Elector, with the
Parliaments approbation and remonstrance thereupon to the King, with the Kings
answer. 34 Act in favors of the Prince Elector for restraint of Levies and
recrues of Soldiers. 35 Ratification of the profession of Theology in the
Universitie of Glasgow. 36 Commission for the accounts of the three Regiments,
viz. Lord Sinclaire, Munro and Cochrane. 37 Act of approbation and exoneration
in favors of the Lord Loudun. 38 Act of exoneration and approbation Earl of
Rothes. 39 Act of approbation and exoneration Earl of Dumfermling. 40 Act of
exoneration Master Robert Barclay. 41 Act of exoneration Adam Blair. 42 Act of
approbation and exoneration Sir John Smith. 43 Act of approbation and
exoneration Sir Archbald Johnstoun. 44 Act of approbation and exoneration Lord
of Wauchtoun. 45 Act of approbation and exoneration Sheriff of Teviotdail. 46
Act of approbation and exoneration Lord of Riccardtoun Drummond. 47 Act of
approbation and exoneration Master Alexander Wedderburne. 48 Act of approbation
and exoneration Hugh Kennedye. 49 Commission for trial of Helene Moses anent
the murder of her Bainn. 50 Act of approbation and exoneration Master Alexander
Hendersone. 51 Act anent Master Alexander Pitcairne and the Lord of Ogill
Ramsay. 52 Declaration by the Lord Ker concerning the Marquess of Hammiltoun.
53 Act and declaration by the King and Parliament in favors of the Marquess
of Hamiltoun. 54 Exoneration to the Marquis of Hammiltoun anent his keeping and
delivering of the great Seal. 55 Act of exoneration and approbation in favors
of the Lord Amont. 56 Commission for hearing the General Commissars accounts.
57 Act in favors of Bannatyne of Kames, reponing him against the Commissars
decree. 58 Ratification and election of the new Kirk of Kilmarnock. 59
Commission by the King and Parliament to the Committee for trial of the late
incident concerning the Marquis of Hammiltoun, and the Earl of Argyle. 60
Ratification and act in favors of the Schoolmaster of Megle. 61 Commission to
the Lord Almond and his Bailiff anent the trial of John Jervie. 62 Act in
favors of Lieutenant General King. 63 Act and ratification to the Universitie
of Saint Andrews of the rents of the Priorie and Bishopric of Saint Andrews.
64 Act in favors of the Burgh of Dornoch anent the change of their Fair. 65
Act rescinding general Ruthvens forfeiture. 66 Orders of the Parliament
concerning the Irish business, with a warrant to the secret Council to give
instructions to the Commissioners for the remainder of the Treaty. 67 Act in
favors of the Prince Elector Palatine anent ten thousand men to be sent to
Germany. 68 Act and warrant in favors of the Earl of Rothes and others, for
letters of reprisall against the Hamburgers. 69 Commission for trial of the
murder of Isabel Drymmie. 70 Ratification, exoneration and approbation in
favors of the Marquess of Argyle. 71 Warrant for putting Lieutenant Colonel
John Munro to liberty. 72 Warrant to the Earl of Crafford for his
enlargement. 73 Warrant for putting M. John Guthrie to liberty. 74 Warrant to
sir Robert Spottiswood and Sir John Hay for their liberty. 75 Commission for
visitation of the College of Saint Andrews. 76 Act in favors of the Burrows,
ratifying the act of the Committee for the relief of the gilders therein
mentioned. 77 Act in favors of the Burgh of Glasgow anent their liberty to
nominate and elect their Magistrates. 78 Act for re-calling the Marquess of
Hamiltoun and Marquess of Argyle to the Parliament. 79 Ratification in favors
of the Town of Saint Andrews. 80 Act in favors of Alexander Cunnyngham for
four hundred and thirty pounds sterling. 81 Act to the Earl of Montrose, Lord
Naper, Lairds of Keir and Blakhall for their liberation. 82 Act in favors of
Captain William Stewart. 83 Act anent the keeping of the Castle of Edinburgh
to the Earl of Levin. 84 Act in favors of the Earl of Levin for 100000.
marks. 85 Act of approbation and exoneration to the Earl of Levin Lord
General, and sundry other general Officers. 86 Act anent the liberation of
the Earl of Montrose, Lord Naper, L. Keir, L. Blakhall, Sir Robert Spotiswood,
Sir John Hay, and Lieutenant Colonel Water Stewart, with the Act of caution
found by them, containing also a warrant to the Council to take the like
caution of the Incendiaries. 87 Reference to the Council anent the
incarceration of poor people. 88 Act in favors of the Officers of fortune
within the Country, with a reference to the Commission for the common
burdens. 89 Reference in favors of the Lord Forbes to the famine Commission.
90 Act in favors of the Procutors for the Estate, with a reference to the said
Commission. 91 Reference in favors of George Fowls to the Exchequer. 92 Act
anent the pryces of Writts, Seals, and Registers remitted to the Council,
with power to do therein as the King and Parliament might, and their
determination to have toe authority of an Act of Parliament. 93 Reference in
favors of Master Alexander Colvill, and Master James Robertoune Justice
Deputes to the Exchequer. 94 Reference Master Alexander Pitcarne minister to
the Commission for the common burdens. 95 Reference for these soldiers of
fortune who were incarcerate at New Castle to the Commission for the common
burdens. 96 Referene for the General of artillery to the said Commission. 97
Reference for the Earl of Hoome and Countess of Hoome to that Commission. 98
Supplication for the British Subjects remitted to the Kings Majesty. 99
Reference for the Earl of Nithisdaile to the Council. 100 Reference for the
L. of Edzell to the Commission for the common burdens. 101 Reference L. Moynes
contra Glengarie to the Council. 102 Reference in favors of Sir William Dik
to the Exchequer. 103 Reference for the Lord Sinclare to the Commission for the
common burdens. 104 Reference for Sir James Ramsay to the Commission for the
common burdens. 105 Act and Reference in favors of the Earls of Mar and
Linlithgow to the Council, for recompense of their charges and expenses anent
the works contained in their patents for making powder and tanning leather.
106 Supplication L. Blair anent his ward and marriage granted. 107
Supplication L. of Cauldwell anent his ward and marriage granted. 108
Supplication in favors of the Lady Stormonth granted. 109 Supplication L.
Mynto Turnble for his ward and marriage granted. 110 Supplication L. of Cromlix
for his ward and marriage granted. 111 Act and warrant for transporting of John
and Thomas Blaks from Drumfreis to the tolbuith of Edinburgh. 112 Act
discharging the confluence of people to Edinburgh in this time of Parliament
not being members nor having necessar attendance on Parliament, and appoynting
strong guardes to be kept. 113 Ratification in favors of Sir William Scot of
Clarkintoun, of the lands, teinds, and Kirk thereof. 114 Ratification in
favors of the Burgh of Forres of their infeftment. 115 Ratification in favors
of the Lord of Kilbirnie of his infeftments of the Barronnie thereof, and
others therein contained. 116 Ratification in favors of John Hammiltoun of
Boghall of the lands of Boghall, and others therein specified. 117 Ratification
in favors of James Melvil of Hall hill for the lands of Nether-Grange of
Kinghorne, Wester-Mills, and Castle of Bruntiland. 118 Ratification in favors
of Sir John Prestoun of his gift of pension. 119 Ratification in favors of the
Earl of Lindsay of the Signator granted by the King to him of the lands,
offices, and others therein contained, with the precept and seasing to follow
thereupon. 120 Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Kirkcudbright. 121
Ratification in favors of James Sinclare of Skallaway. 122 Ratification in
favors of William Maxwell of Kirk-house. 123 Ratification in favors of the
Lord of Grenok. 124 Act in favors of the Burgh of Lawder, appoynting a Fair
therein yearly, 22. of July. 125 Act in favors of the town of Jedburgh for
two Faires yearly. 126 Ratification in favors of Mart Stewart of her letters
of rehabilitation. 127 Ratification in favors of Thomas Forbes of Watertoun.
128 Ratification in favors of the Earl of Hoome of his infeftment of the
Barronie of Dunce. 129 Ratification in favors of the Lord of Tofts for the
lands of Easter and Wester plew-lands. 130 Ratification in favors of Sir
Andrew Skene for the Barronie of Auchtertuill. 131 Ratification in favors of
Sir Thomas Nicolson of the Barronie of Carnok. 132 Ratification in favors of
Master John Skene of the Baronnie of Halyiars. 133 Act in favors of the
Weavers freemen Burgesses of Edinburgh. 134 Ratification in favors of the
Town of Edinburgh anent the augmentation of their Ministers stipends out of
the house-meales thereof. 135 Ratification in favors of Heriots hospital. 136
Ratification in favors of the Lord General Leslie Earl of Levin for the
Baronnie of Balgonie and others therein contained. 137 Ratification in favors
of Master James Baird for the lands of Little Fiddes. 138 Ratification in
favors of David Carnagie of Ethie of the Baronnie of Craig-ethie. 139
Ratification in favors of Robert Pringle, and Master John Pringle his son for
the lands of Templehall, teinds thereof, and lands of Woodheid. 140
Ratification in favors of the Masons and Wrights of Edinburgh. 141
Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Dumbartane, anent their Fayres and
Markets. 142 Ratification in favors of the lord of Swintoun anent the
Baronnies of Swintoun and Cranshaws, teinds thereof, and patronage of the Kirk
of Cranshaws. 143 Ratification in favors of the Lord Forrester for
Torwoodheid. 144 Ratification in favors of the Lord of Glenbervie for the
lands and barronie thereof. 145 Ratification in favors of the Burgh of
Renfrew. 146 Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Montrose. 147 Ratification
in favors of the Burgh of Dundie. 148 Two Ratification in favors of the Earl
of Lothian, of his rights and infeftments of the lands and others therein
contained. 149 Ratification in favors of the Lord of Colingtoun, anent the
lands, teinds, and barronie of Colingtoun. 150 Ratification in favors of John
Arnot of Wodmylne, of his right thereof. 151 Act in favors of the house and
family of Ruthven of Bandeane to their surname of Ruthven. 152 Ratification in
favors of the burgh of Linlithgow. 153 Ratification of the decree arbitrall
given by the Kings Majesty betwixt the Earl of Buckleugh and Francis Stewart.
154 Ratification in favors of John Moodie of his right of some tenements in
Leith 155 Ratification of the gift granted by the Kings Majesty to the
Ministers at haly-rudehouse of the impost of all wines vented in the
Cannongate. 156 Ratification in favors of John Earl of Traquhair of his right
of the lands and others therein contained. 157 Ratification in favors of
Master James Lawson of a tak of the teinds of the Parochins of Badreule. 158
Ratification in favors of the sheriff of Teviotdaill for the Kirk lands of
Cavers. 159 Ratification in favors of the lord of Frendrant of the two
charters and infeftments therein contained, of the lands and Baronnie of
Frendrant and others therein specified, containing a declaration by the King
and Parliament in his favors. 160 Ratification in favors of Sir John Smith of
his rights of his lands in Crawmond. 161 Ratification in favors of Master
James Scot of his infeftments of the lands of Bonytoun. 162 Act anent the
erection of the Kirk of Elie. 163 Act for establishing a particular Register of
seasings for the shire of Argyle at Innerara. 164 Ratification and act anent
the erection of the Kirk of Anstruther wester. 165 Act anent the dis-uniting of
the Kirk of Dennie from Falkirk. 166 Ratification in favors of the Burgh of
Glasgow, of their infeftment thereof. 167 Ratification in favors of John
Dikson of his infeftments and rights of the lands of Hartrie and Kilbocho, with
the patronage of the Kirk and tak of the teinds thereof, and annuity of the
samine. 168 Ratification in favors of the Earl Marshall of his tak of the
customs of Aberdene and Bamff. 169 Ratification in favors of the old and new
colleges of Aberdene, of the mortification to them, of the rents of the
Bishopric thereof. 170 Ratification in favors of Master Peter Ewat of the tak
of the abbacie of Croceragnell. 171 Ratification in favors of the university
of Glasgow, of the rents of the Bishopric of Galloway. 172 Ratification in
favors of Sir John Seytoun of his pension of two hundred pound stirling. 173
Ratification in favors of the schoolmasters at Auchtertuill of the few duty
thereof. 174 Ratification in favors of the Minister at the North Kirk of
Leith, of the mortification to them of the victual therein mentioned. 175 Act
of erection of the Kirk of Carrestoun in favors of the lord of Balnamoone.
176 Ratification of the mortification of the teinds of Over-carestoun and
Pitforkie, etc. 177 Ratification to Master Thomas Michell of his gift of the
rents of the Bishopric of Rosse, unpayed cropts, 1638.1639.1640. and 1641. 178
Ratification in favors of the Earl of Dumfermling of the patronage of the
Kirks of May and Dyke. 179 Ratification in favors of the Earl of Mortoun
anent Dalkeith, Lugtoun, and Sheriff-hall. 180 Ratification in favors of the
Earl of Dumfermling of his tak of the Lordship thereof. 181 Ratification to
John Semple of his infeftment of the Corn Milne therein mentioned. 182
Commission to the Earls of Murray and Dumfermling, and the Lord of Innes,
etc. for keeping of the water of Spey. 183 Ratification in favors of the Earl
of Kinghorne of the right of his lands within the territory of Glames, and
others therein contained. 184 Ratification to the Town of Muscleburgh of their
infeftment granted by the Kings Majesty. 185 Ratification in favors of the
Burgh of Glasgow, of the new gift and mortification granted to them by the
Kings Majesty. 186 Ratification in favors of Patrik Ruthven, brother to the
sometime Earl of Gowrie, ratifying the signator and gift granted to him by the
Kings Majesty. 187 Ratification in favors of Robert Leslie of his tak of the
Bishopric of Orkney. 188 Ratification in favors of the Minister of Culros of
his gift and mortification therein mentioned. 189 Ratification and Commission
in favors of the Burgh of Pearth, anent the Bridge thereof, and of his
Majesty's new gift granted to them thereanent. 190 Ratification in favors of
the Burgh of Whithorne. 191 Ratification to the Lord Amont of his rights of the
Baronie of Falkirk and others. 192 Ratification to Master Laurence Scot of his
rights of the lands of Bavelaw. 193 Ratification in favors of the Earl of
Hoome of the contract and disposition to him of the living and estate of Hoome.
194 Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Dumbar. 195 Ratification to the
Marquess of Hammiltoun of his infeftment of the Baronie of Monkland, and
patronage of the Kirks of Calder and Monkland. 196 Ratification in favors of
the Town of Dunkeld. 197 Ratification in favors of James Maxwell and the
Lord of Barnes anent the light upon the May. 198 Ratification to the Earl of
Dalhoussie of his tak of the teind sheaves of Abbots-hall. 199 Ratification in
favors of Alexander Gordoun of Earlestoun anent the right of his lands therein
specified. 200 Ratification to the Earl of Rothes of his pension of ten
thousand pound Scots yearly. 201 Ratification to the Chirurgions and Barbers of
Edinburgh of their liberties. 202 Ratification in favors of the Burgh of
Pebles, 203 Ratification to the L. of Dun of the two taks set to him of the
Customs of Montrose. 204 Act in favors of the Hat-makers of Edinburgh, anent
the ^^bertie of an Overseer or Quartermaster. 205 Ratification to John Forbes
of Leslie of his decree against the Lord of Haddo. 206 Ratification to the
Lord Fraser of his decree against the Lord of Haddo. 207 Ratification of the
Sheriff-clerkship of Stirling, in favors of John Williamson, and Master David
Forrester. 208 Ratification in favors of the Burgh of Aberdene, of the gift
granted to them of the Kirk of Saint Nicolas teinds and patronage thereof. 209
Ratification of the decree dis-uniting Kirkmabrek and Kirkdail from Anveth.
210 Ratification to the Lord of Keir of his tak of the teinds therein
specified. 211 Ratification to Master William Wardlaw of the gift of
chalmerlanrie therein contained. 212 Ratification to William Gordoun of
Kirkconnell of his right of the lands of Drumconkrie. 213 Ratification to the
Minister at Donoone of the mortification of twelve hundred marks yearly. 214
Ratification to the Duke of Lennox of his gift and right of the temporalitie of
the Bishopric of Glasgow, Baronie and Regalitie thereof. 215 Ratification in
favors of the Minister of Dornoch of the gift of eight hundred marks yearly
out of the rents of the Bishopric of Caithnes. 216 Ratification in favors of
the Earl of Findlater of the Signatour granted to him of the office of
Bayliarie of the Baronie of Strathzlay. 217 Ratification in favors of the
Burgh of Aberdene, of their rights and infeftments. 218 Ratification of the
mortification of 1000. marks to the Minister at Glenluce, and 200 marks to the
Schoolmaster thereat. 219 Ratification to John Malcome of the gift of
Chalmerlanrie of the Stewartrie of Fife. 220 Ratification in favors of
Colonel John Leslie of his infeftment of the Myres. 221 Act anent the election
of the Hospital of the Baronie of Barhalgardie. 222 Ratification in favors of
Alexander Maxwel of the lands of Dechmont. 223 Ratification to master Hary
Chaip of his infeftment of the lands of Ormestoun. 224 Ratification in favors
of the Town of Edinburgh of the gift granted to them of the patronage of the
Kirks of Halyrudhouse and North Leith. 225 Ratification in favors of the Lord
of Balfore of his infeftment of the teinds of Kilrinnie and others therein
contained. 226 Ratification in favors of John Innes of Lenchars, of his gift
of the bailliarie of Spynie and constabularie of the Castle thereof. 227
Ratification to the minister of Dunkell of the Kings gift of a thousand Marks
yearly. 228 Ratification in favors of James Gordoun of his infeftment of the
lands of Seatoun. 229 Ratification in favors of the Parochioners of Markinsche
of a decree before the Commissioners for surrenders and teinds. 230
Ratification in favors of the L. of Kinhalt of the lands of Drummoir, and
patronage of Kirkmadine. 231 Ratification in favors of the burgh of
Rutherglen. 232 Ratification to Colonel Hammiltoun of his gift to be general
of the Artillery and gift of pension. 233 Ratification to the beidmen of the
Magdalene chapel of the mortification to them of an hundred and nine pounds
sterling yearly out of the Bishopric of Dunkell. 234 Ratification to the Earl
of Tullibardine of his rights and infeftments of the lands therein contained.
235 Ratification to Master Alexander Wedderburne of his tak of the customs of
Dundie. 236 Ratification in favors of Sir William Dik of his right and
infeftment of the lands and teinds of the Baronnie of Northbervik. 237
Ratification to Sir William Dik of his tak of the viccarage, teinds, salmond,
herring, and other fish teind betwixt Tyne and Skaitraw. 238 Ratification to
the L. of Wedderburne of his tak of the teind sheaves of kello, etc. 239
Ratification of the contract betwixt the Kings Majesty and the Earl Marshall,
anent the woodset of the Lordship of Deire. 240. Act anent the erection of the
Kirk of Longsyd. 241 Ratification in favors of the lord of Panmure of his
infeftment of the Lordship of Briechen and Navar, and others therein contained.
242 Ratification in favors of the Earl of Kinnoull of his infeftment of the
Baronnie of Duplin with a dissolution. 243 Ratification in favors of the Earl
of Kinnoull of his infeftment of the Baronnie of Kinfawms. 244 Ratification to
the Earl of Kinnoull of a tak set by the Kings Majesty to him of the teinds of
Consland. 245 Ratification in favors of the Earl of Sea-forth, of his
Baronnie of the Jews, with a dissolution. 246 Ratification in favors of James
Pierson of his infeftment of the lands of Auchtermeggets. 247 Ratification in
favors of Sir John Hammiltoun of Orbestoun knight Justice Clerk of the lands
of Orbestoun, and others therein contained. 248 Ratification in favors of
William Gray of his infeftment of the Baronnies of Fouls and Forgund, and of
the patent of honor, in favors of William master of Gray his son. 249
Commission to the Earl of Montrose, and Lord of Panmure of the Justiciarie of
the fishings of the waters of North and South-esks. 250 Ratification of an
Infeftment in favors of the town of Cromarty. 251 Ratification of an
Infeftment in favors of the town of Innernes. 252 Ratification of an
Infeftment in favors of the town of Rosmarkie. 253 Ratification in favors of
the town of Breichen of their infeftment with a novo damus. 254 Ratification
in favors of the town of Lanerk of their infeftment. 255 Reference in favors
of the Parishioners of Bers to the Commission for plantation of Kirkes. 256
Ratification in favors of the Lord Couper of his lands of Cassiltown and
Englishtown, and others therein contained. 257. Act in favors of the burgh of
Selkirk, anent a Fair to be holden therein yearly on the fourth of July. 258
Ratification in favors of Sir James Balfoure of his infeftment of the Baronnie
of Kinnaird. 259 Ratification in favors of the lord of pluscardine of his
infeftment of the lands of pluscardine, and others therein contained. 260
Ratification of the infeftment of the erection of the Lordship of Cardrose. 261
Ratification in favors of Sir William Stewart younger of Gaimtullie of his
infeftment of the lands of Strabrand. 262 Ratification in favors of the L. of
Nidrie, of his infeftment of the lands of Nidrie, marshall and others therein
contained. 263 Ratification in favors of William Seytoun of Grange of his gift
of general postmaster of Scotland, containing an exception in favors of the
burghes of Bruntiland and Kinghorne. 264 Ratification in favors of the town of
Weik of their infeftment, with a declaration, declaring the said town to be the
head burgh of the sheriffedome of Caithnes. 265 Commission to the Earl of
Erroll anent the justiciarie of the fishings upon the water of Ithane. 266
Ratification in favors of the town of Bruntiland, of an act of exchequer,
with a declaration that Sir James Melvill his assuming of the style of
Bruntiland shall no ways be prejudicial to their liberties. 267 Ratification
in favors of the Earl of Erroll of a pension granted to him by the Kings
Majesty. 268 Ratification in favors of the Earl of Kinoull, of his right of
the lands of Erroll. 269 Ratification of the immutuall band amongst the
heritours adjacent the Pow of Inchaiffray. 270 Ratification in favors of
William Gray of Pittindrum, and William Master of Gray his son, of a tak set by
the Kings Majesty to them of the teinds of their lands, lying within the
Parochin of Fowls, and others therein contained. 271 Ratification in favors
of the minister of Brechin, 272 Ratification in favors of the Minister of
Navar. 273 Ratification in favors of Sir Alexander Gibson of Durie, one of the
Senators of the College of justice. 274 Ratification in favors of the Master
John Cant. 275 Ratification in favors of the Fewars of Kylismure. 276
Ratification in favors of the James Dumbar. 277 Ratification in favors of the
Lord Lorne. 278 Two ratifications in favors of the Lord Ackine. 279 Two
ratifications in favors of Sir James Macgill, of Cranstoun Riddle Knight, one
of the Senators of the College of Justice. 280 Two Ratifications in favors of
Sir James Scot of Rossie. 281 Ratification in favors of the Earl of
Eglintoun. 282 Ratification in favors of the Earl of Queensberry. 283
Ratification in favors of the rights of the Canongate. 284 Ratification in
favors of my Lord Advocate. 285 Ratification in favors of Somervell of Drum.
286 Ratification in favors of Robert Pringle of Stichell. 287 Ratification in
favors of John Carstairs. 288 Ratification in favors of the Lord of
Houstoun. 289 Ratification in favors of Doctor Chalmers. 290 Ratification in
favors of James Maxwell of Innerweek. 291 Ratification in favors of the Earl
of Lawderdaill. 292 Ratification in favors of Master William Cochrane of
Cowdoun. 293 Ratification in favors of the Town of Irving. 294 Ratification
in favors of the Lord of Dalmahoy. 295 Ratification in favors of the South
Queensferrie. 296 Ratification in favors of Sir Richard Grahame. 297
Ratification in favors of William Scot and his brethren. 298 Protestation
Earl of Sutherland anent his place. 299 Protestation Lord Borthwik anent his
place. 300 Protestation L. of Cambo, as Commissioner for the Sherifdome of
Fife. 301 Protestation L. of Cesnok in name of the whole Barons. 302
Protestation L. of Wedderburne, as Commissioner for the Sherifdome of Bervik.
303 Commission and warrant by the King and Parliament to the Exchequer for
regulating the Book of Rates. 304 Warrant by the King and Parliament to the
Council to dis-band the companies yet on foot, and to provide for moneys for
that effect 305 Protestation Town of Kinghorne and Robert Hepburne for the
Earl of Dumfermling against Halhils Ratification. 306 Protestation for the
Kings Veallers against James Sinclars Ratification. 307 Protestation Town of
Renfrew against the Lord of Grenocks Ratification. 308 Protestation Wrights of
the Cannongate against the Wrights of Edinburgh their Ratification. 309
Protestation Earl of Argyle against the Ratification for the town of
Dumbartan. 310 Protestation Town of Glasgow against the same Ratification. 311
Protestation Town of Glasgow against the Ratification for the Burgh of Renfrew.
312 Protestation Town of Renfrew against the Ratifications of the Burgh of
Glasgow. 313 Protestation Town of Dumbartan against the Ratifications of the
said Burgh of Glasgow. 314 Protestation L. Dun against the Ratification of the
Town of Montrose. 315 Protestation L. of Houstoun against the Ratification of
Renfrew. 316 Protestation L. of New-warke against the Ratification of Renfrew.
317 Protestation Marquess of Hammiltoun against the Ratification of the Town
of Linlithgow. 318 Protestations Earls of Buckleugh and Hadingtoun, and
Bayliffe of Lochend, against the Ratification in favors of Francis Stuart. 319
Protestation Town of Pebles against the Ratification of the Earl of Traquair.
320 Protestation Lord Amond against the Act for the Kirk of Denny. 321
Protestation L. of Minto against the Ratification of the Town of Glasgow. 322
Protestation Town of Renfrew against the Ratification in favors of the L. of
Houstoun. 323 Protestation Kirk of Anster against the Ratification of the Kirk
of Kilrinnie. 324 Protestation Sir William Dik, and the whole fishers against
the Ratification in favors of the L. Aickine. 325 Protestation Town of
Edinburgh against the Ratification in favors of the Wrights of the Canongate.
326 Protestation Town of Edinburgh against Robert Lesleys ratification. 327
Protestation Earl of Galloway against the Ratification in favors of the
Universitie of Glasgow. 328 Protestation Earl of Pearth against the Town of
Newburgh. 329 Protestation and declaration Earl of Dumfermling against the
Ratification for the Queenes-ferrie. 330 Protestation Town of Air against the
Town of Irvings Ratification. 331 Protestation for (...) Hoome against John
Carstairs Ratification. 332 Protestation Town of Brechin against the act of
erection of the kirk of Carrestoun. 333 Protestation Earl of Lauderdail
against the Town of Muscleburghs Ratification. 334 Protestation and
declaration Earl of Kinnoull contra Patrik Ruthvens Ratification. 335
Protestation Town of Edinburgh against the act in favors of the Hat-makers.
336 Protestation L. of Haddo against the Ratifications in favors of the L.
Fraser, and L. Lesley, and their protestation in the contrair. 337 Protestation
Lord Lesley for the shire against the Town of Aberdenes Ratification of their
infeftment. 338 Protestation Lord Maitland against the Earl of Hooms
ratification. 339 Protestation Lord Yester against the ratification of the
Town of Pebles. 340 Protestation and declaration by the King and Parliament in
favors of the Procutor and agent for the Kirk for their fees against the
Ratification in favors of the Duke of Lennox of his right to the Bishopric of
Glasgow. 341 Protestation Marquis of Hammiltoun against the Duke of Lennox
Ratification. 342 Protestation College of Glasgow against the Town of Glasgows
Ratification. 343 Protestation Earl of Lanerk for Robert Lesley against the
Ratification of the gifts of the Bishops rents of Orknay, with his Majesty's
declaration abiding by the gift of Robert Lesley, as being first done, and
preferring the samine to all other gifts. 344 Protestation L. Giffan against
the Ratification in favors of the town of Glasgow, of the Bishopric of
Galloway, and their gift thereof. 345 Protestation Earl of Murray against Innes
of Leuchars Ratification. 346 Protestation Town of Glasgow against the Town of
Rutherglens Ratification. 347 Protest. L. of Balymayne against the L. of
Panmures Ratification. 348 Protestation Earl of Argyle against the Earl of
Seaforths Ratification of the Jews. 349 Protestation Earl of Sutherland
against that Ratification. 350 Protestation Marquess of Hamiltoun against the
Town of Lanerks Ratification. 351 Protestation and declaration Town of
Dumbartan against Renfrew their Ratification. 352 Protestation and declaration
Renfrew against the Town of Dumbartan their Ratification. 353 Protest. L. of
Lawers against the Earl of Tullibardans Ratification 354 Protestation Earl of
Seaforth against the Ratification of the town of Weik. 355 Protestation Earl
of Southesk against the Ratification in favors of the Minister of Brechin,
with the Commissioners of Brechins protestation in the contrary. 356
Protestation Alexander Urchart against the Ratification in favors of the Town
of Cromartie. 357 Protestation Marquis of Hammiltoun against the Ratification
in favors of the Town of Glasgow. 358 Protestation Lord Yester against the
Ratification in favors of the Earl of Kinnoul. 359 Protestation Earl Marshall
against the Ratification in favors of the Earl of Kinnoull. 360 Protestation
in favors of the Earl of Erroll.
FINIS.

