C2 R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Discharging the Importing of Foreign Linen and Woolen Cloth,
Gold and Silver Thread, etc.
CHARLES by the grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith,
To (...) Macers of Our Privy Council, Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that
part, conjunctly and severally, especially constitute Greeting:
Forasmuch as the Lords of Our Privy Council, having for increase of Money, and
improvement of the Manufactures of this Kingdom, appointed a Committee, who
with advice of the Merchants, and other Persons experienced in these Affairs,
have agreed upon several Conclusions, which are with all possible convenience
and expedition, to be formed into a mature and digested Proclamation, for
Regulation of the Manufacture and Trade of this Kingdom: But because several
Merchants may either by mistake, or upon a sinister design, give order for
Importing of these Goods which are Prohibited; Therefore to prevent all
inconveniences which may arise to this Our Ancient Kingdom, by the Import of
those Commodities, which are either to be debarred, as superfluous in
themselves, or supplied by Domestic Manufactures, or private Industry of Our
own Subjects, and to make the Importers thereof inexcusible; We with Advice of
Our Privy Council, do hereby discharge the Importation of all Silver and Gold
Thread, Silver and Gold Lace, Fringes, or Tracing, all Buttons of Gold and
Silver Thread, all manner of Stuffs, or Ribbons in which there is any Gold or
Silver Thread, all Philagram Work: as also, all Foreign Holland-Linen,
Cambrick, Lawn, Dornick, Damask, Tyking, Bousten, or Dametry, Tufted or Striped
Holland, Callico, Musline, Selesia and East India Linen, and all Clothes, made
of Linen or Cotton: As also all Foreign Clothes and Stuffs whatsoever, made of
VVooll-Yarn, or Wool and Lint: all Foreign Silk, and VVoolen Stockings: all
Foreign Laces made of Silk, Grimp or Thread, and all manner of Laces and Point
of any sort of Colors; all Foreign made Gloves, Shoes, Boots and Slippers;
and do hereby discharge all Merchants and others whatsoever, to Import into
this Kingdom any of the foresaid Commodies, after the Date hereof; excepting
only such as can be made appear upon Oath, to have been ordered by preceding
Commissions, and Shipped before the 10th. of March Instant; which time they
have to recall their Commissions, if any such have been given; with
certification that all such Goods which shall be Imported, shall be burnt and
destroyed and the Importers and Ressetters shall be fined in the value of the
Goods so Imported; and that if any Taxmen of the Customs, Collectors or Waiters
shall connive at the inbringing thereof, they shall be likewise punished, by
payment of the value of the Goods Imported, and by being removed from all
charge relating to Our Customs, or any Employments depending thereupon. And We
Ordain these Presents to be Printed and Published at the Market Cross of
Edinburgh, that none pretend ignorance.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the first day of March,One thousand six
hundred eighty and one, And in the three and th^rtieth Year of Our Reign. Per
actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. PAT.MENZIES. Cl. Sti. Concilij.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to his most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1681. And Reprinted at LONDON for S. J.


