G. King invt. et Sculp.



The Anatomist: OR, The Sham Doctor. Written by Mr. Ravenscroft. WITH The loves
of Mars and Venus. A Play Set to MUSIC. Written by Mr. Motteux. As they are
Acted together at the New Theater, in Little Lincolns-Inn-Fields.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by R. Baldwin, near the Oxford Arms in
Warwick lane. 1697.

TO Thomas Ravenscroft, Esquire; Late High Sheriff of Flintshire.
SIR,
THo the Stars are placed at so great a distance from us, yet we behold their
Light; and those that shine most bright are most admired. So Merit and Virtue
dart their Influence from afar: You seem one of the first Magnitude. Shrewsbury
is the Orb in which you are fixed; yet tho your Person is circumscribed there,
your Virtues are diffusive through all Counties: There they enjoy your Person, and
here we admire your Virtues. Fame represents you to us so qualified with all
the Ornaments* of a Gentleman, that you seem a new addition of Honor to your
Family, and rather give Credit to the Name, than receive a Luster from it: And
yet it is so Ancient, that when William the Conqueror came into England, one of
his Nobles Married a Ravenscroft: He Married, it is said, ( Ex perantiquissima
Ravenscroftorum Familia) out of the most, or very ancient Family of the
Ravenscroft's. From thence, Sir, you are descended. I boast the same; but wish
I could boast the same Virtues too, that make you Eminent, and a Glory to the
Name, your prudent government of your self your Generosity, your Bounty, your
Affability, and above all, your Principles of Honor and Loyalty. Interest
sways you not, nor gives a Byas to your Actions: They all aim at Virtue, and
there you nobly win the Game. Distress makes you not slight your Friend nor
swerve from being Just.

But while I am speaking truth of you, I may seem to flatter my self, that bear
your Name; therefore I will not proceed to enumerate your Praises, lest it
should be thought I arrogate to my self.

This humble piece, which I dedicate to you, is the most trivial of any that
have past my hands: Yet it has stood the Test of the Stage, with great success:
But now it launches into the world in Print, it wants the support of some
eminent person to protect it. Therefore, Sir, I prefix your name, to be its
Refuge and Defense. If your Cand our will pardon its faults and imperfections,
the world will then by your example favorably receive and cherish it, if not
for its own merits, at least for yours, which command all Tongues to praise
you, and all, Hearts to Love you. With this, I dedicate and devote my self to
your Friendship and Service, hoping that a future Intimacy and farther
Acquaintance, may establish me in your favor, and give me better opportunities
to show how much, and how entirely* I esteem a person of your Worth and
Character.

SIR, Your Admirer, and Most Humble Servant, Edward Ravenscroft.

Prologue to Her Royal Highness. Spoken by Mrs. Barry.
Written by Mr. Motteux.
MOre blessed than Day, be this auspicious Night!
W'hen with Your Presence we indulge our Sight.
Our solitary Stage no longer rieves:
The Sight of Princes still from Fate reprieves.
So, when the glorious Ev'ning-Star does rise,
Her glittering Train attends, and fills the circling Skies.
Thus we at need on Heaven and You depend:
Our Wishes rise, and the kind Beams descend.
Oh! that we here could often 'ner thus be blessed!
But mighty Joys too seldom are possessed.
With gloomy Looks we did your Absence mourn,
And only lived in hopes of your Return.
In pity grant our Sports one kindly Ray!
We by your Presence live, and by your Smiles the Play.
This fears no Censure; for, while you're in View,
What can Spectators see or like but You?
Seem but to like, and their Applause we'll boast,
For sure to see You pleased is what will please them most.
Prologue spoken by Mr. Betterton.
Written by Mr Motteux.
To day expect no Pageant Decoration,
This Lord May'rs Show began the Reformation:
Yet is our Entertainment odd and new;
We Have in our Show the First of Cuckolds too:
And what we call a Masque some will allow
To be an Op'ra, as the World goes now.
So is your poisoning Quack miscalled a Doctor,
And your worst Mimick calls himself an Actor.
So your dull Scribbler (to our Cost we know it)
Writes a damned Play, and is misnam'd a Poet.
Once Song and Dance could buoy up want of Thinking,
But now those Bladders cannot prevent its Sinking:
Plays grow so heavy, that those helps are vain;
Three times they sink, and never rise again.
Well, if our Neighbors the Precedence claim,
For good dull Stuff we'll not dispute with them.
Our Medley is perhaps as much too light,
But let it pass -- We don't take Money yet by weight.
By Sympathy, 't should please the Beaux, I know,
For in all things an Op'ra's like a Beau.
Both Beau and Op'ra on the Stage are seen;
Both odd in Dress, and shifting still the Scene;
Each dances, sings, and moves like a Machine.
To be admired, it is at a vast Expense;
It loves soft words, but cares not much for sense;
For by its Nature 'twas design'd' for show;
Why, it is an Op'ra but to dress a Beau.
But one unlucky difference stands between;
Op'ra's are paid, but Beaux pay to be seen,
(Those who don't come to sharp an Act I mean.)
For your own sakes, we beg Applause of you;
Since 'twill revenge, you on the Scribbling Crew.
For, if this takes, strait cries each senceless Elf,
Dem-me, I Would write as well as this my self.
With that, he writes a things which we refuse,
Then, wondering how we durst affront his Muse,
Strait in a huff he gives it to other House;
Who either slight it, or 'twill be its Lot
To get as much as their last Op'ra got,
Epilogue spoken by Mr. Bowen.
Written by Mr Motteux.
GOod People! save the Body of our Play,
From those who to dissect it Yonder stay,
Like Surgeons on an Execution day.
Even e're it dies they will mawl it, I m afraid;
And you would thinkt hard, like me, in such a dread,
To be dissected, e're you're hanged, and dead.
The fear of this our trembling Scribbler's kills;
I dare say they have no need to take my Pills.
Pray spare 'em: Learn of Vulcan to forgive;
Or else, egad, few Plays or Wives will live.
Even he, methinks, too late his wrath did smother,
Here, Wives and Husbands keep not such a pother,
But fairly strive to out-Cuckold one another.
Why, should all dye that follow the Occupation,
Oonds! 'twere the way to cut off half the Nation.
Besides, Horns are not seen; should they appear,
Gadsooks, yon Place would even outhorn Horn-Fair.
You Would see your Surly Dons toss their Bull's Feathers,
And your tame poor Contented bleat like Weathers.
Lewd rakish Husbands butt with Goatish Horns,
And half-made Cuckolds with an Unicorn's.
Now as all have to Cuckoldry a Call,
So will the Curse of scribbling on you fall;
'E gad these Times make Poets of us all.
Then do not damn your Brothers of the quill;
To be revenged, there is hope you will write as ill.
For nere were seen more Scribes, yet less good writing,
As there nere were more Soldiers, yet less Fighting.
Both can do nothing if they want supplies.
Then aid us; and our League its neighboring Foes defies;
Tho they brib d lately one of our Allies.
Sure you would not have us, for want of due pittance,
Like Nicompoops sneak to them for admittance.
No; propt by you our fears and dangers cease,
Here firm, tho Wealth decay, and Foes increase,
We'll bravely tug for Liberty and Peace.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE
Old Mr Gerald, Mr Bright Young Mr Gerald, Mr Hodgson The Doctor, Mr Underhill
Wife to the Doctor, Mrs. Leigh Mrs Angelica, their Daughter, Mrs Bowman
Beatrice, the Maid, Mrs Lawson Martin, Servant to Old Gerald, Mr. T. Harris
Crispin, the Sham Doctor, Servant to Young Gerald, Mr Bowen Simon, a Country
fellow, Mr. Trout Waiting Woman, Mrs Robinson
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter before the Curtain, Angelica, Beatrice. Ang. IS my Mother ready, is she
coming to hear the Music?


Beat. Yes Madam, and is extremely pleased; she loves Music wonderfully.


Ang. So do I Beatrice; we are much beholden to my singing Master.


Beat. Yes Madam! But you are more beholden to your Lover, young Mr. Gerald.


Ang. How so!


Beat. You know he has left the University for your sake, and has been this
month in Town, waiting opportunities to see you: He brought with him some words
of his own composing to entertain you* they are set by your own Master: By this
means he hopes to get admittance to discourse you, and breath his Love
Ejaculations in your Ear.


Ang. How can that be? He is known both by my Father and Mother.


Beat. No matter for that; he is in disguise, and sits amongst the Instrumental
Music as one of them.


Ang. How shall I know him?


Beat. By his Eye, as you do a Pheasant, he will be looking on you all the while.


Ang. But how will he come to speak to me?


Beat. Trust that to chance, at least it will be a pleasure to see one another:
It is a delight to Lovers to steal looks, tho it be at Church.


Ang. Sure Love and Devotion are near a kin, they are each bred in the Soul,
and Music is the food of both.


Beat. Here comes your Father and Mother.


Enter Doctor and Wife. Wife. Come Husband, stay and hear the Music, my
Daughter's Master will take it ill else, it was provided for the Playhouse,
and he has brought 'em all here to practice it over in form: You Will have time
enough to visit your Patients.


Doct. Let 'em begin presently then, for time is precious to men of business.


Wife. The Music strikes up already. Sit down, Husband, Daughter, and
Beatrice, take you your places over against us.


They all sit down, and the first Musical Entertainment begins. After that they
rise and speak. Doct. Well, now my time is out, I must be gone.


Wife. This is not all: This is but the Prologue to what follows; you must hear
the rest.


Doct. I must go visit a Nobleman that is my Patient just now, but I Will return
anon: In the mean time take all the performers in to Breakfast, and treat 'em
with some bottles of Wine.


Wife. By that time you will come again.


Doct. Ay, my dear Wife, farewell.


Doct. Exit. Wife. Gentlemen, pray all walk into the next Room, and take part
of a small Entertainment. Come Daughter.


Exeunt Wife, Ang. and Performers. Enter Crispin. Crisp. Beatrice, tell Mrs.
Angelica my Master would fain come too, but dares not, for fear he should be
known to be in Town, Besides, he and I have some business, but we'll be here
again anon.


Beat. Well, well, get you gone Crispin. I am called.


Exeunt severally. SCENE II.
Enter Old Gerald, and Martin. Mar. You are resolved Sir, to Marry you say?


O. Ger. I am; and to that end, I have sent my Son to the University, to mind
his Study, and be out of the way.


Mar. May I, Sir, be so bold, to ask the Ladies name, you intend to make your
Wife?


O. Ger. Madam Angelica the Doctor's Daughter.


Mar. Sure, Sir, you're not in earnest, she is not above fifteen; that Match
Sir, would be sitter for your Son


O. Ger. My Son? I don't intend that he shall Marry yet, these seven years.


Mar. But Sir, consider well before you Marry.


O. Ger. I have thought enough, she is handsome, young, and sprightly.


Mar. But these are qualities will not agree with an old man's constitution.


O. Ger. Old Coxcomb: I an't so old.


Mar. No Sir, if you had been contemporary with the Patriarchs, you had been
counted now a very youth, but in this short-lived age we live in, Sir, you are,
as one may say, worn to the stumps.


O. Ger. Hold your prating; Threescore is man's ripe Age.


Mar. Yes, and his rotten Age too; but you, if I mistake not, are threescore
and ten.


O. Ger. No more of Age: It Is a thing never to be inquired into, but when you
are buying Horses.


Mar. How? Not in Marriage Sir.


O. Ger. Not if a man be very rich.


Mar. Can you believe Sir, the old Doctor her Father, and the Gentlewoman her
Mother, who is a notable wise governing Woman, will bestow their Daughter, and
their only Heir, upon a man so old, where there 's no hope of Grand Children to
inherit what they have, without an Act of Parliament to enable him.


O. Ger. Hold your tongue I say; you are my Servant, not my Councellor I take
it Sir; this is my own concern; when I am Married, I doubt not but I shall
behave my self, as a married man ought.


Mar. But if the Doctor will not consent to it.


O. Ger. That I am sure of, he has promised me, and he is a man of his word.


Mar. That indeed is something: but Sir, you know the Wife there wears the
Breeches; and if the gray Mare be the better Horse, you will find it difficult to
bestride the Filly.


O. Ger. I know she is a little domineering; and I know too that Mr. Doctor is
a Wise Man; his gravity and prudence, will manage her well enough; he who can
our mad folks, scorns to be Wife-ridden.


Mar. Many have tried in vain; a man sometimes may sooner break his own heart,
than his Wife's will. But see Sir, here is the Doctor.


Enter Doctor. Doct. Mr. Gerald, good morrow to you Sir.


O. Ger. Mr. Doctor, I was coming to speak to you.


Doct. Come; let me feel your pulse.


O. Ger. It needs not Sir.


Doct. The Other hand.


O. Ger. That Is not my business.


Doct. No, but it is mine, your Pulse Sir is disordered.


O. Ger. You mistake me, my --


Doct. Put out your tongue, your tongue.


O. Ger. No matter for my tongue.


Doct. Do you sleep well?


O. Ger. Yes, very well. But Sir --


Doct. How is your Stomach? have you a good Appetite.


O. Ger. Yes Mr. Doctor, but I come --


Doct. And do you digest well what you eat?


O. Ger. Yes very well, but will you hear me Sir?


Doct. And all those other benefits of nature.


O. Ger. I have 'em regularly. But Mr. Doctor --


Doct. Nay if you eat well, drink well, sleep well, digest well, and after all
this should not be well, it would be wonderful. But I lose time, I must visit
my other Patients. Your Servant Sir.


O. Ger. Stay, good Sir, stay, I have had patience to hear you talk, and to no
purpose neither; now it is my turn to speak, and to some purpose.


Doct. Dispatch then; I Am in haste.


O. Ger. It Is not about my health I came to you, no it is another affair.


Doct. What affair?


O. Ger. That, that you know of.


Doct. What I say?


O. Ger. The business that I spoke of.


Doct. When?


O. Ger. When? more than once.


Doct. Where?


O. Ger. At several places; at your house and mine.


Doct. What was it then?


O. Ger. About your Daughter.


Doct. What about my Daughter?


O. Ger. About my marrying her.


Doct. O, was it nothing else? I thought 't had been something of consequence.
As to that matter I have given my promise; choose your own time, Marry her when
you please.


O. Ger. And have you broke it to your Wife?


Doct. No, but my will is hers, she submits to what I think fit. I am and will
be master. I thank Heaven, I have discretion, and can rule a Wife, as a wise
Husband ought.


O. Ger. I doubt it not.


Doct. If once my Wife should contradict my will, she should soon find what
metal I am made of. I thank my Stars we have no domestic broyls, my Wife
submits to me in all things.


O. Ger. If you think fit then, let us acquaint her with it, it is a formality
all Mothers may expect.


Doct. You say well; stay here, I Will call her!


Ex. D^^ O. Ger. Well Martin, what say you now?


Mar. I see the Doctor is your friend; so far all is well; but mark the end I
say still.


Re-enter Doctor and Wife. Doct. My dearest, here is our good friend Mr. Gerald
come purposely to see you.


Wife. Sir, you Servant. Tho my Husband's a Physician, I am glad to see you're
in good health.


O. Ger. Speak to her Mr. Doctor, tell her the business.


Doct. Do you speak first.


O. Ger. It Is properer for you.


Doct. No, no, you will explain your self much better. Lovers are eloquent.


O. Ger. But you have the Authority of a Husband, and may without ceremony open
the matter to her.


Doct. No, you must break the Ice, you shall see my power if she resists.


Wife. Pray Gentlemen, what is this contest about, and why was I called hither?


O. Ger. A foolish punctilio of honor; and something Mr. Doctor has to acquaint
you with.


Doct. Our kind friend, Mr. Gerald here, has a mind to marry our Daughter, Love.


O. Ger. Yes Madam; and upon such terms as few Parents are displeased with. You
may scruple my age, but when you know, I will take her without a Portion, and
mean to settle a good jointure on her, allow her handsomely for Pin-Money, keep
her a Coach, a Chariot, and two Footmen; and give her every New-years-day, a
hundred Guineas in an Embroidered Purse, to fool away; I hope, that scruple
will be removed. Besides, Mr. Doctor has given his consent already, and I doubt
not, but yours will come as easily.


Wife. Hold there, good Mr. Gerald; these things require consideration; your
Ages are most unsuitable. Many young Women have been ruined by such unequal
Matches. Youth and Age cannot agree: An old Man may be fond of a young Woman,
but a young Woman of an old Man never. But to avoid all inconveniences, and
fatal accidents, that may happen to our Family, by such a disproportioned
Marriage, I must tell you plainly, you shall not have my consent; and I hope you
will not take it ill of me.


O. G. But your Husband, Madam, has given me his word.


Wife. What if he has? He gave it then without consideration. When he comes to
weigh all circumstances as he ought, he must* and will be of my mind too.


O. G. Speak Mr Doctor, did not you absolutely promise me?


Wife. He who indiscrectly promises, may with good reason call it back. He did
it without my knowledge or consent therefore 'twas but a half promise, Sir.


O. Ger. But, Mr Dr, a Man of Honor ought to keep his word, and stand to what
he says. Speak then, have you not promised me your Daughter?


Dr. It Is true, I cannot deny it.


Wife. How! can you not? we'll talk of that hereafter. Well Mr Gerald, promise,
or not promise, all is one for that, I deny my consent, and that is enough.


Dr. But Wife, dear Wife --


Wife. Wife me no Wife's, but hold your foolish prating; sure I know better
than you What Is fitting for our Daughter.


Dr. But my dear, we ought --


Wife. I know we ought to be wiser than to make foolish promises; or if you
were so childish not to keep em. Come Mr Gerald, set your Heart at rest, you
shall never marry my Daughter; there is my resolution. I will not be the jest of
the whole Town. Who would not split their sides to hear a couple of old fools
call one another, Father and Son? away, away for shame.


[Ex. Wife. Mar. Sir, Sir, Mr Dr.


Dr. Well, what say you?


Mar. If once my Wife should contradict my will! She should soon find what
metal I am made of. I thank my Stars we have no domestic broyls, my Wife
submits to me in all things.


O. Ger. Martin says true; this lesson you read to us, before you called your
Wife, good Mr Doctor.


Dr. It Is very true; and it is as true, this was no proper place to show my
authority; our Passion must be governed by our Reason; my Moderation must cool
her Intemperance: Had I presently flown to the top of the house, we had made
fine work on it: I Will take a more convenient opportunity to discourse this
matter with her; in the mean time, leave it to me: I have given my word, and I
will -- I will -- come trust to me: I warrant you.


Mar. Yes Sir, leave it to Mr. Doctor, he will do wonders; he is a Lion in
private, but you saw he was a Lamb in public: But I fear you had better take
the Wife's word, than the Husband's, it is plain she rules the Roast.


Dr. You are a fool, and know not what you say.


Mar. But I know, Sir, you had a furious repulse at the Half Moon, you were
beaten out of your Trenches too; you will have no better luck at the Conterscarp:
If you dare venture to storm, I fear you will be beaten off, with such a
shameful loss, you will be forced to raise the Siege, and glad you escape
unwounded.


Dr. Hold your tongue, you are a saucy Knave.


Mar. I have done; I will not dispute Titles with Mr Doctor.


Dr. Well Mr Gerald, once more leave all to me: I tell you I will do it; that is
sufficient.


Exit Dr. Mar. Now, Sir, have you the same hopes you had of Marrying Mrs.
Angelica? You see her Mother's an imperious Woman, and will never give her
consent to it: The Doctor I confess is an able Physician, an excellent man in
his way, but yet he has the fortune to be Hen-peck'd, and must submit, as many
wise and learned men have done; therefore you must not build upon his promises:
Besides, I do not find you have got the Daughter's consent yet; and that is the
main point of all.


O. Ger. You say true, Martin; I must think of that. Stay, is not that Crispin
yonder?


Enter Crispin. Cris. O Sir, your Servant; I am glad I have found you. Good
morrow Martin.


Mar: Good morrow Crispin.


O. Ger. What cause brings you to Town?


Cris. Your Son, my Master, sent me in all haste.


O. Ger. For what?


Cris. That Letter will inform you.


O. Ger. reads. Honored Father, Hoping you are in good health, as I am, thanks
be to God, at the present writing hereof: This is to let you understand that
all my Money's gone, and my Clothes worn so bare, that you may, as the saying
is, see my Breech through my Pocket-holes.


Mar A fine Epistle.


O. Ger. This is not my Sons style, nor is it his hand: This is some Roguery of
yours Sirrah.


Crisp. To tell you the plain truth, Sir, I lost I know not how, my Masters
Letter on the Road; and baiting at a little Village, it happened to be the
Sextons house, who sold a Cup of notable good Ale: There I got him to write
this Letter for me. I know my Master sent for Money, and Clothes, pray read the
rest.


O. Gar. No, I have read enough.


Mar. You dictated this Letter to the Sexton, Crispin.


Crisp. I did so? what of that?


Mar. Nothing, but that the style is very eloquent.


Crisp. I think so: I have not been at the University with my Master 4 months,
for nothing.


O. G. Has my Son spent all his Money in so short a time? he has been prodigal.


Cris. He could not help it, he was forced to treat at his first coming, Sir: I
shall be his Steward for the future, and manage matters better.


O. Ger. Look you do. I have some business now, about an hour hence come home
to me. Follow me Martin.


[Ex. O. Ger. and Mar. Cris. So far all is well: If I can screw a good sum out
of him, I do my Masters business; the old Gentleman must not know he is in
Town, nor must my Master know I lost his Letter. O, here he comes.


Enter Young Gerald. Y. Ger. I sent you with my Letter to my Father; why are
you loytering here?


Cris. It Is done, Sir.


Y. Ger. What is done, Sir?


Cris. Your business, Sir, is done effectually: I met your Father here, just in
this place; gave him your Letter; he read it over and over, and said the style
was admirable; was overjoyed to see how the University had improved you; then I
made him an eloquent Oration, to let him see how I had profited: This melted
his hard heart, made his old Eyes twinkle like flames in the bottom of two
Sockets: At last he bid me come home to him some half an hour hence; by that
time, Sir, the Money will be ready.


Y. Ger. Did he ask no questions? how I had spent my Money? what company I
kept? or how I behaved my self in the University?


Cris. He had no time for that; when I come home to him, perhaps he may.


Y. Ger. Be careful Crispin; should he suspect --


Cris. He shall pump nothing out of me, I warrant you.


Y. Ger. But Martin is a notable fly youth.


Cris. You think, because I cannot write and read as he can, that I have less
wit than Martin; I warrant you I Will be upon my Guard, I Will deal well enough
with him. But now, Sir, let me question you a little; how durst you venture
abroad by day light? Should your Father --


Y. Ger. I know it Crispin, but as soon as you were gone, Angelica sent her
Maid to me, bid me meet her here; something of consequence has happened to her,
and I Am in pain to know the meaning of it. See, she is here.


Enter Angelica. Y. Ger. My clear Angelica!


Ang. Mr Gerald! I am glad my Maid found you, you have made haste.


Y. Ger. Can you blame me for that? My love was too impatient to wait; I have a
thousand doubts and fears: why did you send for me? what has happened, Madam?
tell me my Angelica, and ease my loaded heart.


Ang. I could not prevail upon my self to stay till you came. O. Gerald! 'twill
surprise you when I tell you, your Father is in love.


Y. Ger. You mock me Madam.


Ang. No, it is too true; he has asked me of my Father and my Mother, offers to
settle a large Jointure on me, and Marry me without a Portion too. These are
proposals few Parents will refuse.


Y. Ger. The Laws of Nature, tho not of Nations, forbid such unequal Matches.


Ang. But Money, Gerald! what will not Money do?


Y. Ger. It Is true; for Money Mothers sell their Daughters?


Ang. Yes, and for Money, most Daughters sell themselves.


Y. Ger. A Beau for money, will Marry an old withered Witch, with rotten Lungs,
no Teeth, one Eye, and half a Nose.


Ang. For Money, Soldiers sell their lives.


Y. Ger. And Priests their consciences.

-- But my Angelica; your Father is a wise and learned Man, he is not
mercenary, he will not sell you.


Ang. You are mistaken, Sir, he has given his promise to your Father.


Y. Ger. Then all my hope is vanished.


Ang. Not so; you have no reason to despair. You say my Father's wise, and
learned too; now I say, my Mother has no learning, but more wisdom, for she
has positively refused to give him her consent.


Y. Ger. O you revive me! my drooping Soul drinks up your words, as the parched
Earth does a refreshing shower! what is to be done, Crispin?


Ang. I told you my Mother loved Music most immoderately: She is much pleased
with it. I will let her know that it was your contrivance, and acquaint her
with our love, and try to make her of our party. Stay here abouts, if I
succeed, Beatrice shall give you notice.


Y. Ger. Do, my dear Loved, Angelica: Good luck attend you?


[Ex. Ang. Cris. Has the Devil Lechery got possession of my old Master's head?
I am sure he left his Breeches long ago. Let me see; he has to my knowledge,
been bewitched about some 15 years.


Y. Ger. This was the cause I was removed, and sent to the University.


Cris. He shall quickly find we lost no time there; we have studied hard,
studied Fortification, we can Entrench; if he can Mine, Sir, we can Countermine.


Y. Ger. Now go, fetch the money from my Father instantly, you shall find me
hereabouts at your return


[Ex. Cris. Well, of all your Father's follies, this is the worst. When old men
fall in Love, they are surely, cursed.


SCENE II.
A Hall in the Doctors House. Enter the Doctor's Wife, Angelica, and Beatrice.
Wife. Is the Room in order, Beatrice, for the Music to go on with the
entertainment?


Bea. Yes, Madam.


Wife. It Is very well. Go see how long it will be to dinner.
Come, my Angelica, be free and merry,
Trust to thy Mother's conduct, and her kindness;
Thy Father shall not sell thee while I live.
While you remain obedient and discreet,
It shall be all the study of my life,
To make you happy, Child.

Ang. Oh my dear Mother!
Let me receive this blessing on my Knees.
If ever I am disobedient to you?
Or e're abuse this mighty goodness to you,
May I become the outcast of your Family;
Disowned by you, dispis'd by all good Women,
And hated by young Gerald.

Enter Young Gerald. Wife. Here he comes.
You're welcome, Sir; if mine is not sufficient,
You shall have her welcome too,
And that, I hope will please you.

Y. G. Please me! I more Than wealth to Misers, freedom to a Slave, Or a
Reprieve to one condemned to die.


Ang. Oh, Mr Gerald!
I have the most indulgent Mother living.
Your Father's liberal. offers to the Doctor
Cannot prevail on her.

Y. Ger. How shall I thank you, Madam, as I ought?
How pay the mighty debt due to you both?
Due to your wisdom, and her matchless love?
If all the duty, the profound respect
That ever pious Son paid his own Mother
Can merit so much Happiness, if deserve it,
The business of my life shall be to please her.
My truth, my constancy, and perfect love,
No time shall alter, nor no chance remove.

Wife. Do this, my Son, and Heaven will bless you both.


Enter Beatrice. Beat. My Master, Madam, has sent word, he cannot be at home
till dinnertime, but would have you go on with the Music.


Wife. Then we'll loose no more time; come let us seat our selves; I long to
hear more.

Here comes in the second Musical Entertainment: After which they rise and
speak.


Wife. We'll hear the rest after Dinner.


Beat. Desire the Gentlemen all to walk in.


Y. Ger. I must not be seen by your Husband; therefore I Will take my leave.


Wife. I know it, Mr Gerald. Your Servant Sir.


Ang. Sir your Servant.


Y. G. Adieu my Life, my Dear, Angelica.

[Ex
Wife. Two things, and only two, Angelica; I always loved, and loved em
passionately.


Ang. What were those, Madam?


Wife. My Husband, and good Music:


Ang. And in that Madam, I follow your Example?


Wife. Yes Child, but take this rule along with you;
Discretion is a Woman's safest guard.
She shuns Vain Glory, Malice, Strife, and Pride,
When Reason and good Nature is her Guide.

End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Doctor. Dr. BEatrice, I say; where are you?


Enter Beatrice. Beat. Here, Sir, here.


Dr. See all things are in order here in my Laboratory. Many Virtuosi will be
here, to see my curious Dissection, and hear the lecture I intend to read on a
dead Body, which every moment I expect to be sent in from the place of
Execution.


Beat. Why do you choose this back Apartment at the end of the Garden? You used
to do it in the Great Hall formerly.


Dr. My Wife will have it so, and that is enough; the body may be brought in
privately, at that back door, for so I ordered it: Besides, the wrangling
disputations of selfconceited, obstinate Physicians, who come to see my
operation, will at this distance less disturb the Neighborhood: they will
maintain their notions with more noise, than Betters in a Cockpit.


Beat. It Is observed you Doctors rarely agree in your opinions, Sir, which
makes some affirm, Physic itself is a very uncertain Science.


Dr. That Is true; bur yet the fault's not in the Art.


Bea. It most be in the Professors then.


Dr. And so it is; but this is not your business.


Bea. I only speak my simple judgment sir.


Dr. The Body will be here immediately: let 'em carry it into the Vault, it is
cooler there: in the mean time I Will make some visits to my Patients who are
near. Ha! Beatrice, let me see, what have you there?


Bea. Where, Sir, What do you mean?


Dr. There, Sirrah, there. Let Us see those pretty Bubbies.


Bea. Eye Sir, you make me blush.


Dr. Faith I will see 'em; I and feel 'em too.


Bea. You old men have such odd fancies in you.


Dr. I am a Cock 'o'th' Game, you little Rogue.


Bea. You strut, and crow, and clap your Wings indeed, but all to little
purpose.


Dr. Ah you unlucky Chitt! I could, I could --


Bea. But you forget your Patients Sir.


Dr. That Is true indeed: 'well when I come again. Ex. Dr.


Bea. I find all Husbands, old, and young, are still for variety; which is a
certain sign of an ill stomach: well, if ever it be my fortune to Marry one who
serves me so, I Will say no more, but that which is sauce for a Goose, shall be
sauce for a Gander too.


Enter Crispin. Crispin! What brings you hither now?


Cris. I have been almost half an hour hankering about the back door: I saw the
Doctor come forth just now, and then I ventured to slip in.


Bea. Secure that door then, while I fasten this; we will not'be surpised: now
what is the business?


Cris. My Master, poor man's at his wits end, he walks and starts, then stops
and muses, then he walks again: What Madam Angelica told him about his Father
has distracted him. I have a Letter for her.


Bea. Give it me.


Cris. Stay Beatrice, let me look on you a little: what have thou been doing to
thy self? I never saw thee so handsome in my life.


Bea. Indeed?


Cris. No indeed: thou have stolen some of thy Lady's Wash; it cannot be natural;
come, let me try.


Bea. Stand off, you fool.


Cris. Now I think on it, I have not had one kiss since I came from the
University.


Bea. Keep your distance, you had best: I will not make you so familiar with me.


Cris. Say you so: Harkee, Gentlewoman, what made you here alone with Mr
Doctor? This place is very private, at a convenient distance from the house too.


Bea. One who was hanged this morning is to be Dissected here: I must set every
thing in order for it; the Body will be sent in presently.


Cris. We have prepared another Entertainment for your Lady. Here, let me out
quickly. Knocking.


Dr. within. Open the door.


Bea. What shall I do? it is my Master.


Cris. Let me out I say.


Bea. Here, come to the other door. Knocking at the other door.


Wife within. Where are you? Beatrice?


Bea. O Heaven! it is my Mistress, she is at the other door.


Cris. The Devil she is.


Bea. If she were not there, I would let you down into the Vault.


Dr. within. Ho Beatrice! open the door I say.


Cris. What will become or me?


Bea. Here, here, lay your self at length upon this Table: I Will say you are the
dead Body sent from the Gallows.


Cris. Oh Beatrice --


Bea. No more; do as I bid you. Crispin lies at his full length on the Table.
Beatrice open the door.


Enter Doctor. Dr. You made me wait sufficiently. I had forgot some Medicines I
prepared; I must go up and fetch 'em.


Ex. Dr. Bea. Now I Will let in my Mistress.


Enter Wife. Wife. How were you employed, you could open the door no sooner?


Bea. I was busy in taking in this Executed Body, I made all the haste I could.


Re-enter Doctor. Dr. How now, my dearest Love, what make you here?


Wife. I came to see if all things' were in order as they should be.


Dr. It Is very well. Adieu, I am in haste.


Exit. Dr. Wife. Beatrice, set all his Instruments in order: my Daughter and I
will make a visit: I do not love such sights, they make me melancholy.


Bea. I Will be careful in your absence.

Exit Wife. Now, Crispins, is my invention good?

Crispin rises.
Cris. You Have brought me bravely off; but I Will be gone for fear of an
after-clap.


Dr. within. Beatrice, Beatrice, open the door again. Knocks.


Bea. It Is my Master, to the same postu^e quickly.


Cris. The Devil take him.


Enter Doctor. Dr. I think I am bewitched to day; I have taken the wrong
Medicines. What Is that there?


Bea. The Body from the G^^^ows, Sir; the fellows that brought it would not
carry it into the Vault.


Dr. How came they to send him with his Clothes on?


Bea. They Will call for 'em to morrow.


Dr. It Is very well. Ha! the Body's warm: I have a mind to make an experiment
immediately. Go, Beatrice, fetch me my Incision Knives, Amputation Knife,
Dismembring Saw, with the Threads, Pins, and all the other Instruments I laid
ready in my Closet.


Bea. But Sir, your Patients expect you now.


Dr. An hour or two hence will serve.


Bea. Should any of 'em dye in the mean time?


Dr. That Is not my fault; if any of 'em are in so much danger, my visit will do
'em no good now.


Bea. I have heard you say, Sir, a proper dose given at a lucky time --


Dr. Go, bring me only my Incision Knife; for while the natural heat remains, I
shall more easily come at the Lacteal Veins, which convey the Chyle to the
Heart, for Sanguification, or increase of Blood.


Bea. But, Sir, you will not begin the Anatomy before the Doctors come.


Dr. Fetch it, I say.


Bea. Well Sir, since I must.


Exit Bea. Dr. He Is not ill shaped, nor is he very ill featured; and yet his
visage still retains much discontent and trouble. Well, all the Rules of
Metoposcopy and Physiognomy are false, if this was not a Rogue that very well
deserved hanging. This Incision pleases me extremely; I Will open his Besly from
the Xiphoid Cartilage, quite along to the Os ^ubis. I feel his Heart pant yet:
If any of my fellow Physicians were here now, especially those who doubt the
Harveyan Doctrine, I Would let 'em plainly see the Circulation of the Blood through
the Systole and Diastole.


Enter Surgeon. Sur. O Doctor! I am glad I have found you: My Lord is much
worse since yesterday; you must visit him immediately.


Dr. I Will come anon; I am very busy now.


Sur. My Lords so very ill, you must go with all speed to him.


Dr. Go you before I say, and let him blood, I Will be with him in an hour.


Sur. Sure Bleeding cannot be proper in his circumstances.


Dr. I say let him blood: Sure I know what I do.


Sur. His case is altered much, Sir, since you saw him.


Dr. Once more, I say, go bleed him.


Sur. But Sir --


Dr. Bleed him, I say: It Is fine indeed when Surgeons shall teach Physicians.


Sur. I will not Bleed him, I am sure it will be his death: Let who will do it
for me; and so farewell.


Exit Sur. Dr. Farewell, Sir, if you will not, another shall.


Enter Beatrice, who was listening. Bea. I have been looking all about Sir, and
cannot find your Incision Knife: Besides, Sir, a fine Lady called at the door
just now, in a great Gilt Coach, and charged me to send you to my Lord's
immediately.


Dr. Ha!


Bea. In haste Sir, in all haste.


Dr. Say thou --


Bea. He Is dying Sir, he is dying.


Dr. What should I go for then? --


Bea. You must go Sir, you shall go -- you are sent for.


Dr. The Devil's in the Wench --


She turns him round. Bea. They are in haste, in haste Sir.


Dr. Well I go then: Let the Body be carried into the Vault.


Bea. It shall, Sir; but lose no more time: be gone. So, joy go with you.


She turns him out. Cris. And I, without more words, will be gone presently.


Bea. Whither in such haste?


Cris. Whither, with a vengeance! Let me out I say: you must fetch the Incision
Knife, with a pox to ye, and all the other damnable Instruments, to rip me up
alive, and make minced meat of me! A curse on his Systol and Dyastole.


Bea. You are mistaken, Crispin: when I went out I did not go to fetch the
Instruments, I went to hide 'em, where I was sure he could never find 'em.


Cris. I thought indeed, you could not have the heart to see a man who loves
you as I do, so barbarously dismembered; and therefore I lay still.


Bea. Well, stay here a while; I Will run and give Angelica the Letter, and
return instantly.


Cris. I beg your pardon, I Will stay no longer in this room.


Beat. Why so?


Cris. The very thought of that damned Incision Knife puts me into a cold
sweat? I Will stay for you in the street.


Beat. Away, you sot.


Cris. I had rather be a Sot than an Anatomy, I will not have my Flesh scraped
from my Bones. I will not be hung up for a Skeleton in Barber-Surgeons-Hall*


Beat. Stay but a little.


Cris. Yes in the street. There I shall not be in danger of your damned
Amputation Knife, and your Dismembring Saw, with a pox to him.


Beat: Alas! poor Crispin.


Cris. Fear makes me think every thing I see an Instrument to rip me up, from
the Systole to the Dyastole.


Beat. He had a mind to be acquainted with your inside, Crispin.


Cris. The Devil pick his Bones for it. I shall never recover my self till I get
out of this cursed place. [Knocking again] Ah! The Spirit's come again! Open
the door, I Will rush out like a Lion.


Bea. Have a care, or you will spoil all.


Cris. If the Dr catches me here, he will spoil all. Amputation and Incision
will spoil all.


Bea. Come, lay your self upon the Table quickly; he has no Instruments.


Cris Not I; for ought I know, he may have some about him, his Pockets may be
filled with Knifes, Pins, Threads, Saws, and the Devil and all.


Bea. Well thought on: Here hangs my Master's Gown and Cap, you shall strait
put 'em on, and tell him you are a Physician, just come from the University,
and understanding a dead Body was to be dissected by him, came to hear his
Lecture.


Cris. Where is the dead Body, fool?


Bea. I Will tell him, it is carried into the Vault, as he commanded.


Cris. Give me the Robes then: I Would rather act he Dr than the dead Body. So,
now I hope I need not fear his peeping into my Os Pubis, with a pox to him.
Puts on the Gown.


Bea. But if he should find out your ignorance!


Cris. I Will venture that; the World bely's 'em, or there are many great
Physicians, as great Fools as my self. I have good natural Parts, Beatrice, if
they escape but Incision and Amputation.


Bea. So; now I Will let him in.


Enter a Waiting Woman. Wait. Is Mr Dr within?


Bea. No.


Wait. Why do you deny him to me? There he is.


Cris. Well, what is your business with me, Mistress! Speak.


Wait. My Lady has lost her little Lap-dog, which she loved better than any
Relation in the World. She lays the fault on me, and grieves and takes on as if
'twere her only Child. I fear she will grow Distracted if we find it not. Now,
Sir, knowing that you are not only a learned Physician, but that you understand
Astrology and the like --


Cris. Ay, ay, I understand one, as well as the other.


Wait. Therefore, Sir, I bring you a Fee, and desire you to tell me some
tidings of him.


Cris. Have you brought the Dogs Water with you?


Wait. His Water? the Dog's lost, Sir.


Cris. Lost -- why -- ay, what then?


Bea. The Rascal stumbles confoundedly -- You do not mind, Sir, the Dog is not
sick, he is lost.


Cris. O ho -- lost? how long since was he lost?


Wait. Two days ago.


Cris. At what hour?


Wait. At eleven in the morning.


Cris. What color?


Wait. Black and White.


Cris. Enough, enough.


Wait. Well, he is a rare Man, if he can tell me where to find the Dog.


Bea. Never doubt him; he will do it certainly*


Cris. You say it is two days since?


Wait. Yes, Sir.


Cris About eleven a clock?


Wait. Yes.


Cris. Black and White?


Wait. Very right, Sir.


Crisp. Beatrice, what is in that Box there in your hand?


Beat. Some Pills my Master gave me to lay up.


Cris. O ho! Some Pills? Give me the Box.


Bea. To what purpose?


Cris. Hold your peace; here, take these Pill.


Wait. For what, an't please your Worship?


Cris. Your Lady's Dog is lost.


Wait. Yes, Sir.


Cris. And you would find him again?


Wait. With all my heart.


Cris. Take these Pills then.


Wait. Will these Pills make me find the Dog again?


Cris. Yes, they will make you find him; for they are of a very searching
nature. There I was witty, Beatrice.


Wait. But, Sir --


Cris. Go, do as I bid you.


Wait. Here are just five, Sir, must I take 'em all?


Cris. Yes, all five, and all at once.


Wait. There is your Fee, Sir, if these Pills help us to the Dog again, you will
have my Lady, and the whole Family for your Patients* and so your Servant, Sir.


Ex. Wait. Bea. Ha Crispin! Is not this better than being a dead Body. You no
sooner Commenced Doctor, but you got a Doctor's Fee.


[She shuts the Door. Cris. Two new Crown-pieces; it is a brave Trade indeed:
Here a man gets his Money easily.


Beat. I could not choose but smile to hear your ignorance O sily! The Dog's
Water? And what would you have done, but for my Box of Pills? Give Pills to
find a Dog? Ha, Ha!


Cris. What would you have a man do, who can neither write nor read? Come let
me disrobe my self; I Will wait for you in the street.


[Knocking. Bea. Hark, some body knocks again.


Cris. O Lord! If this should be the Dr?


Bea. There Is no remedy? You must brazen it out.


Enter Simon. Sim. Is Mr Doctor within?


Bea. What Is your business?


Sim. I Would speak with him.


Bea. From whom?


Sim. Why from my zelf.


Bea. Why do you know him, friend?


Sim. I come to ask him one Question, and you ask me a score.


Bea. He Is not at home to every Body; therefore I must know.


Sim. Then I neither know him, nor he me, I pray is he at home to receive
Money? I bring a Fee.


Cris. Who are you Friend?


Sim. Why they call me at our Town, Simon the infant; but my name is Simon
Burly.


Cris. Well, what is your business? quick.


Sim. I am told you re an Astrologer, as well as Dr.


Cris. What then?


Sim. Why then, I question you, an't please ye, whether Ailce Draper, a young
Maid in our Town, that I love, has that love for me again as she pretends to
have. Because there is an arch Attorney's Clark, that is often in her Company,
and I don't know --


Cris. Hold, what kind of Woman is she?


Sim. Why, she is a sprightly, cleaver, well built Wench, with a fine featly
Face, brown Hair, and a ruddy Complexion; a good crummy Lass, and treads well
on her Pastons.


Cris. Sprightly, proper, well built, featly Face, brown Hair, ruddy
Complection'd; a crummy Lass, and treads well on her Pastons.


Sim. Ay marry does she.


Cris. Here, take these Pills.


Sim. Pills?


Cris. Yes, take'em.


Sim. How, Pills?


Cris. Yes of Pills. You must take the number Ten, because of your great Bulk.


Slus. I have taken Pills to purge with-all; but, Wounds can they --


Cris. Go to I say; they will purge the Head, and clear the understanding
wonderfully. Ours is a Science you know nothing of.


Beat. Tell him they are Cephalic Pills. Bea* whispers him.


Cris. Ay, ay; These are Cephalic Pills. But that is Heathen Greek to you: If
you understood Latin, I could talk to the purpose to ye.


Sim. I am a piece of a Scollard I must tell you. Intelligo, Domine, Linguam
Latinam.


Cris. Poh, poh, I know that; but that is Outlandish Latin. There Is several
sorts of Latin: There Is Law- Latin, Priests Latin, and Doctor's- Latin; as for
example: Olo Purgatum, Physicum, Vomit -- um -- guts -- out -- um -- and so
forth. Our Latin is quite another thing from School Latin.


Sim. I think it may be so?


Cris. Go, do as I bid ye.


Sim. I had best give you your Fee first.


Cris. I, I, that is well considered.


Sim. Pills* --.


Cris Ay. Pills.


Sim. Ten Pills.


Cris. Just ten: Dispatch -- away,


Sim. If these should do the business --


Cris. I understand you; I shall have more of your custom then; go, go, farewell
--


Sim. These knowing Men, your Lawyers, and Physicians, when they have once
fingered the Money, are so hasty to be rid of a man, they will not give one word
into the bargain: Good day to ye, Sir.


Cris. The like to to you, Friend. [Ex. Sim.

Two Crowns and half a Guinea got already; this is a gainful and no painful
Trade.


Bea. Learned Mr Dr, I must have snacks.


Cris. And so thou shall; there is my last Fee for thee, you cannot say but I
deal nobly by you.


Bea. -- Thank you; this will buy Pins.


Cris: -- Hark!


[Knocking. Bea. There Is more Fees coming.


Cris. My heart misgives me. Ah, what will become of me! it is the Devil
himself.


Enter Doctor. Dr. Have you done every thing as I ordered, Beatrice?


Bea. Yes, Sir, the Body's carried into the Vault. Just before you came in this
Gentleman, some Dr, I suppose of your acquaintance; I presume he intends to be
present at your Anatomy Lecture.


Dr. Sir. tho I have not the honor yet to know you, you are very welcome, Sir:
I shall not begin my dissecton till to morrow morning; then if you please to
honor me with your presence, you may, perhaps, hear something that is curious,
and out of the common Road.


Cris. I have heard much, Sir, of your great Abilities, and shall not fail you;
for your reputation, Mr Dr, is a reputation -- that -- as I may say -- or as --
in fine, Sir, I will not fail to wait on you --


Bea. Sir, if you please to retire out of this Room --


Dr. By and by -- I have not done with the Dr yet.


Dr. Pray, Sir, let me consult with you a little, about the case of a sick
person, who is my Patient now.


Cris. Do me the honor to excuse me now; I have business of mighty
consequence, that requires my departure instantly, -- but to morrow, Mr Dr --


Dr. Stay a little, I Will give you his Case in two words. You must know, my
Patient, Sir, has labored many months first under a Tertian, then under a
Quartan, and now it is turned to a Quotidian: The Fever we have pretty well
abated, yet after all, -- besides a great disposition he has to sleep, which
very much fatigues him, -- that which he spits from him, is very white -- now,
Sir, in my judgment that is an ill symptom, for a Pituita alba aqua inter cutem
supervenit, says Hipocrates and this you know well enough, the Greeks call
Leucophelgmateia -- so then according to Hipocrates, this white spitting, or
Pituita alha is an evident sign, that the Hydropsie, or Dropsy will succeed.
Now, Sir, what say you is the most sovereign Remedy to be given in this Case to
hinder this evil consequence?


Cris. Why, Sir, I must tell you -- but to what purpose? you have no need of my
opinion, you are a man famous for understanding -- so that -- and as it were --
in fine, I will not speak one word more to this purpose.


Dr. Pray, Sir, speak freely; I shall be proud to have your opinion of this
case*


Cris. No matter, Sir, for my opinion; for tho I know enough and all that --
yet I had rather --


Dr. I act openly, Sir, I am not like some Physicians that I know, so fond of
my own opinion, Sir, that rather than consult with other Doctors, they will let a
Patient dye under their hands; therefore speak freely, I am prepared to give
you my attention.


Cris. Why then, Sir, in this sort of Malady, I do not know but that -- or when
-- or as it may be very near this Case -- or so, Sir --


Dr. Humh --


Cris. What think you of -- a -- dose of Pills?


Dr. How! Pills, Sir? that would ruin all we have done.


Cris. O you mistake me, Sir, I don't advise you, Sir, to give him Pills. I
only mentioned, Sir, a dose of Pills which I had took my self this morning,
Sir, which have not yet done working, and force me to leave you something
abruptly, Sir.


Dr. Pray let me know your. Lodging e're you go. I shall be glad of the honor
of your acquaintance -- and --


Cris. I am gripped most damnably --


Enter Wife, Angelica, and Beatrice. Beat. Quickly, Madam, or he will be
discovered.


Wife. Enough -- O Husband -- Husband, come away, have a care -- have a care --


Dr. Of what Wife? --


Wife. Turn that ill looked fellow out of Doors -- away with him -- let him not
speak a word.


Cris. Madam --


Wife. Away with him --


Cris. Madam -- Madam --


Wife. Away with him* away with him. away with him --


Cris. Madam -- Madam -- Madam -- Madam -- Madam --


Beatrice and Angelica thrust out Crispin. He turning round is forced quite to
the Door. [Exit. Wife. Ah, dear Husband, you must excuse me for intruding so
hastily --


Dr. What was the matter, Wife?


Wife. Did you know this Gentleman.


Dr. I suppose him to be some young Callow Dr just wandered from his Nest, the
University.


Wife. No, no, he is a High German Doctor -- a Great Negromancer, a Conjurer,
one that deals in the black Art, and raises Spirits --


Dr. How do you know? --


Wife. Some of our Neighbors that saw him come in at the back Door -- came
privately and told me so -- and bid me have a care of him. -- I was frighted
almost out of my Wits -- and shall not come to my self agood while --


Dr. Oh Wife, fear nothing, it is but silly peoples talk.


Wife. Indeed I am much frighted --


Dr. Come, come, divert your self, and think no more on it.


Wife. Ay, well thought on -- Beatrice are the performers ready to go on with
their Musical Entertainment.


Beat. Yes, Madam, they stay but for your coming.


VV. Come then we'll go in, Husband you shall stay and sit with me -- Music
has a strange influence over me, that will bring me to my self again.


Dr. I will Wife? --


[Dr. Wife* Ang. Exeunt. Wife. Daughter, come you along with us.


Enter Crispin peeping in. Cris. Beatrice are they gone --


Beat. What makes you here -- I thought I had thrust you out of doors.


Cris. You did so -- but wondering what you all meant, I slip in again -- to
listen --


Beat. It was my contrivance to bring you off, you Blockhead, you had been
discovered else --


Cris. This was better however, than Incision, Dissection, and Amputation.
Therefore now I Will be gone in earnest. I fairly have escaped all these
disasters,

And would not run the Risque again for twenty Masters,


Beat. Faint hearted, Crispin!
In spite of all ill luck in Love's Hist'ries,
I Would venture Limb and Life to serve my Mistress.

Here comes in the third Musical Entertainment. ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Old Gerald. I Am resolved to bribe Beatrice, and make her of my party;
she is a notable young witty Wench, and governs her young Mistress as she
pleases; the Devil's in her if she is Money proof. I see her coming forth. Enter
Beatrice. Beatrice, Beatrice, a word with you.


Beat. To me, Sir, do you speak?


O. Ger. Yes, yes, to you, my pretty, little, witty, smiling Rogue; hold up
your head, here is Money for you; ha!


Beat. Two pieces of Broad Gold? What is this for, Sir?


O. G. One for thy good Will, and one for thy good Word.


Bea. As how, Sir, I beseech you?


O. G. Promise me one thing, I will make 'em ten, make 'em ten presently; and
if you succeed afterward, a hundred.


Bea. I marry, Sir, you speak now to the purpose?


O. G. You know I have obtained the Doctor's promise, to marry his Daughter,
fair Angelica.


Bea. You have, Sir.


O. G. Her Mother refuses her consent to it.


Bea. She does so.


O. G. Now Child, if you could get for me the young Lady's consent --


Bea. To marry, Sir?


O. G. Ay, ay, to marry her.


Bea. Is that all? Come, Sir, she may look further, and fare worse --


O. G That Is well said; there is another piece for that.


Bea. I thank you, Sir.


O. G I know you rule her as you please.


Bea. Some times she hearkens to me.


O. G. Now if you will commend me to her often --


Bea. As how, Sir?


O. G. As thus. By telling her how rich I am, and that I love her so, I can
deny her nothing. It Is true, I have a Son, an only Son, but him I have removed,
on purpose to make way for her.


Bea. That was wisely done, Sir.


O. G Ay, was it not? Tell her all Happiness consists in wealth, that she may
make me settle almost all I have on her, and the Children I shall have by her.


Bea. And do you think you shall have Children by her?


O. G. Why not? I am hale, and very lusty, Beatrice. Well, if thou do this
for me, besides a hundred pounds I Will give thee on the day I Marry her, I Will
get thee with Child too, give the a good Portion, and Marry thee to an honest
Shopkeeper.


Bea. Fie, fie; you offer me too much in conscience, Sir* but for my young
Mistress, Sir --


O. G. Ay; am I sure of thy assistance there?


Bea. Yes, Sir, I Will do my weak endeavor for you; I Will begin presently; I Will
set you forth with commendations, Sir.


O. G. How, how my pretty Rogue?


Bea. Why thus, Sir -- if I may be so bold to advise you, Madam, take Mr
Gerald, let him be your Husband -- says she presently, which Mr Gerald meanest
thou? O Madam, say I, the Father certainly; the Son's a young extravagant, idle
fellow; his Father means to disinherit him, unless he mends his manners.


O. G. And so I do; that of my Son was well put in. Go on.


Bea. O but he is old, she cries -- true Madam, say I, but then he is rich too,
very rich; when e're he dies, he will leave you wealth enough to make you a Lady.


O. G. That she may be before, if she pleases me.


Bea. I Will tell her so. But she may say, old men are cross and peevish -- no,
say I, he is mild, and humble, a fine, sweet tempered Gentleman, he will dote upon
you, he will never make you jealous, he will not run after other Women, as all
young fellows do.


O. G. That was well thought on.


Bea. O Madam, you know not what a fine thing it is to be an old Man's darling.


O. G. Good again.


Beat. Says she, his Teeth are naught -- O but his Breath is sweet -- his Eyes,
says she are sunk -- O but, say I, he sees without Spectacles -- says the --
he is an old musty fusty stinking --


O. G. Enough, enough. When shall I see her, Beatrice?


Bea. This very afternoon, you cannot have a sitter opportunity, you know the
Dr, is much abroad, my old Mistress will be absent too. If you will be walking
about four a clock, near our back Door, I Will let you privately into the Anatomy
Room, there she shall meet you, Sir.


O. G. Hold up thy hand, I Will make the three broad pieces ten. There, will
these encourage thee?


Bea. You are a wise Client, Sir, you will not starve a good Cause, I see.


O. G. I scorn it, Beatrice.


Bea. One thing I must advise you, Sir; be vigorous, press your suit home to
her: for I must tell you, there is a young, debauched lewd fellow, just such
another as your own Son is, who haunts her every where, makes violent love to
her, watches all opportunities to speak to her, is always making Presents,
sending Letters to her: I Will watch him narrowly, I Will spoil his sport; I Will
manage Mr Gerald's Cause so well, if I get not my young Mistress for him, I Will
forfeit my Maidenhead.


O. G. Come hither; I must kiss thee; I will kiss thee, thou art a pretty,
witty, merry Rogue, and I Will -- provide for thee.


Bea. Farewell, Sir, remember four a clock, if you brought some Jewels, with
you, Necklaces, Rings, and Bracelets. only to show her, Sir, young Girls, you
know are mightily taken with such fine things.


O. G. I Will do it, my Girl; I Will do it. I Will home and pick out of my Cabinet the
best of all my Pawns, and bring 'em to her. But first I Will be spruc'd up; I
will be shaved and washed, and perfumed too; put on a clean Band, and my best
Bob-wig, my new Hat, and put a clean Handerchief in my Pocket, and then -- at
four a clock -- ay that is the hour.


[Ex. O. G. Bea. Madam, come forth -- he is gone.


Enter Angelica. Now, Madam, let us laugh while our sides ache: What would this
old, stinking, fumbling fool, do with a sweet young Wife? When once love gets
into an old man's head, it teaches him as many tricks, as a dancing Dog.


Ang. They say he is very covetous: How did you get that money out of him?


Bea. I tickled the old Trout in the right place; see, Madam, here are the
merry Spankers, I Will warrant you, I Will do his business for him.


Ang. You have engaged me, Beatrice; instruct me how I shall come off with ^ime.


Bea. Trouble not your self about it, leave that to my management: I must go
and find young Mr. Gerald out, and Crispin too, they must help to carry on the
work. You shall have nothing to do, but to laugh at his folly, and applaud our
contrivance.


Ang. I Will in, and expect the event.


Ex. Severally Enter Young Gerald, and Crispin. Cris. Well, Sir, what think you
now of my Adventures?


Y. G. Why truly, they were extraordinary.


Cris. A dead man -- a Doctor -- an Astrologer.


Y. Ger. You made your way through many difficulties, but for my sake, you must
once more go to the Doctor's House.


Cris. Who, I, Sir?


Y. Ger. Yes.


Cris. I beg your pardon. What to be dissected, carved artificially Limb after
Limb. No, Sir, I Will have no more Dissection, Amputation, nor Incision. You may
go, and venture your self, Sir, if you please.


Y. G. Should I go, and be seen there by the Doctor, I ruin our design, and
lose my Mistress; he will tell my Father that I am in Town. You run no hazard,
for he knows not you.


Cris. No hazard! call you it, I hazard my Legs, Arms, Veins, Arteries, and
Muscles; and in the Doctor's gibberish, I hazard Incision, Dissection,
Amputation, and Circulation, through the Systole and Diastole. Why, Sir, in such a
case, a Physician cuts up a man with as little remorse, as a Hangman carves a
Traitor.


Y. G. For all that, you must venture your precious self once more. When I get
my Mistress, I Will make thee ample satisfaction.


Cris. Well, if I must, I must. I saw a Physicians Gown and Cap, hang up at a
Broakers Shop, hard by, to be sold. Buy 'em, or hire 'em for me: I had rather
appear before him, in the shape of a Doctor, than a dead Man. That habit,
Pills, and impudence brought me off then, I Will think of some other remedy now.


Y. G. While I secure the Habit, step to my Father's and secure the Money.


Ctis. I will, but first, Sir, tell me what is Latin, for I am a Doctor.


Y. G. Medicus Sum.


Cris. Medicus sum, Medicus sum.


Y. G. You have it right.


Cris. Very well, Medicus sum. Go about your business, I Will about mine. Medicus
sum, Medicus sum.

Ex. Y. G. Well, it is a fine thing to understand Latin; I must be sure not to
forget Medicus sum. Now I Will to the old man: Ho! talk of the Devil and his
Horns appear.


Enter old Gerald, and Martin. O. Y. O Crispin! where is your Master? tell me
true.


Cris. Where should he be? at the University.


O. G. Ay, he should be at the University -- but where is he, ha?


Cris. I warrant in his Chamber, hard at study: or else in the Schools chopping
Logic. Please you to give me the Money, Sir, that I may return to him with
speed.


Mar. Give you the Money? ha, ha, ha.


Cris. What do you sneer at? ha.


Mar. Money! who is the fool then?


Cris. Meddle with your own business, Sirrah, or I Will give you a douce of the
chaps --


O. G. Be quiet, Knave.


Cris. A Jack -- an Apes -- to interrupt me --


O. G. Have done, I say -- how does you Master spend his time there?


Cris. He studies all the morning. After dinner studies again, after Supper, he
walks out and talks with the Students, and then they jabber Latin like the
Devil. The best on it Sir, they will dispute and wrangle so long, till they are
almost choked with hard words. Then they go very lovingly together, and drink
a chirping Cup, or two, and then to their Chambers in good time.


O. G. It Is very well: But several of my acquaintance tell me, they have seen
him here, here in this Town.


Cris. O abominable!


O. G. Sirrah, confess the truth, is he in Town?


Cris. Medicus sum -- he is not here indeed, Sir.


O. G. Deny it not, I know it.


Cris. He is not here indeed, Sir.


Mar. He equivocates -- here? No, he is not here.


O. G. But, Slave, he is Town.


Cris. No.


O. G. I lie then, do I?


Cris. Medicus sum.


O. G. What Is that you mutter, Rascal?


Cris. A word I learned at the University. Medicus sum; that is, I am a Doctor.


Mar. Yes, of the lying faculty.


Cris. Sirrah, if I had you in another place, I would --


Mar. What would you do?


Cris. I would dissect you, Rascal, run my Fist through your Systole, and Diastole.


O. G. What gibberish is this?


Mar. You Thin-Gut.


Cris. Yes, impudence, If I had you under my clutches, I would make you feel
Dissection, Incision, Amputation, ay and Circulation too.


Mar. Come and you dare, let us see what you can do.


O. G. Saucy Knaves, forbear.


They offer to fight, O. G. holds his Cane betwixt *em. Cris. Sirrah, I Will rip
up your Belly, from the Cartilage Ziphode, to the Os pubis, you dog.


O. G. The fellow's mad -- be quiet or I Will cudgel both of you: Well, Crispin,
since your Master's not in Town, return you to the University, tell him, next
week I Will send the Money to him by the Carrier.


Cris. But, Sir --


O. G. One word more, and my Cane shall fly about your Ears.


Cris. Well, I know what I know.


O. G. What do you know?


Cris. That I Will be revenged of that audacious Villain.


O. G. For what you, Rascal?


Cris. Pray, Sir, what will you beat me for?


O. G. For a lying Rogue.


Cris. And I would maul him because he is a Fac-totum, and sets you against my
young Master and me.


O. G. Sirrah, Sirrah, I could find in my heart --


Cris. Ay, strike if you think good.


O. G. Say you so; there is for you then.


Ger. strikes at Cris. he ducks: Ger. misses his blow, and falls. Cris. gives
Mar. a Cuff and a Trip, throws him down, and runs off saying, Medicus sum.


Mar. Son of a Whore, he has lamed me.


O. Ger. Help me up, good Martin.


Mar. Oh! oh! I want help my self, Sir. The Rogue has broke my Crupper.


O. Ger. The Villain has rumbled my clean Band too.


Mar. If ever I light on him --


O. Ger. Be patient, Martin.


Mar. I must, whether I will or no.


O. Ger. Go home, Martin; I have business another way.


Exeunt. Enter Young Gerald and Crispin* Ger. helping Cris. to put on his Gown.
Y. Ger. So, now your Worship's fitted.


Cris. Then you met, Beatrice, Sir.


Y. Ger. I did; there is work enough cut out for you, rub up your memory, you will
have occasion to make use of all the Jargon you can think on.


Cris. Those damned heathenish names will never out of my memory.


Y. Ger. I see my Father coming; he is running like a Wood-cock into the snare.


Cris. I care not if he meet me now; I Will outface him. Medicus sum, non sum
Dogus, non sum Rogus, Medicus sum.


Y. G. Come this way, that I may inform you fully of our design; the time is
short.


Cris. Hold, Sir, degrade me not, the Gown must have precedence, and take the
upper hand too.


Exeunt. Enter Old Gerald. O. G. This is the hour, it is just 4 by my Watch; if
Beatrice prevails, I am made for ever.


Enter Beatrice. Bea. O, Sir, are you come? I have been peeping for you at the
Window, a whole half hour.


O. G. Is the Coast clear? Where Is my Angelica.


Bea. No questions, but come in.


Exeunt. Enter Young Gerald, and Crispin. Y. G. So, so, he is caught, run to the
fore door, when you hear me Thunder at this --


Cris. I Will beat an alarm at that -- I have my cue.


Ex. Enter old Gerald, and Beatrice. Bea. I chose this Room on purpose for your
meeting. Here are two doors you see; if my Master or Mistress come to one, I
can slip you out at the other.


O. G. 'Twas wisely done.


Bea. I see her coming; make good use of your time.


O. G. I warrant you. I have brought something to show her, will sparkle like
her Eyes.


Enter Angelica. The Door claps after her. Ang. O Beatrice! What shall we do?
The Door unluckily is locked, the Key is on the other side too.


Beat. That Is the mischief of all Spring Locks: There Is no remedy now. Look
here, Madam, here is Mr Gerald come to kiss your hands.


O. Ger. With your favor, Madam -- Salutes her.


Ang. I vow I am ashamed to see you, Sir.


O. G. Young Maids, I know are bashful; but when you are married, a loving
Husband will teach you confidence.


Ang. O Beatrice! if my Mother should find me here --


Beat Fear nothing, Madam; this door is fast; I Will lock the fore door presently.


Ang. Well, Mr Gerald, you see my Maid has prevailed with me: She gives you
great commendations too.


O. G. Ay, my sweet; I Will make 'em all good, I warrant you.


Ang. I am young, and some say I am handsome too; I doubt not you will love me:
But, Mr Gerald, what reason is there for me to love a man in years, as you are?


O. G. I have many reasons for your Ear, more for your Eyes. Look here, my
Queen, look here, my Cleopatra? Here Is a Necklace of Pearl worth above 500
pounds; it will become that soft white Neck most rarely. Then here is a set of
Bodkins for your hair, cost fourscore pounds: Ah how they sparkle like your
pretty Eyes: Then here is a Croceat of Diamonds cost 300, an Ambrosie, worth
above 400 more. How like an Angel you will look, when this is set under those
white panting Bubbies!


Aug. Indeed they are very fine, and very large.


O. G. Here are two Diamond Rings, one with 3 Stones besides the Sparks; and
this has 5, one cost 50 pounds, the other above fourscore. Then here are
Diamond Bracelets for your Arms. But here, my Jewel, here is the rarety, the
Phoenix of 'em all. This Ring here with one Stone, it is a Diamond of the old
first Water. I have refused, my Child, above four hundred pounds for this one
single stone.


Ang. It Is beautiful indeed!


Bea. Did not I tell you, Madam --


O. G. And then for Plate, old, and new fashioned too, plain, gilt, and
wrought; I have a Cedar Chest full.


Bea. What young man could make you such fine Presents?


O. G. All, all shall be yours, my little Mouse, my Pigeon.


Ang. O Heaven! some body knocks*


Bea. I Will peep through the Keyhole: O Madam, it is my Master and my Mistress.


O. G. Let me out at this door quickly.


Bea. Ah, the Key's broke in the Lock! undone, undone for ever.


Ang. I am ruined if my Mother finds me here.


Ben. Ah, Madam! What will become of me.


Ang. For Heaven's sake hide your self, do Mr Gerald, I Will love you dearly for
it.


O. G. How? Where? I Will do any thing my dear will have me.


Bea. Here Is the Coffin the dead body was sent in from the Gallows, you may
hide your self in that.


Ang Ay do, Mr Gerald, do.


O. G. How! Coffin me before I am dead, I beg your pardon; I cannot endure the
thought on it.


Bea. Thou strip your self to your Wastcoat, and your Drawers, and lie at your
length, here on this Table, I Will tell my Master you're the dead body, sent in
to be dissected.


Ang. Quickly, Mr Gerald; if you love me deny me not Knocking all this while.


O. G. Come then, I Will do any thing my, Dear Commands me.


Ang. Hark how they knock; I fear they will break the door down.


Within. Ho! Beatrice, Beatrice.


Bea. Make haste, or we are undone. They strip him.


Within. Open the door! Why Beatrice, where are


Bea. So, so; what e're they say or do, be sure you stir not for your life.


O. G. Where will you hide my Clothes?


Bea. Here, here, I^le put them and my young Mistress into the Coffin. Knock
again. I am coming presently.


O. G. So, so; I am dead as a Herring.


Bea. What ever happens, Sir, be not afraid. Come in.


Enter Crispin like a Doctor. Young Ger disguised like his man. I thought I
heard my Master and my Mistress. Cris. They come here presently; but where,
where be the dead Carcass for dissection?


Bea. Here, Sir.


Cris. Ver -- good -- Mr Doctor, send me to begind manuel operation upon de
exterior, an den he will come hear me read upon de interior --


Bea. Are you the German Doctor; that wase her this morning with my Master?


Cris. Yes, de-ver -- same, me am de German Doctor, de Medicine, de Physitien,
de Operateur, de Anatomist, de Chemist, de --


Bea. Very well, Sir, have you any service for me?


Cr^s. Stay one little time. Dis be de Body, let me make de observation of the
Visage -- here be de ver ill aspect -- dis was one person of de fair Speech,
but de falls Heart; covetous, designing, letcherous; a Robber, a Thief, a
Cutthroat -- Sacrament, hanging was too good for him, a Rogue, a Villain -- ah
vat pleasure will dis be to make de Dissection, de Incision, and de Amputation,
upon dis Body, and rip open his Belly from de Cartilage Ziphode, quite along to
his Os-pubis. Ah! vat be dis? his Heart pant still -- dis was the stubborn old
Thief, was but Mr Doctor here, just a now, I would show him de Circulation of
de Blood, through de Systole, and Diastole. Come I Will begin de Dissection while de
body be warm.


Bea. What before my Master comes?


Cris. Yes indeed, dis be only de Manuel Operation, me vil read de Lecture ven
he be here: vare be my man, vare be de Instruments? Y. G. Here, Sir, here.


Bea. Bless me! what is that great Knife for?


Cris. Dis be to cut de Troat, from Jugular to Jugular; as thus.


Bea. Hold Sir, I beseech you. Fear nothing, Mr Gerald. [aside


Cris. You shall see presently.


Bea. It Is just like one of our Butchers Knives: and then what is that Ax for?


Cris. Dis be de decolation Ax, to cut off de head at one Chop; as thus --


Bea. Not yet Sir: What Is that there like a Wimble?


Cris. Dat be to bore a hole in de Scull; when any part of de Scull be broke,
and depressed upon de Brain, with dis we bore hole hard by de fracture, as you
shall see just-a-now.


Bea. No Sir, not now; I Will see it anon.


Cris. Den we put in de proper Instrument, and raise de depressure up to de
proper place, and so make de cure.


Bea. But what is this terrible Saw for?


Cris. Dat be de dismembring Saw, to Saw off de Leg, or de Arm: You see me
presentale Saw off de Bone of dis Leg, and --


Bea. Stay Sir; What Is that sharp crooked Knife for?


Cris. Dis be de Amputation Knife, to cut off de Leg or de Hand, just-a in de
Joint. Ha! where be de Leg and be Arm? --


Crispin draws one Leg from the other, and one Arm from his Body, and Gerald
draws 'em close to him again. Cris. De Devil! me lay one Arm here, and one Leg
here, to Saw off just in the middle, and cut off just in de Joint, for de fine
experiment; and de Arm, and de Leg, be gone home to de Body.


Enter 2 men. 1 Man. Mr Dr. we come for the Coffin we brought the dead Body in.


Cris. Dear be de Coffin; be gone; and give me no interruption; now I open all
de Breast. [Cris. tears open his Wastcoot. So, now with dis Instrument, dis
[The men carry off the Coffin. Knife, I will in one moment cut de Breast Bone,
from de Ribs, and lay all open, dat you shall see how de Heart, de Lungs, de
Liver, lie in dair place proper, and order natural. O de Devil, again! de Body
shrink! de Leg move; and de Arm too: vat strange Carcass have you in dis
Country?


Bea. Oh! Sir, I have seen whole Bodies, after they have lain here a day or
two, get up, and run away.


O. Ger. And so will I! I Will not stay to be butchered here. He leaps off the
Table.


Cris, and Bea. Ah, ah, ah.


O. Ger. Lose my Clothes, my Life, and Jewels all at once! -- Your Servant, Mr
Doctor.


Cris. Stop Thief, stop Thief. As old Gerald is running out, and Crispin after
him, the Doctor and his Wife enter. O. Gerald runs against the Doctor, beats
the Doctor and his Wife down, and Exit.


Dr. O murder, murder!


Wife. Ay, murder, murder!


Enter Simon, and Waiting Woman. Sim. Wounds! Where Is this Dog of a Doctor?
I Will knock the old Cheat's Brains out.


Wait. And if I can reach him, I Will claw his Eyes out.


Dr. O am bruis d all over!


Wife. And I am lamed too.


Wait. O are you there?


Sim. Wounds, Doctor, you have scoured my Guts out, with a murrain to ye --


Wait. And I can hardly draw my Legs after me, for your Physic. But I Will claw
you for it.


Wife. Hold, Mistress, or I shall pluck a Crow with you.


Dr. Be patient Wife -- you are both mad. I never saw either of you before.


Sim. O damned lying Doctor! did you not give me Pills? and I gave you a whole
half Guinea?


Wait. And had not I some of your Rot-gut Pills too, and gave you 2 new
Crown-pieces?


Dr. You rave both, and must be sent to Bedlam.


Sim. 'Sbud I Will have my money again --


Wait. And so will I, -- or tear his Eyes out --


Cris. Hold friends! pray moderate your angers, and don't affront a person of
our faculty.


Sim. Ah, ha! I was mistaken, this is the Doctor --


Wait. I this is he gave us the Pills. I beg your pardon, Sir.


Cris. Beatrice, you must refund.


Bea. There --


Cris. Look you friends, 'twas a mistake. There Is your Half Guinea, and your
Crown-pieces too.


Sim. O pox! this is something.


Ex. Sim. and Wait. Dr. What is the meaning of all this*


Wife. Beatrice, what is the matter here?


Dr. What strange outcry was that we heard?


Wife. I, and who threw us down?


Dr. And what strange thing was that ran over us?


Bea. Why, Sir, as I was showing Mr Doctor here the dead Body that was sent you
from the Gallows, he felt his pulse, and laying his hand on his Breast, he
found his Heart panted; then he took his Incision Knife, and before he could
touch his naked skin, up started the dead Body, and ran away, just as you saw
--


Cris. All this is true, Sir, as I am a Member of the learned Faculty.


Dr. I am amazed*


Wife. Nay Husband, I have heard of such strange things: I warrant the poor man
was hanged wrongfully.


Enter Old Gerald hastily. O. Ger. O undone! undone!


Wife and Bea. Ah, ah, ah!


Wife. He Is come again, Husband, ha!


Dr. In the name of goodness! What art thou?


O. G. Undone I say, undone.


Dr. Art thou a Spirit? or Flesh and Blood? answer.


O. G Give me my Clothes, my Jewels, Huswife --


Bea. Avaunt, avaunt!


O. G. Where are they? Gipsy, speak.


Bea. In the Coffin, in the Coffin.


O. G. I overtook the Coffin, and there is none of 'em. Where are they, and the
Jilt too your young Mistress?


Dr. Sure it is our Neighbor, Mr Gerald.


O. G. I am the same.


Wife. You tell me wonders, Crispin.


Cris. Step to your Daughter's Chamber, Madam; there the Riddle will easily be
unfolded*


Exit. Wife. Dr. What is the matter, Sir? why in this posture? and why this
outcry too?


O. O. That Baggage there, and the young Witch your Daughter, have contrived to
abuse and cheat me, of two thousand pounds worth of Jewels, that were pawnd to
me.


Dr. Here they come then, who must give you satisfaction.


Enter Wife and Young Gerald, leading in Angelica, dressed in the Jewels. O.
G. How! my Son here!


Y. G. Yes, Sir, and my Wife.


Wife. I found 'em shut up together in my Daughter's Chamber.


Dr. Married say you?


Y. G. Yes, Sir, contracted long since; and now confirmed in private, as far as
modesty would permit.


O. G. And Married too! then all is at an end.


Y. G. Here are your Clothes, Sir, Doctor Crispin can tell you how I came by
'em.


Dr. Crispin!


O. G. My Rogue.


Cris. Non Rogus; Medicus sum; that is, I am a German, or a Polish Doctor.


Y. G. The Jewels, Sir, so well become my Wife, I think you cannot in
conscience demand 'em back.


Ang* They were his own free gift; he scorns to take what he has given me.


Wife. Well. I am glad the Son has married my Daughter, and wish Joy to you
both.


Dr. Bless you together. Come Brother Gerald, it is your Son's Wedding Night;
you must forgive 'em and be sociable: Let me prevail with you to give order for
a good Supper, and we'll be very merry, Brother.


O. G. I had as good, I shall be laughed at else.

Sirrah* here has been fine practice, and my Son's marriage was your
contrivance.


Cris. I do confess it, Sir, and glory in the success.


Dr. Come then, sit down, and listen to the Music, and after Supper we'll hear
at large the adventures of Doctor Crispin in this Affair.


Cris. Beatrice and I will tell you he whole Story,
And as we snack'd the Fees, we'll share the Glory.

The Fourth and last Musical Entertainment. After that, the Curtain falls.
FINIS.

