EXCELLENT OBSERVATIONS AND NOTES, Concerning the Royal Navy and Sea-Service.

WRITTEN By Sir Walter Rawleigh and by him Dedicated to the most Noble and
Illustrious Prince HENRY Prince of WALES.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be Sold at his Shop
at the Sign of the Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1650.

Excellent Observations and Notes, concerning the Royal Navy and Sea-service.
HAving formerly (most excellent Prince) discoursed of a Maritimall voyage, and
the passages and incidents therein, I think it not impertinent nor differing
from my purpose, to second the same with some necessary relations concerning
the Royal Navy, with the Services and Offices thereto belonging. For, as the
perfection and excellency of our Shipping is great and remarkable, so the
imperfections and defects of the same by use and experience of late years, have
been found to be diverse and inconvenient, as it falls out many times in the
circumstances of Land service by the charige of Arms, diversities of
Fortifications, and alteration of Discipline. And therefore for the due
reformation, many things are necessarily and particularly to be spoken and
considered of in their Order. In regard whereof, I will first begin with the
Officers, and therein crave pardon (if in speaking plainly and truly in a
matter of so great importance) I do set aside all private respects and
partiality. For in that which concerns the service and benefit of my Prince and
Country, I will say with Cicero, Nil mihi melius, nil mihi Charius. And
therefore not justly to be taxed with any presumption for meddling with matters
wherein I have no dealings nor charge. For that in the affairs of this nature,
every good Subject is deeply interessed, and bound in Conscience and duty both
to say and do his best.

Of the Officers of the Navy.
FIrst therefore, it were to be wished, that the Chief Officers under the Lord
Admiral (as Vice Admiral, Officers under the Lo: Admiral to be men of the
best experience in Sea-service.
Treasurer, Controller, Surveyor; and the rest) should be men of the best
experience in Sea-service, as well as of judgment and practice in the utinsells
and necessaries belonging to shipping, even from the Batts end to the very
Kilson of a Ship. And that no kind of people should be preserred to any of
these offices, but such as have been thoroughly practiced, and be very judicial
in either kind of the above named services; but we see it oftentimes to fall
our otherwise. For sometimes by the special favor of Princes, and many times
by the mediation of great men for the preferment of their servants, and now and
then by virtue of the purse, and such like means, some people very raw and
ignorant, are very unworthily and unfitly nominated to those places, when men
of desert and ability are held back and unpreferr'd, to the great hinderance of
his Majesty's service, to the prejudice of the Navy, and to the no little
discouragement of ancient and noble able servitors, when favor or partiality
shall eat out knowledge and sufficiency, in matters so nearly concerning the
service and safety of the Kingdom, wherein all private respects should be laid
apart, and virtue truly regarded for it self.

Of the building of Ships.
SEcondly, it were no less behoovefull for his Majesty's service, and for the
strength of the Navy, No Ships to be builded by the great.
that no Ships should be builded by the great, as diverse of them have been; For
by daily experience they are found be the most weak, imperfect, and
unserviceable Ships of all the rest. And it is not otherwise to be presumed,
But as the Officers would be thought to be very frugall for his Majesty in
driving a bargain by the great at a near rate with the Shipwright, So
likewise the Shipwright on his part will be as careful to gain by his labor,
or at least to save himself harmless, and therefore suite his work slightly
according to a slight price. Out of the which present sparing and untimely
thrift, there grows many future inconveniences and continual Charge in
repayring and reedifying such imperfect slight built Vessels. The proof and
experience whereof has been often found in new Ships built at those rates,
but so weakly, as that in their voyages, they have been ready to founder in the
Seas with every Extraordinary storm, and at their return been enforced to be
new built. But seeing the Officers of the Admiralty do hold (by the grace of
his Majesty) places of so good Credit and benesit, it is their parts therefore
(being well waged and rewarded for the same) exactly to look into the sound
building of Ships, Officers of the Admiraltie exactly to look into the sound
building of Ships, etc.
and to employ their care and travel as well in the over sight thereof, as to
provide that all things else belonging to the Navy be good and well
conditioned: For the strong and true building of a Ship is not to be left
barely to the fidelity of a Marchanticall Artificer (the chief end of whose
work in his own Account is his profit and gain) but some Superior Officer
ought to have a further regard in that business, if he be such a one as has
more judgment in the building and conditioning of a Ship, then devotion to his
own ease and profit.

Moreover if any decayed Ship be intended to be new made, it is more fit and
profitable to make her a size less then she was, then bigger; For then her
beams which were laid over-thwart from side to side, will serve again, and
most of her Tymbers and other parts will say well to the building of a new
ship. But if she should be made a size bigger, the Timber of the old will be
unprofitable for that purpose; we find by experience, that the greatest ships
are least serviceable, The greatest Ships least serviceable.
go very deep to water and of mavelous Charge and fearful Cumber, our
Channells decaying every year. Besides, they are less nimble, less maineable,
and very seldom employed. The Spaniards phrase.
Grande Navio grande fatica, says the Spaniard, a ship of 600 Tuns will carry
as good Ordnance, as a ship of 1200. Tuns, and though the greater have double
her number, the lesser will turn her broad sides twice, before the greater can
wend once, and so no advantage in that overplus of Ordnance. And in the
building of all ships, these six things are principally required.

1. First, that she be strong built.

2. Secondly, that she be swift.

3. Thirdly, that she be stout sided.

4. Fourthly, that she carry out her Guns all weather.

5. Fifthly, that she hull and try well, which we call a good Sea-ship.

6. Sixthly, that she stay well, when bourding and turning on a wind is
required.

1. To make her strong consists in the truth of the Workman, and the care of
the Officers.

2. To make her sail well is to give a long run forward, and so afterward done
by Art and just proportion. For as in laying out of her bows before and
quarters behind, she neither sinck into, nor hang in the water, A caution for
Shipwrights.
but lie clear off and above it, And that the Shipwrights be not deceived
herein (as for the most part they have ever been) they must be sure, that the
Ship sinck no deeper into the water, then they promise, for other wise the bow
and quarter will utterly spoil her sailing.

3. That she be stout, the same is provided and performed by a long bearing
Floor, and by sharing off above water even from the lower edge of the Ports.

4. To carry out her Ordnance all weather, This long bearing Floor, and
sharing off from above the Ports is a chief Cause, Provided always, that your
lowest Tire of Ordnance must lie four foot clear above water when all loading
is in, or else those your best pieces will be of small use at the Sea in any
grown weather that makes the Billoe to rise, for then you shall be enforced to
take in all your lower Ports, or else hazard the Ship. Mary Rose in 11. 8. time.
As befell to the Mary Rose (a goodly vessel) which in the days of King Hen.
8. being before the Isle of Wight with the rest of the Royal Navy, to
encounter the French Fleet, with a sudden puff of wind stooped her side, and
took in water at her Ports in such abundance, as that she instantly sunck
downeright and many gallant men in her. The Captain of her was Sir George
Carew Knight, who also perished among the rest.

5. To make her a good Seaship, that is to hull and try well, there are two
things specially to be observed, the one that she have a good draught of water,
the other that she be not overcharged, which commonly the Kings Ships are, and
therefore in them we are forced to lie at try with our maine Course and
Missen, which with a deep keel and standing streake she will perform.

6. The hinderance to stay well is the extreme length of a Ship, especially if
she be floaty and want sharpness of way forwards, and it is most true, that
those over long Ships are fitter for our Seas, then for the Ocean, but one
hundred Foot long and five and thirty Foot broad, is a good proportion for a
great ship.

It is a special Observation, Special observation.
that all ships sharp before, that want a long Floor, will fall roughly into
the Sea and take in water over head and Ears. The high charging of Ships a
principal cause that brings them all ill qualities.


So will all narrow quartered ships sinck after the Tail. The high charging of
ships is it that brings them all ill qualities, makes them extreme Leeward
makes them sinck deep into the water, makes them labor and makes them overset.

Men may not expect the ease of many. Ease of many Cabbins and safety at once
in Sea-service not to be expected.
Cabbins and safety at once in Sea-service. Two Decks and a half is sufficient
to yield shelter and lodging for men and Mariners and no more charging at all
higher, but only one low Cabin for the Master. But our Mariners will say,
that a Ship will bear more charging aloft for Cabbins, and that is true, if
none but ordinary Marryners were to serve in them, who are able to endure, and
are used to the tumbling and rolling of ships from side to side when the Sea is
never so little grown. But men of better sort and better breeding would be
glad to find more steadiness and less tortering Cadge work. And albeit the
Mariners do covet store of Cabbins, yet indeed they are but sluttish Dens
that breed sickness in peace, serving to cover stealths, and in Fight are
dangerous to tear men with their splinters.

Of harboring and placing the Navy.
THere are also many and great reasons why all his Majesty's Navy should not in
such sort be penned up as they are in Rochester-water, His Majesty's Navy (in
such sort as they are) not to be pend up in Rochester-water, etc.
but only in respect of the ease and commodity of the Officers, which is
encountered with sundry Inconveniences for the Sea-service, the dificulty being
very great to bring them in or out at times of need through so many Flats and
sands, if wind and weather be not very favorable. Besides, they must have
sundry winds to bring them to the Lands end, and to put them to the Seas, which
oftentimes fails, and causes delay when have is most needful. For if any
service be to be done upon the South parts of England, Wight, Portsmouth,
Garnsey and lersey, Devonshire Cornwall, Wales, or Ireland.
as the Wight, Portsmouth, the I slands of Garnsey and Jersey, or Westward
toward Devon-shire or Cornwall, or toward Wales or Ireland, It is so long ere
his Majesty's shipping can be brought about to recover any of these places, as
that much mischief may be done the while. For the same winds that bring in the
Enemy, binds in our shipping in such sort, as that oftentimes in a months space
they are not able to recover the nearest of any of these above named Coasts.
But how perilous a course it is, is easily discerned, and as casily remedyed,
seeing there are besides so many safe and good harbors to disperse and bestow
some of the Navy in, where they may ever lie fit for all services, Portsmouth,
Dartmouth, Plymouth, Falmouth, Milford and diverse others, Harbors very capable
and convenient for Shipping*
As Portsmouth; Dartmouth, Plymouth, Falmouth, Milford and diverse others, All
of them being harbors very capable and convenient for shipping. But perhaps it
will be alleged, that they cannot ride in any of these so safe from enemies
as in Rochester-water, because it reaches far within the Land, and is under
the protection of some Blockhouses. To which I answer this, That with very
easy care and provision, they may in most of these places ride sufficiently
secure from any foreign practices. And I do not mean that all the whole Navy
should be subdivided into all these Ports, but that some half dozen or eight
of the midling ships, Half a dozen or eight of milding Ships and ships and
some Pynnaces to lie in the West, etc.
and some Pynnaces should lie in the West, and yet not in any Port so near the
Sea, as that in a dark night they may be endangered by enemies with fire or
otherwise, but in some such places as Ashwater is by Plymouth, Ash-water by
Plymouth.
where an Enemy must run up a fresh River, a dozen miles after he has passed
the Forts of the Island, and the Alarm given, before he can come where they
lie at Anchor. In which River the greatest Charack of Portugal may ride a
Float ten miles within the Forts. But if regard be only had of their safe
keeping, and not also of their readiness and fitness for service, then let
them never be sent abroad to be hazarded against the Enemies forces; for
therein they shall be more subject to casualitie and danger, then by lying in
any of these harbors above specified. But certaien it is, that these Ships are
purposely to serve his Majesty, and to defend the Kingdom from danger, and not
to be so penned up from Casualitie, as that they should be the less able or
serviceable in times of need. And therefore that objection savours not of good
reason, but rather of self respect in the Officers, who are all for the most
part well seated near about Rochester. But the service of his Majesty, and the
safety of the Realm (in my poor opinion) ought to prevail beyond all other
respects whatsoever: and to him that casts thoseneedlesse doubts, it may well
be said, pereat qui timet umbras.

Of the needful expense in manning the Navy and other inconveniences by
placing all the Fleet in Rochester-water.
IF the service of the Shipping lying for any of these places above named, Nota.
or for Spain, or for the Islands, they are enforced of very necessity to
press the best and greatest part of their men out of the West Countries, which
is no small charge in bringing them so far as between that and Rochester, and
then when they are imbraqued at Rochester, their charge is again redoubled in
their pay and expense of victuals, before the Ships can recover so far as
Plymouth, which many times is long a doing, for they do ever usually touch at
Plymouth in all Southerene voyages, for the furnishing many Sea-necessaries,
which that Country does afford. And therefore for so many Ships as should be
there resident, the Charges of Conduct Money for Marryners, Charges of Conduct
money for Mariners well saved, etc.
of wages and of victuals, would be well savd for all that time, which is
spent betwixt Rochester and Plymouth. Besides, it were to be presumed, that
Enemies would not be so troublesome to the Western Coasts, nor that Country it
self would be so often dismayed with Alarums as they have of late years been,
if some of his Majesty's good. Ships were resident in those parts. If therefore
in his Majesty's wisdom it should appear fit, to bestow some of his Shipping
in any of these Horbours aforenamed, it shall be very needful likewise that
there be a Magazin of all A Magazin of all manner of necessary provisions, etc.
manner of necessary provisions and Munitions in the same places, according to
the proportion of the Shipping that there shall be resident, whereby such
defects as by accident may fall out, shall upon any occasion be readily
supplied without delays or hindrance of service: And that withal in the same
places, some Officers belonging to the Admiralty be there always attendant,
otherwise it would be found very inconvenient to be enforced ever to at-attend
such helps and supplies as must come so far off as London, when it may more
easily and with less charge be effected in places where they ride.

Of great Ordnance.
IT was also very behoovefull, His Majesty's ships not to be overcharged and
pestered with great Ordnance as they are.
that his Majesty's Ships were not so overpestred and clogged with great
Ordnance as they are, whereof there is such superfluity, as that much of it
serves to no better use, but only to labor and overcharge the Ships sides in
any grown Seas and foul weather. Besides many of the ships that are allowed
but twenty Gunners, have forty piece of barsse pieces, whereas every piece at
least requires four Gunners to attend it, And so that proportion of Ordnance
to so few Gunners, very preposterous: For when a Ship seels or roules in foul
weather, the breaking loose of Ordnance is a thing very dangerous, which the
Gunners can hardly prevent or well look into, they being so few, the Gunnes so
many; withal we do see, that twenty or thirty good brass pieces, as Cannon,
Demicannon, Culverin, and Demiculverin, is a Royal Battery for a Prince to
bring before any Town or strong Fortress. Royal Battery for a Prince.
And why should not we as well think the same to be a very large proportion for
one Ship to batter another withal? which if it be, then may his Majesty
ratably save a great part of the Ordnance throughout every Ship, and make the
Navy the more sufficient and serviceable, and thereby also save a great deal
of needless expense in superfluous powder and shot, Needless expense of
superfluous powder and shot, etc.
that is now prerended to be delivered out according to this huge and excessive
proportion of Artillery, whereof if many had not been stricken down into Holt
in many voyages and (especially in this last journey to the Islands) diverse of
the Ships, weight, Heaft, and Charge thereof, would have foundered in the Sea:
wherein I report me to such as have served in them, and saw the proof thereof.
For this journey to the Islands, The journey to the Islands.
did most of all others, discover unto us these experinces and trials in the
Royal Navy, for that it was the longest Navigation that ever was made out of
our Realm, with so many of the Princes Ships, and tarrying out so late in the
year, whereby both the winds and Seas had power and time thoroughly to search
and examine them. Besides many times, there is no proportio of shot and powder
allowed rateably by that quantity of the great Ordnance, as was seen in the
Sea-Battaile with the Spaniards in the year 88. when it so nearly concerned
the defense Spaniards Armado in 88.
and preservation of the Kingdom. So as then many of those great Guns wanting
powder and shot, stood but as Ciphers and Scarcrowes, not unlike to the
Easterling hulkes, Easterling Hulkes.
who were wont to plant great red Port-holes in their broad sides, where they
carried no Ordnance at all.

Of Calking and sheathing his Majesty's Ships.
THere is a great error committed in the manner Great error committed in manner
of Calking his Majesty's ships with rotten Ocum.
of Calking his Majesty's Ships, which being done with rotten Ocum, is the
cause they are Leaky, and the reason is this, for that they make their Ocum
wherewith they Calke the seams of the Ships, of old seere and weatherbeaten
ropes, when they are overspent and grown so rotten, as they serve for no oath
use but to make rotten Ocum, which moulders and washes away with every Sea, as
the Ships labor and are rossed, whereas indeed of all other things, the most
speicall and best choice would be made of that stuff to have it both new and
good, for that sparing to employ old rotten Ropes, is a great defect either in
the building of new Ships, or in the repairing of old, and is the cause why
after every journey they must be new Calked. And therefore it were much to be
wished, as a thing fit for his Majesty's service, profitable for the Navy, and
happy for those that shall serve in them, that the whole Navy throughout were
all sheathed, as some of them are. The benefit and good whereof for Sea-service
is manifold, and no less frugall for his Majesty in making his Ships as strong
and lasting thereby, as they are otherwise good of sail. And then shall they
never need (scarcely once in ten years) this new Calking and repayring which
now almost every year they have. Censure taken of the best Seamen of England.
And hereof let the censure be taken of the best Seamen of England, and they
will not vary from this opinion.

Of Victualling.
AS his Majesty's due allowance His Majesty's allowance for victualling Ships
very large and honorable,
for Victualling of ships is very large and honorable, and would be greatly to
the encouragement and strengthening of the Mariners and Soldiers that serve in
them, if it were faithfully distributed, the Sea-service (indeed) being very
miserable and painful, So again as it is abused and purloyned, it is very
scant and dishonorable to the great slander of the Navy, to the discouragement
of all them that are pressed thereunto, and to the hinderance of his Majesty's
service. For that many times they go with a great grudging to serve in his
Majesty's Ships, as if it were to be slaves in the Gallyes. So much do they
stand in fear of penury and hunger; The case being clean contrary in all
Merchants ships, and therefore the Purveyors and Victuallers are much to be
condemned, as not a little faulty in that behalf, who make no little profit of
those polings which is cause very lamentable, that such as sit in ease at home,
should so raise a benefit out of their hunger and thirst, that serve their
Prince and Country painfully abroad, whereof there has a long time been great
complaining, but small reformation.

Of Beer Caskes.
THere is also daily proof made, Great inconvenience by bad Caske used in his
Majesty's ships
what great inconveniences grows by the bad Caske which is used in his
Majesty's ships being commonly so ill seasoned and Conditioned, as that a great
part of the Beer is ever lost and cast away, or (if for necessity it be used)
it breeds Infection, and Corrupts all those that drink thereof. For the
Victuallers for cheapnesse will buy stale Caske that has been used for
Herring, Train Oil, Fish, and other such unsavory things, and thereinto fill
the beer that is provided for the Kings Ships. Besides the Caske is commonly
so ill hooped, as that there is wast and leaking made of the fourth part of all
the drink were it never so good, which is a great expense to his Majesty, a
hinderance of service, and a hazard of men's lives, when the provision fails so
much and answers not the Account. The which might easily be redressed, if the
Caske for his Majesty's Shipping, were purposely hooped in such sort as Wine
Caske is, or else hooped with Iron, which would ever serve and save that
continual provision of new Caske, which now falls out every voyage. But this
course were more profitable for his Majesty then for his Officers, and
therefore unpleasing to be spoken of, But yet such as serve in the Ships have
good cause to wish the reformation thereof.

Of the Cookroomes in his Majesty's Ships.
ANd whereas now the The great Inconveniences of the Cookrooms in all his
Majesty's Ships made below in hold in the wast.
Cookroomes in all of his Majesty's Ships are made below in hold in the wast,
the inconveniences thereof are found many ways by daily use and experience.
For first it is a great spoil and annoyance to all the drink and victuals
which are bestowed in the hold, by the heat that comes from the Cookroome.
Besides, it is very dangerous for fire, and very offensive with the smoke and
unsavory smells which it sends from thence. Moreover it is a great weakening to
a ship to have so much weight and charge at both the ends, and nothing in the
Mid-Ship, which causes them to warpe, and (in the Sea-phrase; Sea-phrase.
and with Mariners) is termed Camberkeeld: whereas if the Cookroomes were
made in the Forecastle (as very fitly they might be) all those Inconveniences
above specified, would be avoided, and then also would there be more room for
stowage of victuals, or any other necessary provisions, whereof there is now
daily found great want. And the Commodity of this new Cookroome the Merchants
have found to be so great, as that in all their Ships (for the most part) the
Cookroomes are built in their Fore-Castles, contrary to that which has been
anciently used. In which change notwithstanding, they have found no
inconvenience to their dressing of meat in foul weather, but rather a great
ease, howbeit their Ships go as long voyages as any, and are for their burdens
as well manned. For if any storms arise, or the Sea grow so high as that the
Kettle cannot Boil in the Forecastles, yet having with their Beer and Biscuit,
Butter and Cheese, and with their pickled Herrings, Oil, Vinegar and Onions,
or with their red Herrings and dry Sprats, Oil and Mustard, and other like
provisions that needs no fire, these supply and varieties of victuals, will
very sufficiently content and nourish men for a time, until the storm be over
blown that kept the Kettle from boiling.

Of Mustering and pressing able Mariners.
AS concerning the Musters Musters and Presses for sufficient mariners to
serve in his Majesty's Ships the care therein very little, or the bribery very
great.
and Presses for sufficient Mariners to serve in his Majesty's Ships, either
the care therein is very little, or the bribery very great, so that of all
other shipping, his Majesty's are ever the worst manned, and at such times as
the Commissioners Commissions come out for the pressing of Mariners, the
Officers do set out the most needy and unable men, and (for Considerations to
themselves best known) do discharge the better sort, a matter so commonly
used, as that it is grown into a Proverb amongst the Sailors, That the
Mustermasters do carry the best and ablest men in their Pockets, a Custom
very evil and dangerous. The Sailors Proverb.
where the service and use of men should come in trial. For many of those
poor Fishermen and Idlers, that are commonly presented to his Majesty's Ships,
are so ignorant in Sea-service, as that they know not the name of a Rope, and
therefore insufficient for such labor. The which might easily be redressed;
if the Vice Admiral of the Shire where men are mustered, and two Justices had
directions given, to join with the Mustermasters for the pressing of the best
men whom they well know, and would not suffer the service of their Prince and
Country to be bought and sold, as a private Muster master would do. Besides,
the Captains tains themselves of the Ships, if they be bare and needy (though
pity it were that men of such condition should have such charge committed unto
them) will oftentimes for Commodity Chop and change away their good men, and
therefore it were sitly provided to bridle such odd Captains, that neither they
themselves, nor any of their men, should receive his Majesty's pay but by the
pole, and according as they were set down in the Officers books when they were
delivered without changing of any names, except to supply such men as are
wanting by death or sickness, upon good testimony under the hands of the
Master, the Boat swayne, the Master Gunner, the Purser and other Officers of
the ship. For it nearly concerns them to look well thereunto, having daily use
of them.

Of Arms and Munition.
IT were a course very Comfortable, defensive and honorable, that there were
for all his Majesty's ships a proportion of Swords, A proportion of Swords
Targets of proof and the like allowed; and set down for every Ship according
to his burden, etc.
Targets of proof, Moryons, and Curatts of proof, allowed and set down for
every ship according to his burden, as a thing both Warlike, and used in the
King of Spains ships, the want whereof as it is a great discouragement to men
if they come to any near fight or landing, so would the use thereof be a great
annoyance and tertifying to the enemy. And herein should his Majesty need to be
at no extraordinary expense: For the abating of the superfluous great picces in
every Ship, with their allowance for Powder, Match and Shot, would supply the
cost of this provision in very ample mannet.

Of Captains to serve in his Majesty's Ships.
AT al such times as his Majest. ships are employed in service, it were very
convenient that such Gentlemen as are his Majesty's own sworn servnats, His
Majesty's own sworn Servants to be preferred to the charge of his Majesty's
Ships.
should be preferred to the charge of his Majesty's Ships, Choice being made of
men of valor, and Capacity; rather then to employ other men's men, And that
other of his Majesty's servants should be dispersed privately in those services
to gain experience, and to make themselves able to take charge. By the which
means his Majesty should ever have Gentlemen of good account his own
servants, Captains of his own Ships, instead of petty Companions and other
men's servants, who are often employed, being (indeed) a great indignity to his
Majesty, to his shipping and to his own Gentlemen. For that in times past, it
has been reputed a great grace to any man of the best sort, to have the Charge
of the Princes ship committed unto him, and by this means there would ever be
true report made unto the Pr. what proceedings are used in the service, which
these meaner sort of Captains dare not do, for fear of displeasing the Lords
their Masters, by whom they are preferred, or being of an inferior quality,
have no good access to the Presence of the Prince, whereby to have fit
opportunity to make relation accordingly.

But now forasmuch as I doubt not, but that some contrary spirits may or will
object this as a sufficient reason to infirm all those points that I Objection.
have have formerly spoken of, and say unto me, why should his Majesty and the
State be troubled with this needless Charge of keeping and maintaining so
great a Navy in such exquisite perfection, and readiness? the times being now
peaceable, and little use of Arms or Ships of War, either at home or abroad,
but all safe and secure, as well by the uniting of the two Nations, as by the
peace which we hold with Spain, and all other Christian Princes. To this I
answer, that this (indeed) may stand (at the first sight) for a pretty
supersiciall argument to bleare our eyes, and lull us asleep in security, and
make us negligent and careless of those causes from whence the effects of
peace grows, and by the virtue whereof it must be maintained. But we must not
flatter and deceive our selves, to think that this Calm and Concord proceeds
either from a settled immutable tranquillity in the world (which is full of
alterations and various humors) or from the good affections of our late
enemies, who have tasted too many disgraces, repulses, and losses, by our
forces and shipping, to wish our State so much felicity as a happy and
peaceable government, if otherwise they had power to hinder it. And therefore
though the sword be put into the Sheath, we must not suffer it there to rust,
or stick so fast, as that we shall not be able to draw it readily when need
requires. For albeit our enemies have of late years sought peace with us, yet
yet has it proceeded out of the former trial of our forces in times of war
and Enmity. And therefore we may well say of them as Anneus (Praetor of the
Latins) said of the Roman Ambassadors, who seemed curious and careful to
have the League maintained between them (which the Roman estate was not
accustomed to seek at their neighbors hands) and thereupon says this Anneus,
unde haec illis tanta modestia nisi ex cognitione virium and nostrarum and
suarum. For with the like consideration and respect have our late enemies
sought to renew the ancient friendship and peace with us. And well we may be
assured, that if those powerful means whereby we reduced them to that modesty
and courtesy as to seek us, were utterly laid aside and neglected, so as we
could not again upon occasion readily assume the use and benefit of them, as
we have done, those proud mastering spirits, finding us at such advantage,
would be more ready and willing to shake us by the ears as enemies, then to
take us by the hands as friends. And therefore far be it from our hearts to
trust more to that friendship of strangers, that is but dissembled upon policy
and necessity, then to the strength of our own forces, which has been
experienced with so happy success. I confess that peace is a great blessing
of God, and blessed are the Peacemakers, and therefore doubtless blessed are
those means whereby peace is gained and maintained. For well we know that God
works all things here amongst us mediatly by a secondary means, The which
means of our defense and safety being shipping, and Sea-Forces, are to be
esteemed as his gifts, and then only availeable and beneficial, when he
withal vouchsafes his grace to use them aright.

FINIS.

