ROGER* The West-Country Lad. Set forth in his proper SHAPES. OR, THE
WEST-Country Lasses Sweetheart Described, in Answer to the Well-shap'd Country
Lass.
To the Tune of Cavalilly Man.
Licensed according to Order.

^ ^ HIe hoe, pray what shall I do?
My Sweetheart is gone I cannot tell how,
He Is like to Old Nick, and give him his due,
And this is my Love, do you like him hoe?
I Am sure he has got a goodly burnt Face,
He looks like to Cain, or one of his Race,
And a Halter would set him off with a good grace
And this is my Love, do you like him ho?
He has a fine Nose that is like to a Bottle,
But it bends somewhat downwards and covers his Throttle,
It Is partly green colored, and partly it is mottle,
And this is my Love, etc.
His Teeth, like a Checquer, is all black and red,
And stands very handsomely in his Calves-head
Which makes me full often the thoughts of him dread,
And this is my Love, etc.
His mouth it is narrow, being square a yard long
His Breath it is scented, and that very strong,
It smells like a Turd when you stir in it long,
And this is my Love, etc.
The Hair of his Head its color is red,
But it looks very gray having Nits in his Head,
And where there is Nits there is Lice it is said,
And this is my Love, etc.
I spies him by chance the last Wednesday Morn,
A Combing his Hair with a Comb made of Horn
And I think such a lousie Rogue never was born
And this is my Love, etc.
His Throat it is like the Ditch near to the Fleet,
But it is not so handsome, nor scarce so sweet,
And I Am sure he can swallow a Bashel of Wheat,
And this is my Love, etc.
His Body is Crooked more every day
And his Legs they are both often turned the wrong way,
Which makes him look wonderful handsome and gay,
And this is my Love, etc.
His Legs are small as the Post of a Mill,
I think it is true, believe it who will,
But his Arse I am sure a great Cauldron will fill,
And this is my Love, etc.
Last night in a nasty old Bed he Pigg'd in,
His Feet in his Mouth all beshit to his Skin,
He looked like a Monster and fiercely did Grin,
And this is my Love, etc.
And now my good Neighbors I swear by my say
I Am afraid that some of you will steal him away
But I hope you will return him again the next day
If you like not my dearest Love hye ho,
Printed for James Gilbertson, and G. Conyers.


