AN ANSWER TO Mr. WILLIAM PRYNN'S Twelve Questions concerning Church
Government: At the end whereof, are mentioned several gross absurdities, and
dangerous consequences of highest nature, which do necessarily follow the
tenets of Presbyteriall, or any other besides a perfect Independent Government.
Together with certain QVERIES.
SIR,
HAving perused certain Questions concerning Church Government, which carry
your name Imprinted in the Frontice-piece: The well-wishes which I bare toward
you, did soon prevail with me to make an Answer to them, conceiving you may
cast an eye thereon as purposely directed to your self, by an unknown
Well-willer, rather than on sundry larger Discourses; which if you had
seriously considered, I cannot but imagine, you would have been better
informed, than, for the present, I perceive you to be in this particular:

The Title says, Considerable serious questions sadly propounded: And the
Preface tells the World. You have neither leisure, nor opportunity to debate
the late unhappy differences touching Church Government, etc. which moved you
to digest your subitane apprehensions of these distracting controversies into
the ensuing considerable Questions, to be sadly pondered, and solidly debated
by sober minded, peaceably disposed men, of greater ability and vacancy for
such a work, etc. Surely 'twill seem strange to many, that subitane
apprehensions should so easily be digested into considerable questions, by one
who in his own confession, had neither leisure, opportunity, nor ability for
the work; and yet it will likely be thought more wonderful that you seem to
think so lightly concerning the distractions of the Churches, (from whence not
a few of no little piety and judgment conceive the distractions of the
Kingdom to arise) as to imagine the publishing of subitane apprehensions,
should in any considerable degree conduce to a composing of them.

1. To the first Question then I answer: That the Gospel being by Christ's own
injunction to be preached to all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19* 20. etc. (who have
their established different forms of Civil government) Christ has not
peremptorily prescribed one, and the self same form of Ecclesiastical
Government, Discipline and Rites unto all Nations: (the more to blame are such
as go about to prescribe one throughout whole Kingdoms throughout the world)
and that every several Nation, Republique, yea and every particular Christian
ought to have under the Gospel a liberty and latitude, to choose such a form
of Church government, as he himself, for his particular use, in his own
reason and understanding apprehends to be according to Gods Word, and not
run on implicitly, subjecting himself to whatsoever shall be projected or
set up by others, whereof he himself doubting, incurres damnation, Romans 14. 22,
23. But for the Articles and Statutes of England or Ireland, you know they are
for Episcopacie, and were once as strong for Popery, never for Presbytery: but
what if they should be for Popery again, Judaisme or Turcisme? it is no offense
to make a querie, nor impossible to come to pass: the greatest part of such as
choose our Parliament men are thought to be Popishly or Malignantly affected,
and if it ever happen so, by the same Law and Doctrine the whole Kingdoms must
in consequence, and such obedience as you dictate, conform themselves to
Popery* Judaisme or Turcisme: But you will mean the State may impose no other
government but what is consonant to the Word of God? I answer: That the
Papists, Jews and Turks, do all affirm that both their discipline and
doctrine are according to the Word of God, and their yea is full as good as
your no: If then you say we must suffer rather th^n submit unto such
Antichristians; you say well: but withal, I answer, that you agree with them
or approve them (even whilst they persecute you) in theirs or your principles
(for both have one and the self same) of persecution: and though many things
in all Church governments, Discipline and Ceremonies are left to humane
prudence; the Magistrate may not impose ought upon the Subjects in general, or
upon any one in particular, which by them or him cannot be assented to, or
performed with a good conscience both toward God and men, Act, 24. 16.

But since you take notice of Christ's injunction for preaching of the Gospel to
all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19. let it not seem strange if I affirm it to be
impossible for man to propound a rational way, or so much as a possibility of
preaching the Gospel unto all Nations, without Liberty of Conscience, or in any
other than an Independent way: for how can you imagine that Heretics or
Unbeleevers will come and live amongst you, that they may be won unto the
Gospel by your conversation, or by your convincing them from evidence of
Scripture, if they know your manner is to ravish their Religion from them
before their judgments be fully informed and satisfied? or what hopes have you
that erroneous or misbeleeving States and Princes will suffer such to lurk
within their territories under pretense of propagating the Gospel in simplicity
and truth, who hold opinions (too much savouring of Popery) that when they have
converted a sufficient party unto their belief, they may therewith under
pretext of pulling down Idolatry and superstition, divest them of their power
and Country, unless they will forgo their Religion, from which only (how
erroneous soever) they expect salvation?

Suppose a Turk desirous to turn Christian; the Calvinist, Lutheran, Papist,
Brownist and Anabaptist seeking to make him a Proselite to their faith, each of
them produce their grounds and reasons from the Scriptures, as the rule and
guide to warrant and direct them in this Christian warfare: Suppose again,
that these several sorts of Christians may differ about the sense of
Scripture, nay about the translation or original Text it self; how must this
Turk be directed which of them to yield unto, or be swayed withal? must it be
to them that have the sharpest sword or buffit him the most? doubtless he must
not respect the numbers or persons of the men, nor yet be led away by the
opinions of either which may be more complying with his lust, so are the yea
and nay of one or other of them all alike: It Is true, the Papists pretend
miracles to confirm their doctrine with, and I have heard the truth and
reality thereof affirmed by many travelers, whereof some have passed for
Protestant Gentlemen; but though I conceive my self to have been as desirous,
and to have had greater opportunity than many others, as having lived much
amongst them, to have been a witness of them (if possible) at some time or
other, yet could I never attain so near as to conceive the least likelihood
thereof; and yet if the Papists could, and did make use of false miracles, how
may they be known from true ones? the very Devils are reported to be subject
and subordinate amongst themselves, according whereunto they submit unto, or
vanquish one another; and we know the Egyptian Sorcerers went very far in
competition with Moses and Aaron, so that we must not be swayed with miracles
neither, little more than with the bare yea and nay of men, until we see an
evident demonstration, an infallible guide, the very finger of God himself in
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 2. 4. 5. who requires of us no other than a
reasonable service, Romans 12. 1. and will in likelihood at the great day of
judgment condemn more for believing false Gospels without just grounds, than
for rejecting of the true Gospel, notwithstanding it was accompanied with such
signs and wonders as were never done before, Joh. 15. 24. As in natural
things, we believe nothing but what we see a natural reason for; so in
supernatural things, less than a supernatural evidence will not suffice: But
how then must this Turk be guided and directed to whom he should yield
himself a convert? Surely I know no guide he has besides the reason which God
has given him: no thing in the whole creation is to bear such sway with us as
reason: but what should then induce this Turks reason to believe the one
rather than the other, concerning the revelation of Gods Will unto the World by
the publication of the Law and Gospel? whether any, or which of their
translations is the truest? with the most orthodox interpretation of any or
every portion of the Scriptures? and in sum, which is the right or truest
Religion of them all? And since they all alike pretend authority of Scripture
with no less confidence than the Jews, who ceased not to cry, The Temple of
the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, even whilst they were deepest engaged to
their sins, Jer. 7. 4. I querie what may be the infallible unerring rule to
lead this Turk unto the true Religion? what it was in the beginning? whether
it be still the same? whether less then infallible be a good guide herein?
whether rectified reason be not an infallible guide? how came reason to be
offuscated and depraved? how may we know when it is vitiated? how recover it
and keep it so? And if upon serious disquisition of the truth, we be found
involved over head and ears in ignorance and error, no small portion of
pretended knowledge to be bare opinion only, and the greatest part of most
religions Antichristian void of reason: how ought such as go about to fasten a
yoke of their own doctrine and opinions on others, be accounted the most
ignorant, absurd, presumptuous, and the greatest enemies both to God and man of
any people under heaven, deserving death more then a murderer or traitor?
besides, it will easily appear upon due scrutiny, That the compelling men to a
uniformity by Civil Powers, the enforcing of a National Church, the exacting
obedience to whatsoever Religion shall be established by Law, and consequently
to change so often as the Politic Civil State shall find requisite for
worldly ends, is the only way to banish all Religion from their hearts, and
breed in men a doubting of the Scriptures, if not of God himself.

If true Believers having got the upper hand may banish Misbeleevers, for fear
of being tainted with their errors; than ought not the true Believers when
they are few in number (suppose them Protestant Merchants or others in Turkish
or Popish Countries) by any means remain among the misbeleevers, but forthwith
to depart their territories, which the Apostles and Primitive Christians did
not practice? nay the contrary is insinuated, whilst Peter exhorted, the Jews
turned Christians to have their conversations honest amongst the Gentiles, that
they* which spoke evil of them as evil doers, might by their good works which
they should see, glorify God in the day of visitation, 1 Pet. 2 12. Paul's
advice likewise was, That the believing husband should not put away the
unbeleeving wife in hopes of her conversion, 1 Cor. 7. 12. 16. And Peter bids
wives be subject to unbeleeving husbands for the same reason, 1 Pet. 3. 1. 2.
And since the power of miracles through want of says is ceased, we have no
means so efficacious for convincing people of their errors, and bringing them
unto the truth as a godly conversation, the benefit and fruit whereof would be
quite frustrated, if the Saints of God being the greater party were either to
banish the miss or unbeleevers, or to withdraw themselves if they were fewer:
I desire this argument may be well reflected on, which though it be brief, and
not enforced, I conceive it very pat and apposite unto the point in
controversy.

I know the permitting men of so many different opinions in a Country, is
usually objected as a Bugbear of all confusion, and disturber of the Civil
State: (but to wave the experience of the contrary truth which we see in
Holland, Germany, France, Poland, Hungary, Turkey, Barbary, and elsewhere) why
may they not as well live as peaceably and civilly under one Prince or State,
as under different neighboring or remoter powers, betwixt whom, viz.
Christians and Turks, Protestants and Papists, Lutherans and Calvinists, we
see concluded and maintained peaceable leagues and covenants, with a free
egresse, regresse, or continuance of the respective Subjects in one another
territories? why should it breed greater confusion, or discompose the Civil
peace of England, by permitting an English Lutheran, Brownist, Antinomian,
Anabaptist, Jew, Turk, or others, more than if they were of any other Nation?
or with what sense or reason can that privilege or freedom be denied unto an
Englishman in his own Country, because he differs from the State Religion or
opinions that be in fashion, which every forreigner of any Nation of what
profession soever in amity with England enjoyes without control? would it not
be a pretty fancy to banish English Anabaptists, or others dissenting in
opinion from their native inheritance, their friends and livelihoods, whilst
all our Ports, Towns, and houses are open to receive Spanish Papists, and
Dutch Anabaptists to take the bread out of our mouths? I only make a querie of
it that better judgments may reflect thereon.

2. Particular Churches, members of a Kingdom and Nation are not obliged in
point of conscience and Christianity, to submit unto whatsoever public Church
Government, Rites and Discipline a National Council, Synod and Parliament
shall conceive most consonant to Gods Word, unless it prove so in the whole
Kingdoms, Nations, and those very particular Churches judgment; for by the
contrary position, they and Mr. Pryn himself should be subject unto the Popish
or Episcopal government again, if this present Parliament and Synod do but
say the word; and the Scriptures you aim to prove it with, do not only fail,
but make against you, viz. 1 Cor. 32. 33. which text makes the whole Church, or
rather every member thereof capable of prophesying all alike; and I find not
but the Spirits of the Prophets which the Apostle insinuates to be subject,
might possibly be of as wise, learned and noble as any the Christian world
afforded, in that he said, Ye may all prophecy one by one, v. 31. and whether
it be not greater confusion in the sight of God to compel a hundred men of
twenty several opinions to join in one imposed worship, than permit each of
them to serve God after his own manner; and a kind of constraining God to
curse the true worshippers for the false worshippers sake, or whether he will
or not to bless the false worshippers for the true worshippers which are
amongst them: And lastly, whether way is most peaceable, to desire only a
Christian liberty for our selves of serving God in such manner as we find
ourselves bound in conscience to do, or the imposing a prescript way, our
own, a humane ordinance upon others, who neither understand it to be
reasonable or godly; let man see and judge as God does in judgment and in
truth.

As touching your texts for Subjection to the Powers, viz. Romans 13. 1. 2. 1
Pet. 2. 13. 14. 15. We must bate them in this case, or be subject to
Episcopacie, which I would be loath to be, though it boast of Statute Law as
yet: And for 1 Cor. 10. 32, 33. deal equally with me: can you conceive that
you give me less offense in forcing me to join with you in such a way of
worship as I think sinful or less pleasing unto God, than I should give unto
you by peaceably serving God after another manner, only different from yours,
without so much as maligning yours, much less compelling of your person? or
do you any way seek my profit that I might be saved, when you force me to
serve God (as you allege) after such a manner whereof I doubt, and so am
damned? Romans 14. 22, 23.

3. and 4. To the third and fourth Question, I answer: That in all the New
Testament you find no National Churches, but several Independent ones, to
wit, so many Churches as you read of in all the New Testament, no one depending
on the other: But for Presbyteriall government, I find there no print thereof,
far better color for Episcopacie; yet lest Episcopacie should attempt to show
her horns again, I propound it as a querie; whether superiority, or
Episcopal pre-eminence, which the Apostles enjoyed in those days, was not
only by reason of the immediate Call, Commission, and a higher measure of
inspiration which they enjoyed above their brethren? and that since neither
Bishops, Synods, nor Classical Presbyteries can now boast more of the Holy
Ghost than others; whether Presbyters should not be contented to become level
with their brethren, or restore again the superiority to Bishops, unto the
Apostles and their successors.

The unity, peace and amity which you insinuate to be established by
Presbyteriall Government, is it otherwise than of the outward man? can you
compel them into an unity of hearts and minds as well as bodies? was a
coercive power ever sanctified for such a purpose? had a subordinate government
of Churches, or a National Church been so beautiful in the eyes of Christ,
do we not think the Apostles and Primitive Christians would have been as wise
to find it out, and as daring to practice it as were the Papists of England,
who always governed themselves by Bishops, their Bishop of Chalcedon being
continually resident in the Land till within these ten years? which yet
caused such a difference betwixt the Jesuits and the secular Priests, as that
they have been impleading one another at the Court of Rome for above these
twenty years: Methinkes you should have known of this, and not presuppose the
Apostles and Primitive Christians inferior to Papists for piety or discipline.

But as for the capacity you say this Government has to prevent heresy,
errors, faction, libertinisme, injustice, and other inconveniences: I appeal
to the throne of reason (since that of Christ Jesus being spiritual is so
little apprehended by the carnally minded) whether the quite contrary be not
the truth it self out of this consideration only, viz. The National Church
government to be afterward established, must first be made choice of by most
voices, and so imposed upon the rest for Evangelicall; the most are most
commonly the most corrupt, most licentious, most injust, most factious, either
quite careless or regardlesse of every Religion of all devotion; and by their
Club-law which they are able to manage, being the major party, they will both
erect their government, and compel others to be like themselves; and I desire
to propound it to your saddest thoughts to be seriously considered on, whether
such as are so earnest that the State should prescribe them what Religion to be
of, and after what manner to worship God, do not so for the most part out of
idleness, because they themselves will not take pains to try the Spirits, 1 John 4. 1. whether they be not mere formalists, and such as may be thought to
be of opinion, and pass their lives, as though the State must give account
both of their faith and works at the day of judgment, and not they themselves.

As I told you before, I find no National Church in the New Testament, but
several Independent ones, which I entreat you to consider on: If you say there
was no whole Nation converted to the Christian Faith in those days, and that
the Christians wanted Civil power; I answer, That there were so many
Proselites, so many converted as made several Churches* if not in one City, in
one Province at least, and within a few (some 12) miles one of another, to wit,
the 7 Churches of Asia, no two whereof, besides the first Christian Antioch and
others, were above 120 miles distant, and yet all these were Independent, as
appears by the respective directions, and the distinct charges which the
Blessed Spirit in the Revelation pronounced against them: and whether the
Civil powers were then Christian or Antichristian, had the dependencie and
subordination of Churches been an Ordinance of God, good Christians would have
submitted without a Civil power to pillory or whip them to it, and the
Apostles not omitted to reprehend them if they had done amiss in not observing
it: Since then a Classical Presbyteriall government has no president in the
New Testament, and Episcopal which domineered in some degree, almost ever
since has been voted Antichristian, and neither of them by coercive means can
work more upon Christians than they can upon so many head of Cattle by
impounding them in what place they please, no one of them may warrantably be
established.

5. As the grounds of Independent government attribute nothing to the
Magistrate in Church affairs farther then the Magistrate is a member of their
Churches and Assemblies* so no people under heaven ascribe more unto the
Magistrate than the Independent do in Civil matters. The Great Turk is not
so absolute a Monarch, as a Prince, a Magistrate may be over a people
independent in matters of Religion, who being such as make a conscience of all
they do, would not only give unto Caesar the things that be Caesar's, but even
suffer their own, their propriety in part to be taken from them, rather then
resist the Powers, so they may quietly enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences;
the Scriptures, the principles on which they ground themselves, do necessarily
enforce them to it.

6. Doubtless in all Nations from the first preaching of the Gospel till now,
Christians did multiply, and particular Churches likewise, which for the most
part had dependencie on, and communion one with another, and were all
subordinate to National and Provincial Synods, and public Ecclesiastical
constitutions; but such Churches as were chiefly Papal or Episcopal, and
never Presbyteriall till within the memory of our Fathers: and why we may not
retreat back again into the errors of a hundred years, as well as not pass
forward unto a farther measure of light and knowledge, I find little
satisfaction, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14.

7. The self same Law of Nature, God, and rectified reason which instructed
and warranted all Nations to subject themselves unto some public form of
Civil government, obliging all persons and societies of men alike, which they
conceived most advantageous, does not warrant us to do the like in Church
affairs; because whatsoever civil action the Civil Magistrate requires, may
be performed by the outward man, or else be expiated by penalty without taint
of conscience: But the Church government as it aims at, and regards the
Spiritual service and performance, Joh. 4. 24. so the punishments must have a
Spiritual effect, Mat. 18. 18. and cannot be undergone, or work upon a man's
spirit unless he will himself, neither may he be willing thereunto, unless he
apprehend them to be according to Christ's Government and Institution.

8. From Exodus 23. 17. and 34. 23, 24. with Exodus 34 23, 24. and Deuteronomy. 16. 16.
Levit. 17. 3. 4. 8 9 which speaks of the National Church of the Jews
appearing at Jerusalem thrice a year, you can no fitter apply it to prove a
National Church of Christians, than make it possible for all the world if they
were Christians (which in such a sense must be National) to appear thrice a
year at Jerusalem, or excuse them if they did not appear: and if you grant a
Catholic Church throughout the world which may reach from one end thereof
even to the other: I wonder how it can be denied, that such as join in an
Independent Church way may not as possibly be accounted and prove true members
of the Catholic: but for the distinct Synagogues and Parochial Assemblies,
as you call them, of the Jews, to which the people living together in a City
were allotted and restrained, I find no ground in Scripture; but strong
evidence for a kind of Independent Churches amongst the very Jewsd, as you may
gather from Deutt. 12. 12. 18. c. 16. 11. 14. c. 26. 11. 12. Judge. 17. 18.
Chapters, by such of them as kept Levites to officiate in their families.

The Synodall Assembly you point at in the Acts 15. was no formal Synod,
neither would you as I conceive be contented to be bound by such an other, to
wit, by a particular Church (that is a Parish Church in your account if you
hold any such in those days) of another place, whereof you your self are no
member: If you say an assembly of brethren at Jerusalem, or any other
particular place would now want inspired Apostles to make them Synodall, or
their Decrees of binding power, I cannot help you till it please God to send us
others; neither do I find it in the power of man, because they have not an
Apostolical spirit to supply the want thereof by numbers, by multiplying or
assembling so many more Presbyters or Presbyteries, all men subject to the same
passions with our selves, Act. 14. 15. which is such a piece of simonie as we
must be driven to grant, that God Almighty has hertofore infatuated such
inventions, or yield the Papists therein the upper hand.

But where do we find that those of Jerusalem sent binding decrees to the
Churches of the Gentiles? I see it not in Act. 15. 22. to 32. c. 16. 14. ^. 21.
25. which you produced for that purpose; since whatsoever their decrees were,
though they were infallibly assisted by the presence of the Holy Ghost, v. 28.
the penalty thereof was no more, than, If you do observe these things you
shall do well, v. 29. In Gods name then, if you will needs have Synods, and
equalize them with the Apostles in making of decrees, which I fear me, may
amount unto presumption, let them at least bind no otherwise than the
Apostles, than these of Jerusalem, to wit Spiritually; give them no sting or
poison of Civil power, which will subtly undermine, enervate, and quite eat
out the spiritual, other than which, you will (and may well for this very
cause) acknowledge the Apostles neither had nor exercised: But what are these
binding decrees of that Synodall Assembly? are they any other than a small
portion, or Historical narration of the Acts of the Apostles? did they then
bind the Churches of the Gentiles, or all Christians since, any otherwise than
other portions of Scripture do? And if you will have Synods and Parliaments to
make the like binding decrees at present, do you not say by consequence, and
in effect that they may prescribe us another Gospel, other Scriptures? which
though they were not differing, but alike to what we have received, are we not
forbid to add unto them upon peril of damnation? Rev. 22. 18, 19.

But for the Churches of England, Ireland, Wales, Scotland, etc. recorded by
Historians and Canons, I fear me, if well examined, they will rather be found
Church walls, than Church Assemblies, living Temples of the Lord, whereof
Christ Jesus is the corner stone, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17. Ephesians. 2. 20, 21, 22. such
stocks and stones have the lazy, covetous, aspiring, and which is worst of
all, persecuting (lergie-men endeavored to bring poor Christians to, the
laity as they call them, that they might afterward hew and hammer them into
whatsoever else their own lusts most desired.

9. In my answer to your 3. and 4. Questions, I hope to have given you, if you
consider of it, some satisfaction, that even in the Apostles times, the
Christians if they had been inspired thereto, or so desired, might have made
themselves a National Church, what ever the Civil Magistrate had been, as
well as Papists in England, who always were and still are subject to their
Bishop in chief, from whom they have appeal to Rome; or the Jews themselves,
which so long as they were a Church, were still a National Church, though
subjected to heathen Princes as touching Civil matters, in captivity and
strictest bondage: For suppose England ought to be, and were a National Church
of Calvinists, or other kind of Protestants; if the Prince think, good to
alter his own Religion, or some party of the Subjects, a fourth, fifth or so;
does the Kingdom cease to be a National Church? if it do not, let the
Kingdom enjoy their National Church, and particulars, such as will, their
Independent way; but if it do, it is a strong argument that the erecting of
National Churches is no Ordinance of God, as being over liable to casualty and
subversion, if the Prince thereof only, or every lesser part has a capacity to
overthrow it.

But whereas you say, that as the Christians multiplied, so were Church
Officers, and their Church Government and Discipline varied, the Church
Officers increased, and new Gospels written, prescribing new necessary rules,
canons and directions, etc. and transmitting the same liberty unto posterity of
supplying and instituting the like as they themselves should afterward find
requisite: the phrase, or rather doctrine of new Gospels stumbles me not a
little, conceiving we find it branded with a curse, Gal. 1. 8. 9. 1 Timothy 1. 3.
and I fear me, you may as well question whether we have that true Gospel which
was once delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. as multiply or coin us new ones, for
if there be more then one, or since all Christians are endowed with Christian
liberty all alike; if a Lutheran, Calvinist, Anabaptist or Brownist; if a
Papal Presbyteriall or other Synod; if Rome, Spain, France or England may
make new Gospels, all other States, Synods and People of what opinion soever
may do the like; and then what spirit less than wonderful and infallible can
assure us which is the true one? and yet such as will make new Rites and
Ordinances (their very Ceremonies becoming Ordinances by their enjoining them)
to bind the consciences of their brethren, must necessarily derive their
warrant from some new and unknown Gospel, or have no new ones, their own
confession implying no less, in that they hold a necessity of new Rites and
Ceremonies, whereof they acknowledge to have no express warrant for them in
the Scriptures which are common to us: and for the liberty you say Independents
use in this respect, they impose it no otherwise upon any, but that every
particular man which apprehends it not to be Gods way, may peaceably withdraw
himself.

But for Micah 4. 1. to 5. Zach. 8 22. and Es. 2. 2. 3. And it shall come to
pass in the last days that the mountain of the Lords house, shall be
established in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills,
and all Nations shall flow unto it. And people shall go and say, come ye and
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob,
and he will teach us of his ways, and will walk in his paths, for out of Zion
shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; which you
bring to prove the Prophets prediction of National conversions, and
consequently of National Churches after their days; but you can no more
justify a National Church of Christians from thence, than that the same
National Church of Christians shall likewise go up to the Temple of
Jerusalem, from whence by the same Prophecy they are also to receive the Word
of God, and not from Parliament, Pope, Synod or Presbytery: nay the same
Prophecy goes futher, and says, That they shall then break their swords into
mattocks, and their spears into sithes; Nation shall not rise up against
Nation, neither shall they learn to sight any more, v. 4. May then a
Presbyterial Spirit carve or mince this Prophecy out unto us by peece-meales
which the Spirit of the most High has joined? and if it be to be verified of
our times, that Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn to fight any more; must not these sons of thunder, these men of
War, these Church Incendiaries, which do little besides preaching fire and
sword, with incensing of their over credulous disciples to drive out of the
Country, out of the World, or persecute even unto death such as only dissent
from them in opinion; must they not I say condemn themselves? this course may
make a People become a Nation of Devils, or sooner cut a whole Nation off, than
make them grow into a National Church to serve the Lord in sincerity and
truth: But what if whole Nations should be converted? if National conversions
may or ought to prove so many National Churches, suppose English, Scotch,
Dutch, French, whereof no one will submit unto the other, though they were all
orthodox Protestants, would not they be all independent in respect to one
another? why then may it not be tolerable in the eyes of God, for as many
lesser Churches or Congregationall Assemblies in one State or Kingdom to enjoy
a like independencie? is God a respecter of numbers or of Nations? but if the
several Nations so converted ought to make but one National Church, why may
not the proselites of all Countries as well make one National Church, since we
find in Zach 14. 16. whilst he prophesies of a National Church and worship,
that every one that is left of all the Nations which came against Jerusalem
shall go up from year to year to worship? and which of them shall have the
honor of the denomination and christning of it? wherefore should it be called
after one, rather than after any other of them? I fear me, the Gossips will
not agree about the name, especially the Spaniards who have the Catholic
King, and think all Nations of the World bound to leave their own, and learn
their fashions, language, and what not: and yet the Jews will tugge hard for
it, both with Rome, the Spaniard, and all others, pretending that all
Prophesies and other Scriptures which do make for a National Church, declare
it plainly to be Jewish, Es. 49. c. Mic. 4 1. 5. and the truth is, that under
the Law, whoever of the Nations were then converted, were properly said to be
of the Jewish Church in whatsoever climate or Country they were resident; but
how an Englishman can be a member of several National Churches at once (as
he may happen in his life time to have lived several years in several
Countries) or be one year a member of one National Church, and another year
of another, I know not but conceive it to be totally inconsistent, and yet you
will make him be a member of the National Church where ever he resides for the
present, and that if the Church be now National, whosoever is once a member,
can no more cease to be a member (by leaving one National Church and joining
to another) than in time of the Jews when there were but two estates, to wit,
within or without the Jewish Church.

But if several National Churches may make up one Catholic, why may not so
many more Independent Churches do so too? And if all believers must now make
but one National Christian Church, must it not insinute one High Priest, one
Pope to be head thereof that it may the better hold parallel with the Jewish?
If well examined it is not unlikely something equavalent thereunto may be
discovered: will not these changelings like Micha's vagabond Priests which
remove from one Benefice, Living, and Lecture to another as often as a more
plentiful is proffered, think it better to officiate to a Tribe and Nation,
than to a petty assembly or family, and so betray their flocks? Judge. 17. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, and 18, 19, 20. Is it not to be feared that men cry out for a
subordination of Churches or Presbyteries to enlarge their own jurisdiction?
and will not the same mercuriall spirits at times and opportunities refine the
business, and discover when a Papal plenipotentia may best conduce to unity,
and that with good reason too according to their carnal principles? for why
should not a Monarchical Government be as lawful in Church as Commonwealth,
if the insinuated argument in your seventh Question be good, it should be
necessary so far forth, as many judicious Writers hold a Monarchical
Government to be most exquisite and perfect for every Civil State? nay why
should it not be so? or how dare the favorers, abetters of a National
Christian Church endure any other than a Monarchical head and government, such
a one as God himself prescribed unto the Jews, and fully as much (even both at
once or not at all, I mean a Monarchical head to the National Christian
Church) as he did a National Church unto the Christians?

10. It will be no more obstinacy, singularity, arrogancy, selfe-ends, nor
peremptory schism for Independents to submit unto a government established by
consent of Parliament, and Synod hereafter, than it would have been heretofore,
if the said government shall require any thing of them which they cannot yield
unto without defiling of their consciences: you will, I presume, grant they
might do so in time of Popery or Episcopacie; and why a Presbytery should have
a liberty of forcing men to sin against their own faith; of doing evil, and
exercising dominion over the consciences of their brethren, which neither the
Pope nor Bishops might, is to me a riddle.

But I conceive I may safely bring my appeal home to Mr. Pryns own
conscience, and ask him seriously why he might not have made his tenth whole
Querie unto himself when he opposed the whole Church and State of England, not
having then so many to side with him therein, as through Gods goodness the
Independents now have hundreds? Oh! how do you give offense unto your
brethren, and cause to think you then stood out upon a wrong foundation, in
that you do not see the Independents have the same, and so much better? nay
do you not justify the Archbishop in all his harsh proceedings then against
you, whom now you yet prosecute, for what he did then, the very same which you,
if you had power, would do to Independents? reconcile but your self unto your
self, and i^ I mistake not, you will be far nearer composing the distracting
controversies you speak of in your Preface, whereof your 12 bloody Queries,
with doctrines and spirits of the same alay are the only causers.

But good now, tell me, were they Statesmen, Bishops, a Star Chamber or
High Commission Court, whose government when time was you so withstood? what if
a Presbyteriall Discipline seem as unwarrantable and ungodly unto a thousand
Christians who you call Independents, and in the opinion of understanding and
pious men may likely be as conscientious and knowing as your self? but what if
you a single man or so, were then in the right, though you withstood the settled
government of a State or National Church, and a thousand Independents now in
an error for delivering their opinions concerning Presbyteriall government
which is but getting into the Throne, not yet established, were in the wrong?
what infallible rule or spirit did you then discover unto the State whereby
they might be prevailed upon to think you then were in the right, which a
thousand Independents may not rather be thought to have now, done the like and
more, though yet they were in the wrong? if then we be all subject to the same
passions and infirmities, Romans 14. 15. let us use instructing and admonishing
with meekness, bearing one another burden, Gal. 6. 2.

1 Pet. 5. 2. Peter exhorts the Elders to take the oversight of the flock of
God amongst them, not by constrains but willingly: Perhaps some may apprehend
the sense of these words constraint and willingly to be doubtful, to wit,
whether of the two be to be understood actively in reference to the Elders, and
whether of them passively; in which respect the better to find out the
Apostles meaning, it may not be amiss to try both ways, whereby I doubt not
but we shall easily make appear which of them does best agree with the
coherence as well of that which does precede, as of that which follows. If the
word constraint be to be understood passively in relation to the Elders, then
the meaning of the words, as I suppose, can be no otherwise then this: I exhort
you Elders to be forward in taking willingly the oversight of Gods flock, not
delaying so long as that the flock compel you thereunto; and if it signify
actively, then will it amount to this purpose: I exhort you Elders to take the
oversight of the flock of God so far forth only as they are willing to be
subject unto your oversight without constraint: If then we examine which of
these two interpretations of the Apostles word will suit best with the context,
we shall find the former not only like a patch of old cloth in a new garment,
but if we will make it to be sense, we must suppose the flock of God might
constrain the Elders to take the oversight, if of themselves they were
unwilling, which I suppose you will explode: But that the intention of the
Apostle was to exhort the Elders to take the oversight, and rule over the
flock of God so far forth only as the flock was willing, is clear by the
following words, v. 3. where he adds, that they should not take the oversight
as Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the flock; as if he should
say, Though the flock of God have willingly, and of their own accord chosen
you to have the oversight and rule over them in the Lord, yet think not that
you have hereby obtained any lordly power or dominion over Gods heritage, but
that you might only serve as more eminent ensamples of well-doing unto the
flock: but if they might have taken the oversight by constraint, to wit,
whether the flock would or no; then must they necessarily in that respect have
been as Lords over Gods heritage, which the Apostle expressly prohibits them.

If then the Elders, Presbyters and Bishops may not take this oversight of the
flock of God, farther then the flock does willingly consent thereto, how will
your Parish Churches, much less your National endure this Scripture? how can
you longer uphold either of them, or they subsist, so long as you believe and
yield obedience to it? unless you will say the greater part which are willing,
will sufficiently constitute a Parochial or National Church, and this the
Independents will not grudge you, much less abridge you of, so long as you are
contented to expect, according to the Apostles long suffering, Ephesians. 4. 2, 3, 4.
2 Timothy 4. 2. till they can be convinced to join with you therein.

What think you is the reason that the Kings and Parliaments Forces have been
kept thus in a balance destroying one another, whilst it may have been
observed for the most part, that when either side was in best condition and
height of glorying expecting a total victory, as I may say, the next encounter
proved their overthrow; but that the design of most voices on both sides, is to
get power to persecute the other for cause of conscience? We may be confident
that if both sides had not only notoriously, but even equally offended God in
highest measure through a desire of power to persecute their brethren merely
for differing in opinion, God would have put an end unto the common miseries in
giving victory to one of them; but alas! let it be no offense to say, his
infinite Wisdom finds neither of them capable of such mercy whilst they are
so merciless to one another: is it not too too evident that both the
Episcopal and Presbyteriall Clergy contrary to Paul's profession, 2 Cor. 1.
24. aspire at rule and dominion over the faith of others, Gods most
conscientious and dearest servants? are not their Assemblies full of these
alarmes? are not the Pulpit cushions worn out with tragical actions suitable
thereunto? are not these the comfortable doctrines the disconsolate people are
forced to feed upon in these miserable distractions, whilst they kill one
another in the field, or so many grow mad at home, and dye of penury and
desperation? and what think we made our brethren the Scotch so successeles
here in England, whilst the Wars are now beginning to kindle in their own
Country, if it were not that they join with this Nation, or rather provoke to
establish their so much Idolized Presbyteriall Discipline of persecution? when
yet they themselves thought they had just cause to be highly offended with the
same (their own) persecuting spirit in Episcopacie. When the Lord required the
Israelites to appear before him at Jerusalem thrice a year, he promised that
no man should invade their habitations in their absence, Exodus 34. 23, 24.
which gracious providence of his no doubt continues still protecting all such
as are employed by his command; but unless our brethren of Scotland bethink
themselves in time, and consider that even as the persecuting Bishops of
England attempting to impose their government in Scotland gave occasion to
begin the Wars in England; so if the persecuting Presbyters of Scotland
continue to advance, and get set up the Scotch government in England, it may
likely bring all three Kingdoms to make the seat of War in Scotland: I would
be loath to prophecy upon this occasion, but do much fear, that in how bad
condition soever both England and Ireland are at present, if the Wars last but
a little longer, Scotland will yet be in far worse: God of his infinite mercy
open the eyes of all three Kingdoms in this their heavy visitation,
reconciling Himself unto them all, and them to one another for his dear Son
Christ Jesus sake.

11. The Independent Government will not so certainly let in heresies into
their Churches, as the settling of a coercive jurisdiction in or at the Clergies
beck would keep truth out from a National Church; but if heresies do
multiply without, in the world (in a National Church) that is no more than was
foretold and must follow of necessity, Mat. 24. 24. 1 Cor. 11. 19. this
concerns not the Independent Government which permits no Heretics to be
amongst them within their Churches: they make use of instructing, admonishing,
reproving and rebuking, with such other Spiritual means and armor, as are
only proper and sanctified by God Almighty for preventing heresies and
schisms; whereas all other Discipline which uses imprisoning, whipping,
stigmatizing, and evil entreating even unto death, a course fitter to be
practiced toward beasts than men, may make the outward man turn hypocrite,
two fold worse the child of the Devil, Matthew. 23. 15. but never prevail upon
the Spirit, which, such proceedings may easily exasperate and keep further off,
but will never win unto the truth.

Men do not embrace errors otherwise than as they account them truths, and
therefore it is no marvel if they prove as pertinacious in defense of the one,
as they are constant in defending of the other; in which respect what ever men's
opinions be, they must be dealt withal by the spirit of meekness and long
suffering, Gal 6. 1. 2 Timothy 4. 2. 5. Tit. 2. 15. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. we know not
Gods secret times and seasons for bringing men unto the truth; it is a dangerous
thing to anticipate Gods judgments, even on those which afterward were to be
condemned; some are not called until the 11 hour in Gods account; and our
Savior taught us to ask forgiveness no otherwise then we forgive our
brethren, and no heretic how gross soever, has greater need of a merciful
Presbytery, than that Presbytery has of the Father of mercies.

It Is an easy matter to exclaim against Anabaptisticall, Antinomian,
Heretical, Atheistical opinions, as of the souls mortality, divorce
pleasure, etc. but one dram of apposite Scripture, and rectified reason would
convince men of their errors, far sooner then the clubs and slaves which were
and are still employed against our Savior and his Saints when they could not
resist the Spirit and wisdom wherewith they spoke, Act 6. 10. I can easily
believe that since this Parliament time of speaking and writing truth, many
errors have thereby been published, but even you your self by this means
have not acquired a farther knowledge of some truth which otherwise might still
in likelihood have been witheld, I must either stand amazed at the transcendent
perfection of your knowledge, or conceive you have spent more time in writing
then in reading.

12. Independencie is not so like a Pharisaicall dangerous spiritual pride,
vainglorious singularity, or selfe-conceitednesse of a man's own superlative
holiness, as the Papal Episcopal, Presbyteriall, or other such like Spirit,
which is not contented to enjoy God and himself in peace of conscience; but
what ever giddy whimsie, or phanaticke projects invade and captivate his
understanding, is restless, and Haman like, Est. 3. 5. 6. pines away until he
have brought his neighbor, the Town, Country, and all the World to bow to him
perforce, to be of his opinion.

You your self in what you stood out against the Bishops or the State were
Independent, and like enough would then in modesty have been contented barely
to have enjoyed your independencie, for what you found your self not able to
submit unto in conscience; and now that you think you have gained an
opportunity, do you take it to be justice or good doctrine to foment and be a
ringleader unto others toward the obtaining and exercising dominion over the
consciences of your brethren? Oh the impartiality and falsehood of a man's own
heart and understanding.

At the beginning of this Parliament the whole Kingdom sided with both Houses
in the vindication of their Liberties, and so it continued until such as did
overmuch idolize Presbytery, prevailed for a Bill to damn Episcopacie root and
branch, that Presbytery might succeed it with its fascibus and fustibus, with
its Pentifiealibus and Synodalibus; nothing to be abated which concerned either
wealth or jurisdiction, only an Episcopal tyranny to be exchanged for a
Presbyteriall slavery; which, so soon as the Court Clergy discovered, they
quickly plotted a countermine, they quickly prevailed to bring Arms into the
Field for asserting the National Church Government and Discipline established
by Law; and thus between Episcopacie and Presbytery, between the covetous and
aspiring dominering Clergymen of War on both sides, not only the Grand
Design, the vindication of our just Liberties, through Gods just judgment, is
well near blasted, which was so likely to be compassed by a universal union
and concurrence without the least bloodshed, save of some few notorious
Delinquents, and in stead thereof by their several and yet joint contrivances,
like Sampsons Foxes, the depraved Clergymen of both sides have engaged all
three Kingdoms in so violent and execrable a Civil War to the destruction
and sudden death of so many thousand Christians, Protestants, as the whole
Christian World in so short a time had never felt the like. Can Mr. Pryn deny
but that the parties now in Arms, at least the Grand Instruments, those
principal Engines which set all the wheels a running till they are grown
quite giddy, may notwithstanding their subtle carriage of it, be justly
denominated Episcopal and Presbyteriall? have they not as the Prophet Daniel
says, 11. 39. divided the Kingdoms betwixt them at present, and as Esaiah
tells us, 56. 11. do they not look to their own way only, whilst every one
has his chief aim at the gain which comes from his quarter? nay, has not
each of them designed to reduce all three Kingdoms totally to their command
and bondage hereafter? may not the Apostle James his reprehension be thought
purposely directed to them? From whence come wars and fightings among you?
come they not hence even of our lusts? James 4 1. aut Caesar, aut nullus,
nothing will serve their turns less than absolute conquest of the Kingdom,
of the whole man both soul and body; imprisonment and banishment, fire and
sword to all alike, to Independents as well as to Papists, though the Papists
till they renounce some certain tenets, can be true to neither, but the
Independents unto either, as well as the Apostles and Primitive Christians were
to the Antichristian Roman Emperors.

Did Micah, to whom the Word of the Lord came, c. 1. 1. tell the Jews how they
hated the good, and loved the evil, that they plucked off the skin and flesh
from their bones; that they did eat the flesh of Gods people, and flayed their
skin from off them, that they brake their bones and chopp'd them in pieces as
for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron: they build up Sion with blood,
and Jerusalem with iniquity, the heads thereof judge for reward, the Priests
teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof divine for money; yet will they say is
not the Lord amongst us? Micah 4. 2. 3. 10. 11. and may it not now as truly, if
not then Prophetically, be said of too too many on both sides at present, that
they seek to settle uniformity, and build up a National Church in blood and
rapine? did Micah then tell the Jews, v. 11. That their Heads did judge for
reward, and may it not now be said as truly, that neither widow nor
fatherless, neither poor nor oppressed can tell whom to fly to for relief
or comfort? no Saint to help them within hearing; the Drums and Trumpets,
with imminent necessities, are made excuses to continue the whole Kingdoms in
unsufferable misery, except such as can make friendship by their unrighteous
mammon which they have got with fishing in these troubled waters, Luke 16. 9.
may it not now be said as justly, that the Priests of both sides, the
Episcopal and Presbyteriall Clergy do teach for hire, and prophecy for
money? does not the same Prophet Micah say truly of them, He that puts not
into their mouths, they even prepare War against him? do they not with the
most prostitute Popelings cry out, No penny, no Pater noster? Is not
maintenance, maintenance, the burden of all their Parlour or Pulpit pastime?
and why should they so sacrilegiously set a price on that which is but
supposititious, the phancie of their own brains, the real truth whereof God
required all true Disciples to give for nothing? Mat 10 8. Es. 55. 1. 2. or why
should people be forced to buy the chaffer of these Clergie-merchants, rather
than the wares or labor of a Shoemaker or porter? would not such dealing be
damned for an unjust monopoly, which yet these encroachers practice without a
patent, if any but themselves should do the like? nay why must we be forced to
pay these mercenary Clergymen for such counterfeit service and ministration
which others will discharge better, and that for nothing? is not this the
greatest infringing of the Subjects propriety which the Kingdom suffers? I say
not this to under value the Ministry of the Gospel, or to dissuade an ample
and abundant maintenance to such as truly labor in Gods Vineyard; but to
exaggerate the heynousnesse of those that do not only set, as they pretend, the
inestimable treasure of the Gospel, the unvaluable Word of God to sale as if
it were an unholy thing, Heb. 10. 29. but as much as in them lies, compel all
people and Nations by fire and sword to buy trash and trumpery in stead
thereof, and that at what price they themselves please: And lastly, as Micah
pronounced a curse upon the Israelites for these iniquities of theirs, v. 12.
so have we, instead of peace and propriety, nothing remaining besides direful
Wars and barbarous devastations; and instead of a National Church, through
Gods just judgments, we see three Nations weltering in one another blood.

If then we have thus fallen into these miseries, may we not by retrograding
get cut again? if Episcopacie and Presbytery have set the State on fire
through an ambitious desire of Empire, together with a pestilent spirit of
persecuting one another, may not the serving both alike reduce us to quietness
again? they are these pretended Clergymen that love to be called the great
Rabbis and Doctors, that affect the uppermost seats at feasts and meetings,
Mat. 23. 6. 7. these think the Blessed Spirit departed from all the Saints, to
be retreated and confined unto their breasts; they will allow no body to
Prophecy besides themselves, contrary to Paul's testimony, 1 Cor. 14. 31. in
which respect the people being for the most part bred up in invincible
ignorance, or most erroniously both disciplined and doctrinated, through all
which they become plunged into such a desperate and inextricable misery, who
may and ought justly to be called unto account for it, but the whole Clergy of
the Kingdom? a charge was laid upon the Prophet Ezekiel 3. 18. to instruct and
warn the Jews of their wicked ways, and if he failed therein, the punishment
was threatened to himself; and since the Clergy in other cases as of
separating themselves like a tribe of Levi* usurping tithes, etc. appeal unto
the Law* why should not they with their scroules and catalogues of offenses be
tried by the Law, as Festus said to Paul when he sent him unto Caesar? Act. 25.
12.

Consider a little, I entreat you, the case of one upon the high way going
quietly and soberly about his business; if another should quarrel with him
and say he goes the wrong way, he understands not his own business, and so
compel him with threats and violence to go and do as he would have him;
would not every traveller that beheld it, take this other to be impertinent,
proud, presumptuous and injurious? and yet thus does the world treat the
despised Independents, the meekest of all Christians, which our Savior sent
into the world like sheep in the midst of wolves, Mat. 10. 6. And as Paul
then thought he ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth, Act. 26. 9. Ioh. 16. 2. So most men think they do God good service
in reviling, mocking, and persecuting the Independents by all manner of ways,
and for no other cause but that they are more scrupulous than most men seem
ordinarily, in desiring to keep a good conscience both toward God and man.

And whereas you say that Independency casts off the strongest bonds of
brotherly love and care, etc. I beseech you consider a little better of their
ways; Is it not Paul's golden rule and theirs, to give no offense neither to
the Jew, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10. 32. to walk
in wisdom toward them that are without? Col. 4. 5. Is it not a special and
peculiar drist of theirs to win even such as are without the word by their
lowly and pious conversation, 1 Pet. 3. 1. Nay, do they not treat far more
humanely and Christianly all such with whom, by reason of their unbeleefe or
errors they can have no Church fellowship, than Presbyterian or any coercive
Church government does those whom they would compel by persecution to join
with them in Church society? if they put to death the bodies of their friends,
and consequently damn their soul, for they cause them to dye as obstinate
persons as heretics; what exquisite and new invented torments conjured from
below the pit of hell have such in store to treat their enemies withal? or how
do they follow Paul's injunction, who ordered the incestuous person to be
proceeded against in such a manner only, as though the flesh were mortified or
destroyed, yet the spirit might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus, 1 Cor.
5. 5. I have purposely insisted only upon the most material passages of your
Questions, fearing I should have proved over tedious if I had done otherwise;
however for a further dilucidation and strengthening of what I have already
said, give me leave to add a few lines more.

If a Pope, State, or Synod may impose Articles of Faith, or forms of Worship,
prescribe men how they shall understand the Scriptures, stint them to discourse
on certain portions only, and how far forth from hence will follow these
several gross absurdities: 1. That it is superfluous for common people to
have or read the Bible, because they may not be known to believe any part
thereof farther than they are dispensed withal, and that may be imparted to
them in such respective Treatises approved of by the Pope, State, or Synod. 2.
That it is needless to try the Spirits, because according to such
constitutions, they may neither fly from them though they discover them to be
erroneous, nor embrace them if they be of God; but must implicitly conform to
whatsoever is required of them. 3. That it were no blessing for God to have
given unto any man a more discerning spirit than ordinarily, because though
never so transcendently full of the Holy Ghost, he must notwithstanding quench,
renounce it, and submit unto their Magisteriall decrees whether they be true or
false. 4. If a Pope, State or Synod will expect Spiritual obedience to their
Decrees, they must assume to them the Spirit of infallibility, something above
the common sphere of mankind, otherwise they take too much upon them, and
their brethren will be apt to examine, question and judge them too when they
see cause; and from the opinion of their infallibility will follow, that it
should be needless for the Pope to take counsel of his Cardinals; the
Statesmen to receive information from the Subjects whom they represent, and
from whom they receive their authority in trust only; Synods of any others, or
for they themselves to study the points before hand or as private men; but
Peter's Chair, the State-house or Convocation-house would ipso facto inspire,
and translate them with Saul amongst the Prophets what ever their condition had
been before. 5. It would follow that whosoever take upon them this
infallibility of deciding controversies, should never fail therein if their
Civil power be strong enough to back them in it; because both Popes, States
and Synods do alike lay claim, at least require the same obedience to
whatsoever they decree, in defiance of one another, defending themselves and
doctrines more by Civil power than either right or reason, it being the Sword,
not the Scriptures or reason, which decides the controversy between carnal
and persecuting people: And lastly, if fining, imprisoning, or any degree of
persecuting, or using of coercive means against such as differ from them in
opinion were lawful in the true Church or people of God; the Papists or any
other Heretics, because they take themselves to be the true Church, were
bound to use the same even against the Saints of God because they differ from
them; neither should it be any aggravation unto the Jews at the day of
judgment for crucifying of our Savior, and shedding so much innocent blood of
Saints, which yet we find to fall upon them heavily, Matthew. 23. 35. if
persecution for cause of Conscience, were lawful in any people; since in such
case both Jews, Papists and Protestants of any sort which persecute might say;
The true Church had leave to persecute, we held our selves to be the true
Church, and thought we had done God service in killing such as differed from
us, Joh. 16. 2. the putting of the Saints to death is but a consequence which
necessarily follows the doctrine of persecution for cause of Conscience,
though never so erroneous.

I will not deny but Independents ought to take advice and be directed by the
wisdom, learning and piety of others who are better gifted than themselves,
neither may they do any thing rashly contrary thereunto, but rather suspend a
while, still desiring farther light and information: yet when it comes unto an
issue, and that we must necessarily declare our selves; we may not by any
composition, or for any respect whatsoever be finally overswayed by the
wisdom, learning, and piety of others never so eminently gifted, nor be
prevailed upon to do any thing against our own consciences and understanding.

Eight QVERIES.
Whether have not Parliaments and Synods of England in times past established
Popery? And whether may they not possibly do so again hereafter? Whether in
case a Parliament and Synod should set up Popery, may they therein be disobeyed
by the people? If they may be disobeyed in one particular, whether may they not
upon the like grounds be disobeyed in another? whether the people be not judge
of the grounds for denying obedience to Parliament and Synod in such a case?
Whether the pretense of giving a Parliament and Synod power to establish
Religion, and yet reserve in our own hands a Prerogative of yielding or
denying obedience thereunto, as we our selves think good, be not an absolute
contradiction? and lastly, Whether they that attribute such a power to
Parliaments and Synods as they themselves will question and disobey, when they
think good do not in effect weaken and quite enervate the power of
Parliaments, or else condemn themselves in censuring the Independents for
witholding of obedience from Parliament and Synod in such things wherein they
never gave, or meant them to have power?

If the whole Kingdom may deny obedience unto Popish Acts and Canons, or upon
any other the like just occasion, and they themselves be judge whether the
occasion be just or no; whether may not Independents, a part of the Kingdom
only do the like in all respects? or whether ought they because a lesser part
of the Kingdom, to yield obedience to Popish Acts and Canons, because a major
part approve of and agree with a Parliament and Synod in establishing them?

Whether would it not be an ungodly course for any people to hazard any thing
at the disposal of others, or to be carried by most voices, which may
possibly, if not more then probably he decided in such a mannee as the yielding
obedience thereunto would be burdensome to their consciences, if not
absolutely sinful?

Whether were it not an ungodly course for the whole Commons of a Kingdoms, so
far differing in Religion as that they profess before hand that they dare
not yield to one another upon peril of damnation, to make choice of a
Parliament and Synod, with entering into Vow and Covenant to become afterward
all of that Religion whatsoever the Parliament and Synod should agree on?
whether it be not absurd for men to say they will be of such a Religion as
shall be settled, before they se^ evidence to convince them? and whether it be
in the power of man to be really of what Religion he will, until he see reason
and demonstration for it?

If a representative State or Magistrate may make Laws for setting up a
Religion, or establishing what Church government they please; whether have not
the people the same power originally in themselves, to assume again, and put
it in execution when they please? and whether were this otherwise than to
attribute unto a mixed multitude, to the World, if not absolutely as it is
distinguished from the Saints in Scripture, Joh. 15. 18. 19. and 17. 6. 9. 11.
14. at least by most voices, to make choice of a Religion, Laws and Discipline,
wherewith the Saints, household and Church of God must necessarily be governed?

Suppose a Lutheran and Calvinist, or any others differing in opinion; Whether
may they out of hypocrisy or implicitly submit and be comformable to one
another discipline and doctrine whereof they doubt, before they be convinced?
Whether have either of them an infallible way to convince the other, and bring
them over to be sincerely of their opinion before their understandings be
satisfied? if they have, why do they not put it in execution? if they have
not, why should they be offended with one another if they continue differing?

Whether opposing Gods people or their ways be not a fighting against God?
whether it be not extremest rashness, if not absolute madness and
presumption to attempt any thing which may possibly prove a fighting against
God? and whether any man in these days can have a fuller assurance in his own
conscience, or give better evidence unto others that he does not oppose the
people of God whilst he opposes such as differ from him in opinion, than Paul
whilst he persecuted the Church, Phil. 3. 6. thought he ought to do many
things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26. 9?

Postscript.
COuld the foregoing Answer have found as free a passage at the Press as your
Questions did, it might have presented it self to you a month ago; and though
in the interim I have had the sight of a second dozen of Interrogatories, I may
safely profess the reading of them did not administer unto me any other matter
of edifying, than to find and bemoane the want of those sober minded, and
peaceably disposed men, etc. you spoke of in your Preface to the former dozen,
which might sadly ponder and seriously debate them: however since they are
presented as a second course, though I confess my stomach was overcome at very
first, yet that you may see I am not easily prevailed upon to pass by any
thing of Mr. Pryns without perusal, please to be contented that I observe your
2 Intergatory is, Whether Independents do not extraordinarily eclipse,
impeach, if not absolutely deny and subvert the lawful power of Civil
Magistrates, all former Parliaments, and this present too in all matters of
Church Government, and Ecclesiastical affairs, etc. But from what is thereby
insinuated A. S. does freely clear the Independents in his Observat. and
Annotat. upon the Apologeticall narration, where he says, That the Civil
Magistrate arrogates not to himself (not so much as) any directive power in
matters of Religion. p. 5. The Civil Magistrate arrogates no Spiretuall
authority to himself. p. 48. The Parliament indeed is the supreme Judicatory,
severe Tribunal, the most sacred refuge, etc. in Civil causes, but it
pretends no directive power in matters of Religion, by teaching or preaching,
or judging of controversies of Religion; nor any executive power that is
intrinsecall to the Church, as in the vocation, deposition, and suspension of
Ministers, etc. (which I conceive the Committee for Religion will not like of)
which are merely, spiritual. p. 6. If your meaning be that the Parliament
should judge between the Independents and Presbyterians, you go against the
Parliaments intention: ibid. and lastly, For intrinsecall spiritual power, it
is not in your power to grant the Civil Magistrate any at all; neither can you
give him more spiritual obedience than Scripture permits you, or give him a
part of the spiritual power which you have received of God, It is only in God
who can give power therein to any man we dare not be so bold. p. 28. Now if
this doctrine be Presbyterian, and Presbyterian good, and that deny unto, nay
make the Civil Magistrate disclaim all authority in matters of Religion; with
what justice are Independents censured as subverters of the Civil powers for
saying but the same? If it be objected, that A. S. seems to be of another
opinion in other passages; let but the objecters reconcile him to himself, and
the great controversy between Independents and Presbyterians will be well
near composed: But that you may see the Independents assume no greater liberty
of dissenting from their brethren in matters of opinion than is warrantable by
the Presbyterian rule: See likewise what A. S. says p. 22. to wit; It is safe
even for a few men to dissent from all the World if they have very strong
reason for their dissent. p. 28. Particular congregations are not subject unto
the judgment of Senates or Assemblies, but according to the word of God: and
lastly, It is holden for a certain and undoubted maxim amongst all
Procestants, that the Church has no absolute power in her judgments, etc. You
your self cannot say less, unless you make an Idol of them; yet if you will
but grant them thus much, they are totally and sincerely the Civil
Magistrates, and yours in all the rest.

In your third Intergatory, you insinuate That the Independents conceive a
right and liberty of gathering to themselves such as are Parishioners of 20
other godly Ministers by the established laws and customs, which you say our
solemns Vow and Covenant obliges us to maintain: Good Sir, tell me, Are they
the Episcopal Laws of England, the Presbyteriall Laws of Scotland, or the
popish Laws of Ireland which you call established Laws? for the whole Kingdom
of Ireland both representative and represented, will now no doubt he able to
declare by Club-law wherein your best argument and strength consists, that the
Popish are now the established Laws of Ireland; which of them is it your expect
us to be engaged to by out solemn Vow and Covenant? (for doubtless there are
many who think the Covenant obliges us unto all three alike in their
respective senses, for no few both Popish, Episcopal, Presbyteriall and
Independent men have taken it in no other:) The Popish I conceive you will
renounce, though by your own manner of arguing you cannot even at present get
clear thereof as touching Ireland nor England when ere we have a Popish
Parliament again: As touching Episcopacy, I presume you understand of a Bill
prepared for its extirpation; and why may not Presbytery be kept out as
lawfully if the State and Nation shall think fitting according to your
second-considerable Question? wherein since you do in effect gratify a
Parliament and Presbyteriall Synod with a power of setting up a National
Church Government and Religion: and in your fourth Interrogatory you tell us,
That Kings and Parliaments have the self same jurisdiction in and over all
Ecclesiastical matters which are not positively of divine institution and
injunction, as in and over temporal; will it not follow by the same argument,
that a Popish or Episcopal King and Parliament may do, or have the same in
England and in Ireland? But have you not in these two lines said in effect,
That men must conform to Presbyteriall, Episcopal, or Popish rites and
government to all alike, if King and Parliament be such, whilst they proclaim
them to be according to the Word of God? Nay, may not this present Assembly,
whom you court with most orthodox, pious, conscientious learned Ministers,
especially selected, 2 Interg. taking up your own words, call this a cursed
project, or new kind of Gunpowder, 2 Interg* whereby you have left them
nothing to debate or give consent to, but what the King and Parliament might
do without them? for where find: we warrant for assembling of a Synod to
debate or decree any thing which was before positively divine institution and
injunction? and for all the rest, have you not granted it to King and
Parliament? Surely you have no way to make the covetous amongst the Clergy
amends for this escape of yours, unless you vindicate their tithes; this, and
this only may yet procure your pardon and indulgency; you drive it forward with
a gentle blow both in the beginning and end of your 3 Interg. concerning which,
having given them as brief a touch in my Answer to your 12 Question, I refer
you to what else is said in this behalf more largely in the Bloody Tenet, (not
so bloody a tractate as your dozens of Questions and Interrogatoryes)
Compassionate Samaritan, (fitter to deal with your immedicable vni^u^) and John
the Baptist, (who cried, Prepare the way of the Lord, Mat* 3. 3. whereas your
Questions and Interrogatories prepare the ways of men only, crying, Room, room
for Proclamations and Decrees which require the consciences of Gods Saints to
be subjected thereunto, as if they had authority to say, It seems good to the
Holy Ghost and them it should be so * Act. 15* 28.)

But if Episcopacie be guilty and condemned both root and branch, must not
Presbytery have it Mittimus and pack away therewith? where are the branches of
Episcopacie to be found unless amongst the Presbyters? how can Episcopacie be
Antichristian, and the Presbyters who have no other Ministry, require the same
Jewish tithes, and though formerly, but subordinately, do now jointly execute
the same dominion over the consciences of their brethren? But if you mean that
we are bound by the League and Covenant to maintain the established Laws and
customs of the respective Kingdoms, and bring them to such a uniformity (with
all means sanctified for such a purpose can lead them to) according to the
word of God; you say well, if our Brethren of Scotland mean the like: But will
they be contented that an Act of our present Parliament prepared to cut off
English Episcopacie shall do the like good justice upon the Scotch Presbytery
if they conceive it requisite? Nay, will they give us leave to examine, refine,
purge and punish their Presbytery for such misdemeanors, such trampling
underfoot of Christian Liberty, such enslaving the consciences of Gods people
by humane Acts and Ordinances, with diverse others, all which are thought
fitting to be censured in Episcopacie?

To conclude then, we find it prophesied of our Savior before his birth, That
he should neither strive, ^or cry, nor make a no^^^ the streets, he should not
break a bru^sed reed* nor quench the smoking flax, Mat. 1. ^ ^9* 20. The
ditty which the quire of heavenly Host sang at his nativity was, Glory be to
God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men, Luke 2. 13. 14.
according whereunto his own actions were full of peace even toward those that
would not receive him, as when they of Samaria refused to make ready for him,
Luke 9. 52. to 56. and the Garga^e^es who preferring their hogs before him,
desired him to depart their Country, Mat. 8. ^4. with diverse others: His
Commission to his Apostles was that they should have peace one with another,
Mark. 9. 50. That they should proclaim peace unto whatsoever place or house
they came, Mat. 10. 14. Mark. 6. 11. Luke 10 5. and at His departure He left
his peace with them as a Legacy, Joh. 14. 27. which they continually improved,
baptising and peaceably edifying all such as gladly received and heard them,
Acts 2. 41. Romans 14. 17. 18. and quietly departing from such as did refuse them
and their Gospel, Acts 13. 46. and 18. 6. 7. and 19. 9. But whosoever will
reflect upon the Gospel and Government, your Questions and Interrogatories
point at they will quickly discover how point blanke quarrelling and fighting
they are with that which our Savior and his Apostles taught, which causes me
so much more seriously to apprehend and bewail the want of those sober minded
and peaceable disposed men you spoke of, to whom how few soever, I recommend
you, and your immedicable (...) (...) and satisfaction to your second thoughts
until I may perceive the foregoing (...) unto your (...) has been accepted or
refuted; Farewell.

FINIS*

