True Gain, OPENED IN A SERMON PREACHED At Paul's, Nov. 9. 1656.

By EDWARD REYNOLDS D. D.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Ratcliffe, for George Thomason at the Rose and Crown
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To the Right Honorable ROBERT TICHBORN, Lord Major of the City of London, and
the honorable Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
BEing invited to preach before you, and the Chi^f Assembly of this great City,
I thought it would not be an unseasonable Argument to encourage Citizens,
(whose labors and employments, have a special aspect unto Gain, (to look after
the Works of God, and the interests of their precious Souls, upon the account
of that 2 John v. 8.
full, and Psalm. 19.11
great, and Prove. 11.18
sure reward, which ever attends heavenly negotiations. We read in the
Scriptures of an Heb. 13.14
unabiding City, and a Heb. 11.10
City which has foundations; of Prove. 23.5
winged riches, which fly away; and Prove. 8.18.
of durable riches which stay by us: Of the Scheme, the Pageant, the 1 Cor. 7.31
fashion of this world, which passes over, and of a 2 Cor. 4.17 1 Pet. 1.4.
massy, and eternal glory, which never fades away: Of comforts which we Psalm.
49.17
leave behind us, and put off when we lie down to sleep, and of a John 14.16
Comforter which abides with us, and Rev. 14.13
works which follow us, and are transportable into another Country. Inasmuch
therefore as the Apostle tells us, that we are Ephesians. 2.19
(...), fellow Citizens with the Saints, and that we have Phil. 3.20.
(...), a traffic and negotiation in Heaven, and in as much as when we go
from hence, the earth, and all the contents thereof, will Eccles. 1.4
stay behind us, and nothing will go along with the soul into another World,
but those graces which did here enrich it: I have in this plain Sermon,
endeavored to persuade my self and mine hearers, to be wise Merchants for an
abiding City, and above all the interests in the world, to look after those two
most precious jewels, without which the possession of the whole World would be
but specious beggary, our souls, and our Savior. And because this is a
Doctrine, most generally confessed, and yet too too generally neglected: (even
good men oftentimes suffering Martha's many things to divert their thoughts
from Mary's one necessary thing:) I have the more readily obeyed the Order of
your honorable Court, in publishing this Sermon: Though there be nothing but
the wholsomnesse of the Doctrine it self to commend it to the view of this
curious Age: Wherein, if men's fancies be not gratified with the dress, and
garnish, as well as their consciences, nourished with the substance of sound
Doctrine: If there be not either Elegancy of Style, or New and Polite Notions,
to commend old Truths to our more quaint and delicate palates, we are apter
many times to censure the manner, then to value the matter which is set before
us. As it is, I offer it to your favorable acceptance, and humbly commend you,
and all your weighty affairs to the special blessing of the Lord,

Your Honors most humble servant in the work of the Lord, EDWARD REYNOLDS.

TRUE GAIN.
MATTHEW. 16.26 For what is a man profited if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?


OUr Savior acquainting his Disciples with what things he was to suffer at
Jerusalem, and being thereupon, rebuked by Peter, does not only reprove Peter,
does not only reprove Peter for the carnal apprehensions which he had of his
Kingdom, assuring him that he was therein an adversary and an offense unto
him, as going about to hinder the great work of man's Redemption, by dissuading
him from those sufferings whereby it was to be accomplished; but does further
assure both him and all his Disciples, That they are to be so far from
expecting earthly honors and preferments from him, as that they must learn to
deny themselves, and in stead of Crowns and Dignities, must be ready to take up
a Cross as he should do, and to follow him without the camp, bearing his
reproach. He assures them that as all the good which he was to work for them,
was to be Purchased by his sufferings, and denying of himself, so the way
whereby they were to be brought unto the fruition of it was by denying
themselves, and being conformable unto him in sufferings. That which was
necessary for Christ to do by way of merit to purchase it* was necessary by way
of preparation of heart for them to do, to attain unto it. As He, so we
likewise are first to suffer, and then to be glorified; so Christ says of
himself, Luke 24.26 and so the Apostle says of his people, Romans 8.17.

And because they might be offended at this doctrine, as contrary to those
opionions which they had entertained of their Messiah (whom they believed him
to be) who was in their aprehensions to restore the Kingdom unto Israel Acts
1.6. and to be King of all the world (whence there arose a general belief,
Pluribus persuasio inerat, antiquis sacerdotum literis contineri eo ipso
tempore fore, ut valesceret orient profectique Judea rerum potirentur.
not only amongst Jews, but others, as Tacitus observes, that out of those
Countries should arise a Prince who should rule over all the world, which the
Romans thought to have been verified in Vespasian, who was sometimes
Praefectus Iudeae, (and afterward Emperor of Rome) therefore our Savior
further shows them, Quae ambages Vespasianum and Titum praedixerant. Annal.
l. 5.
that in these reasonings they had indeed too low apprehensions, of him and his
Kingdom, for they ought to look upon their Messiah, as a Prince who would
deliver them from the great^st of all evils, and advance them to a condition,
beyond which a more blessed, could not to be found. But now admit that he were
to be King of all the world, and would advance them proportionably to as great
dignity as such a Kingdom could dispense; yet, if after all this, they die, and
their souls perish and go to hell, what good would such a Kingdom, such a
Messiah do them? Is there any thing worth the soul of a man which he would not
expend, and part with to save that? Therefore he would not have them to think
that a worldly domination was such as he came to purchase for them; but a
glorious and eternal kingdom, which at last he would come with his Angels to
take them into, the first fruits and glimmerings whereof are more worth then
all the crowns and diadems of the world, whereof he promises quickly after to
give them a taste, which accordingly he did the eighth day following in his
Transfiguration on the mount.

The Context from verse. 24. to the end of the Chapter contains, 1. An
Assertion. 2. A Vindication thereof. The Assertion, That whosoever will come
after Christ must take up his cross, and deny himself v. 24. The Vindication
from three great scandals which this severe doctrine of the Cross was attended
withal. 1. Death and this taken away, v. 25. Whosoever will save his life
shall lose it, and whosoever will loose his life for my sake, shall find it.
The way to attain life eternal, is to lay down a mortal life, when the glory of
Christ and his service calls us thereunto: 2. Another great scandal of the
Cross is, that it strips us of the world, and the comforts and delights
thereof, this is removed, v. 26. Admit a man could not only escape the Cross
by forsaking Christ, but exchange him away for all the world, and make himself
master of all the comforts which a confluence of all worldy dominions could
pour into his bosom, yet if after all this he must die, and lose his soul, and
that for ever without possibility of recovery, he would in the issue find it
but an unprofitable bargain. 3.The last scandal of the Cross is the Ignominy,
and shame of it. In which respect Christ is said to have taken unto him the
form of a servant, Phil. 2.7. (because the death of the Cross was servile
supplicium, Live. Tacit. vid. Casaub. ad Sucton. Aug. c. 67. and in Baron.
Exercit. 16. c. 77. and Lips. de cruce Appian. de Bell. Civ. l. 3 Sucton. in
Galba. c. 9.
as the Historian calls it,) and to have despised the shame, Heb. 12.2. and
this is reomoved, v. 27. The Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father
with his Angels, and then he shall reward every man according to his works. As
he, though he were put to shame on the Cross was yet after exalted unto glory,
and sat down on a throne, Hebr. 12.2. so with the same glory he will reward
those that suffer shame for him, and their reward shall be according to their
works, the measure of there glory answerable to the greatness of their shame
and sufferings. Of which, having according to his promise v. 28. given a short,
but most ravishing taste unto some of them in his transfiguration, they
afterward esteemed it a great honor, that they were accounted worthy to
suffer shame for his Name, Act. 5.41.

The words of the Text contain the removal of the second great scandal, which
the Disciples might be apt to take at this doctrine of self denial. They
hoped, as it may seem, to be great men in the world, and to enjoy the liberties
and honors thereof; and now they are told that they must leave all to follow
Christ. And least they should be offended, he assures them that if they should
do otherwise, and for love of the world should forsake him, 1. They would lose
their souls, which is better to them then all the rest of the world: 2. Having
lost them, they would find nothing in all the world, able to redeem and
recover them again.

The words are set down by way of Interrogation, intimating a more vehement
Negation, What shall it profit? That is, It shall not at all profit. It
carries a kind of universal concession, and unquestionable truth in it, which
no man can deny. Even they themselves who cast away their souls to gain the
world, cannot, themselves being Judges, but confess, that it is an absurd thing
to expect profit from any thing when the soul is lost, or to prefer all the
world above a man's own eternal happiness. When a thing is exceeding manifest,
the Scripture uses io make men themselves, whom it would thereby reprove, the
Judges of it. Judge in your selves, says the Apostle, is it comely that a
woman pray unto God uncovered, 1 Cor. 11.13. and the Lord in the Prophet, Isa.
5.3.4. O inhabitants of Judah, Judge I pray you, between me and my vineyard.
And elsewhere, Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel, says the Lord,
Amos 2.11. So the force of the Interrogation is such a denial, as the heart of
him to whom it is made most needs subscribe unto, as having nothing to allege
against it, And in a plain Position it is this, That man who to gain the world,
does cast away his soul, shall find no profit in such a gain; it will prove
like the gain which the Apostle speaks of, Acts 27.21. a gaining of nothing but
loss, and that an irreparable loss, which can never be recovered. It is
dangerous venturing on such an Error, in quo non licet bis peccare, in which
being once involved, a man can never get out again. Such is the loss of a
soul, lose it once and it is lost for ever, there can no ransom, no change be
made for it, Homer. Iliad. l. 10. Digest. l. 9. tit. 1. leg. 3. and de Reg.
juris l. 106.
(...), nothing can be put in the other scale to weigh with it: The Civil Law
says, Ingenui hominis nulla est estimatio, How much more truly may we say of
the soul, Immortalis animae nulla est aestimatio. No valuable consideration for
a soul but the blood of Christ: If we forsake him to gain the world we shall
never find any thing in the world precious enough by the exchange whereof to
regaine our souls.

The words have many particulars couched in them by way both of Supposition,
and of Position. I shall reduce all unto this one Proposition; As Christ does
allow his servants to be moved by Considerations of gain in his service, so he
does withal assure us, That this gain does not stand in winning of the world,
but in saving of the soul That the soul being infinitely more precious then ^ll
the world, therefore the gaining of the world is nothing but loss, where the
loss of the soul is the purchase of that gain; in as much as the world being
gained, cannot be kept; and the soul being lost, can never be recovered. All
men have a merchandise and trade to drive in this world, whereon does depend
the issue of their profit, or damage; therein their principal wisdom is to
balance and poise their gains and losses so as that they may thrive and
prosper in this their trade; wordly love is a great obstruction unto the true
gain which a wise Christian should pursue. They who for preserving that, do
take offense at the cross of Christ, will suffer damage in their souls; the
love of the world and the love of the soul being inconsistent: Since therefore
both will not stand together; and of the two, the soul is much more precious
and excellent then the world, therefore a wise Christian should have his trade
heavenward for the enriching of his soul, rather then downward for the
possession of the world.

The branches then to be touched are three:

1 The lawfulness of a Christians looking after true gain. 2. The
inordinateness of worldly love, and inconsistency thereof with true Christian
gain. 3. The preciousness of the soul of man; in saving, advancing and
enriching whereof, this true gain does consist.

1. Then Christians may be moved in matters of Religion with arguments drawn ab
utili, from considerations of profit or disprofit, of such good things as are
really, beneficial and advantageous unto us. It is the voice of nature in every
man, who will show us any good? Psalm. 4.6. There is a natural indigency in us,
whereby we are constrained to look abroad for foraign supplies of that good,
which we are wholly insufficient to furnish our selves withal. Nec quisquam
tantum a naturali lege descivit and hominem exuit, ut animi causa malus fit.
Senec. de Bene^. l. 4* c. 17.
This wicked men look for in ways of sin; there are few men that are wicked
gratis, but do promise themselves Some benefit by their wickedness. If Esau
sell his birthright; if Balaam curse Gods people; if Jeroboam set up Calves; if
Ahab sell himself to work wickedness; If Judas betray his Master; it is all
upon a contract and bargain, under the intuition of the wages of
unrighteousness. Si violandum jus regnandi causa violandum.

Therefore God is pleased, 1 To Dehort men from the ways of sin by undeceiving
them, and discovering the unprofitableness and perniciousness of those ways.
My people have changed their glory for that which does not profit, Jer. 2.11.
Why do you spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for
that which satisfies not? Isai. 55 2. What fruit had ye then in those things
whereof you are now ashamed? Romans 6.21. The voluptuous sinner promises
himself abundance of delight in his stolen waters; let us take our fill of
loves, let us solace our selves with loves Prove. 7.18. but at last when he has
destroyed his name, and gotten a wound, and dishonor, when he has destroyed
his estate, and strangers are filled with his wealth, when he has destroyed
his body, and given his years to the cruel, when he has destroyed his soul,
and is gone down to the chambers of death: then tell me whether his perfumes of
Mirrh, Aloes, and Cinnamon, be not all turned into gall and wormwood? The
worldling promises himself much content in his dishonest gain, in fraud,
oppression, circumvention, and violence; Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo
ipse domi. I shall have a brave vineyard* says Ahab; I shall have sheep and
oxen, says Gehazi, I shall never want friends, nor contents, money answers to
All, O nummi vos estis fratres. But what says God? Thou fool, this night shall
they take thy soul from thee: Thy vineyard, O Ahab, shall bring forth grapes of
gall: Thy talents, O Gehazi, shall purchase thee and thine heirs a leprosy:
Thy wedge of gold, O Achan, shall cleave thy soul from thy body; Thy thirty
pieces of silver, O Judas, shall be the price of thine own bowels, as well as
of thy masters blood. Treasures of wickedness shall not profit in the day of
wrath, Prove. 10.2. They that will be rich; drown themselves in destruction and
perdition and pierce themselves through with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. The
ambitious man promises him self much honor and power, when he has arrived at
that greatness whereunto he aspireth, I will ascend into heaven, I will exalt
my throne above the stars of God, Isai. 14.15. Omnia serviliter pro
dominatione. Tacit. hist. 1.
When I have by plausible compliances gotten the glories of the world, I will
then please my self, as Nebuchadezner did, with the view and fruition of so
gallant a purchase. But what says the Lord? Though thou set thy nest amongst
the star^* thence will I Bring thee down, Obad. v. 4. Isai. 26.5. Thou art a
man and no God, though thou set thine heart as the heart of God, Ezekiel. 28.2 O
Nebuch^dnezzar, in stead of the majesty of a Prince, thou shall have the misery
of a beast. Thy feasting, O Belshazzar, shall be turned into mourning, thy
pride into terrors, thou shall be drunk not with wine, but with astonishment,
and thy joints shall stagger one against another. Thus do men sell themselves
to sin for hopes of gain, and thus miserably are they cheated in the bargain;
the Devil dealing with them, as some say he does with Witches, giving them
leaves of trees in the shape of gold and silver, so that in the conclusion it
appears, that they did indeed sell themselves for just nothing, Isai. 52.3.

2. By the same argument God is pleased to vindicate the ways of godliness from
the prejudice which wicked men have against them, as if they were unprofitable.
What is the Almighty that we should serve him? what profit should we have if we
pray unto him. Job 21.15. Ye have said, It is vain to serve God, what profit
is it that we have kept his Ordinances Mal. 3.14.5. To take off this Objection,
God assures his people, That his ways do good to those that walk uprightly,
Mic. 2.7. That his people do not seek his face in vain, Isai. 45.19. That he is
not a wilderness unto them, Jer. 2.31. That godliness is great gain, and
Profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4.8. and 6.6. That he who sows
righteousness, shall have a sure reward, Prove. 11.18. That in keeping of his
commandments, there is great reward, Psalm. 19.11. And he is pleased to animate
his servants against the hardship of their Christian warfare, against external
difficulties, and internal faintings, by setting before them exceeding great
and precious promises. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves, and
perfect holiness, 2 Cor. 7.1. Ye have need of patience, that when ye have done
the will of God, ye may receive the promise, Heb. 10.36. Be not weary of
well-doing, in due time ye shall reap, if ye faint not, Gal. 6.9. When ye are
reviled, and persecuted, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward, Mat. 5.11. By this consideration, not only Moses and Paul, Heb.
11.25.26. Phil. 3.4. but the Lord Jesus himself, for the joy which was set
before him, endured the Cross, and despised the shame Heb. 12.2.

Now here in is the mercy of God greatly commended unto us, that when he might
use no other argument to enforce obedience, then his own sovereign authority
over us, is pleased to encourage us by our own benefit. The chief reason of
obedience, says Tertullian, is the authority of the Lord, not the utility of
the servant. Prior est Auteritas imperantis quam utilitas servientis. Tertul.
He made all things for himself, and might have looked no farther then his own
glory: we do so with the creatures which serve us, we labor our Oxen, and then
we destroy them; first we make them drudge, and then we make them die. But God
is pleased to encourage us unto duties by our self-love, commands us to fear
him for our own good, Deuteronomy 6.24. sets the blessing of obedience, and the curse
of disobedience before our eyes, Deuteronomy. 11.26, 28. The work of Christianity is a
difficult work, there are many enemies many temptations, Satan and and the
world resist us without corruption wrestles and rebels within. But here is the
comfort, Gods servants work for a Master that remembers all, who looks to their
profit, as well as to his own honor, who keeps a book for our prayers, a
bottle for our tears, a register for them that fear him, Mal. 3.16, a memorial
of but a cup of cold water, given to a Prophet as a Prophet. This is
encouragement indeed unto Gods service: Christ is willing to put it to this
issue. Though I have a right and power over you, which Satan has not, I made
you, I bought you, he never had title unto you, either by dominion or purchase,
as I have; But I shall wish you to look to your own interest, see which service
is most advantageous to your selves, mine or his: If he can make you more
precious promises, if he can prefer you unto greater happiness, if he have an
immarcescible crown, an eternal kingdom to bestow upon you, if he have shed
any blood, laid down any life, to purchase blessedness for you, I am willing
where your gain is greatest, there your trade and service be directed. But if
my wages be much better then his, and my love much greater then his, and my
right in you, and authority over you much more then his, not only for love and
duty to me, but for your own sakes, limit and confine your negotiations there,
where your own advantages will be more abundant, and your own comforts more
durable and glorious.

We see Christ allows us to eye our own profit in his service. In what sense we
may, or may not this do, may be briefly thus resolved.

1. We may not respect profit or advantage as the ultimate end of our
obedience. Gods glory being simply the supreme of Ends in it self, should
accordingly be so unto us. (...). Marc. Antotonin. l. 4. se. 23
Our greatest aim in bringing forth fruit should be, that God may be honored,
Joh 15.8. that whether we live we may live to him, or whether we die, we may
die to him, Romans 14.7, 8.9. All things are of him, and for him, therefore all
things must be to him likewise, Romans 11.36.

2. We must not respect profit and reward as the only reason of our obedience,
without which we would not do God any service at all, for this would be a mere
mercenary and servile consideration. The chief reasons of obedience are, our
subjection to Gods authority over us, because he is the Lord; our faith, love,
and thankfulness for his Covenant of grace, because he is our God. These two
are joined in the Preface to the Decalogue, I am the Lord thy God.

3. We may not respect profit and reward, as the fruit of any merit in our
services: when we have done all we can, we are but unprofitable servants unto
God, and therefore he might justly make our services unprofitable to our
selves. It is matter of comfort, it is not matter of boasting; we may rejoice
that there is profit in serving of God, but we may not glory of it as any
natural or necessary consequent of our services, for Grace does exclude
boasting, Vita b^u^ nostra nibil aliud est quam D^i gratitia and vita aterna
quae bonae vita redditur, Dei gratia est, and ipsa graiis datur, quia gratis
dae^a est illa cui datur etc. Aug. de Great. and lib. Arb. c. 8.
Ephesians. 2.8. and the reward is of grace, and mercy, not of debt, Rom 4.4, 5. and
11.6. Psalm. 26. 12. Exodus 20.6.

But then we may look on the reward and profit of obedience. 1. As a secondary
end, under the glory of God; so the Apostle calls salvation the end of our
faith, 1 Pet. 1.9, Our love to God though it be above our love to our selves,
yet does not exclude it, so our seeking of Gods glory, though it be above all
other ends, yet it does not exclude the seeking of our own happiness; yet God
has been pleased so graciously to twist, and as it were, interweave, and
concorporate these together, that no man can truly aim at the glory of God, but
he does eo ips^ promote his own salvation? neither does any man sincerely seek
his own salvation, but the Lord esteems himself therein glorified by him.

2. As a manifestation of Gods bounty, who when he might require homage of us
as our Lord by the tie of our natural subjecton unto him, is pleased out of
free grace to propose further rewards, making our services as well matter of
profit to our selves, as of praise and glory unto him? faith looks upon God
as a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. as a God that not
only is good but does good Psalm. 1^9.68. as a God whose power and mercy is
herein declared, in that he renders unto every man according to his work, Psa.
62.11, 12

3. As matter of encouragement to run with patience the race that is set before
us; to animate us against all the difficulties, dangers, temptations, and
variety of disheartnings, which through the subtlety and malice of Satan we are
sure to meet with in Gods service. The Hope of ensuing glory does work
resolutions in God servants to purify themselves, that so being like unto
Christ in holiness, they may thereby be Prepared to be like unto him in glory 1
Ioh. 3.3. The crown of righteousenss kept up the resolution of the Apostle
himself, to fight the good fight of faith, to run his race, to finish his
course, to keep the faith, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Thus a Christian is allowed by his
Lord to do his masters work with some eye and intuition of his own gain.

But then as the Apostle says, If a man strive for masteries, he is not
crowned, except he strive lawfully; So, If a man contend for gain, he shall
never overtake it, except he contend lawfully. Our Savior here has excluded
one way, and that a broad one, where in multitudes weary themselves for this
Prize, What shall it profit a man if he win the whole world? And secondly,
intimates the true though a more narrow and private way, viz. to prosecu^e the
interest of our precious souls. Let us consider them both

First, worldly love is inconsistent with true ^hristian gain upon many
accounts. 1. It is vast and insatiable, like the horseleech which cries, G^ve
give* like fire, and the grave, which never says it is enough, Prove 30.15.16.
Lust is infinite, there is no end of its labor, Eccles. 4.8. It reaches at
all, therefore the Apostle calls it not only love of the things of the
world, but love of the world; Love not the world, neither the things that are
in the world, 1 John. 2:15. A covetous heart grasps at the whole world;
Provinciarum nominibus agros colit, sub singulis villicis latiores habet fines
quam quos consules fortiebantur. Sen. de ira. l. 1. c. ult.
would fain be master of all, and dwell alone, like a Wen in the body, which
draws all to it self; let it have never so much, it will still reach after
more, adds house to house, and field to field, Isai. 5.8. keeps not at home,
cannot be satisfied, inlargeth, gathers, heapeth, increases, loadeth it self
with thick clay, Habac. 2.5, 6. The very Heathen have complained of this
endless, and unbounded reach of corupt desires (...), Aristot. Seneca.
ex libidine orta sine termino sunt. Lust has no bound, no measure; like a
bladder it swells wider and wider, the more of this empty world is put into it.
Like a breach of the sea, which has no internal bounds to contain it self in,
sternit agros, sternit sata laeta boumque labores. The Countryman in the Fable
would needs stay till the River was run all away, Rusticus expect at dum de
fluat amnis, at ille labitur, and labetur.
and then go over dry, but the River did run on still. Such are inordinate
worldly desires, the deceitful heart promises to see them run over and gone,
when they are attained unto such a measure; and then they are stronger and
wider, more impotent and unruly then before, modus and modus non habet modum;
for as natural, so sinful motions, the further they proceed, are usually the
stronger. Now God, having so odered the world, as that no man can have it all
to him self, it is divided and bounded to several men and nations Deuteronomy. 32.8.
and man may not remove the landmarks which God has set, nor affect a Monopoly
where the Lord has made a community, this insatiable desire of wordly gain can
never be replenished, and so being unattainable, the labor which is spent
about it must needs be ungaineful, and disappoint the expectations which were
built thereupon.

2. It is exceeding disproportionable to the spiritual and immortal condition
of the heart of man; whatever is in the world is material, carnal, mortal. It
can benefit the outward and the natural man, But to look for peace of
Conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, inward and durable comfort. in any thing
which the world affords, is to seek a treasure in a cole pit. If you go to the
creature to make you happy, the earth will tell you that Blessedness grows not
in the furrows of the field; the sea, that it is not in the treasures of the
deep; cattle will say, it is not on our backs; Crowns will say, it is too
precious a gem to be found with us, we can adorn the head, but we cannot
satisfy the heart, Solomon, who made a critical inquiry after this point,
gives this in as the ultimate extraction from the creatures, vanity of vanities
all is vanity. We have all great experience how loose the world hangs about us.
Life it self is a bubble, and is sudenly gone, but besides that final
separation, God has a thousand ways to part us from this darling; fire burns
it, water drowns it, a sword cuts it off, sickness takes away the savor of it.
A prodigal son, an un faithful servant, an ill debtor, a suit of law, a world
of the like accidents may deprive us of it. Now no man will dote on a false
friend, or care for a false title, or set his affection on any thing that is
false. Why then should we love a false world? Or set our eyes on that which is
not, as the Wiseman speaks, Prove. 23.5. Why should we with Martha so much
trouble our selves about the world, and leave Mary's unum necessarium wholly
neglected? Like the man in Plutarch who went to the Physicians to cure a sore
finger, Plutarch. (...).
when in the mean time his lungs were putrified, and he took no care of them.

3. It is exceeding injurious both to God and our selves. 1. To God, It sets up
the world in his room, is enmity against him, Jam. 4.4. is inconsistent with
the love of him, 1 John 2.15, 16. Estrangeth the soul wholly from him, steals
away the love of the heart, and ingrosseth it unto it self. As the shadow of
the earth makes night in the air, so does the love of it in the heart, when as
Solomon speaks, the world is in it, Eccles. 3.11. It goes along with a man,
sleeps with him, wakes with him, goes to meat, goes to Church with him, When it
flows not in, O how he carks and cares, murmurs and repines, whines and
distrusts God? If it abound, how does he hug and graspe it, and fill his soul
with no other comfort? Talk of spiritual things, faith, hope, love, repentance,
new obedience, judgment to come, he is sick of such discourse, puts you off as
Felix did Paul to another time; but speak of a rich bargain, of a goodly
purchase, of a stately manner, of a gallant prize, you lead him in to a
paradise, (such a one as it is) he says with Peter, It is good being here, let
us build tabernacles. It choaks the seed of the word in the soul, turns the
house of God into a place of merchandise, yea it will cause men to err from
the faith, to know no godliness but gain, to take up religion as it is more or
less in fashion, and advantageous; as the Samaritans would be Jews when the
Jews prospered, Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. c. 3. and 7.
and when they were down, would help to persecute them. It will warp the
Conscience, and corrupt the judgment and make Religion it self to serve turns,
and to be subordinate to secular interests.

2. To a man's self, 1. It is unnatural, for nature has set a commensurateness
between objects end faculties. It is a miserable degrading of a reasonable
soul, to grope for happiness on the backs of sheep, on the furrows of the
field, to fish for it in ponds, or to hunt for it in parks, or to trade for it
in ships, or to think to bring it home on the bunches of Camels. It cost more
to redeem a soul, and it must cost more to attain that redemption. Christ the
heir of all things, who could have commanded the attendance of all the
creatures in the world, was pleased to live in a low condition, that he might
make it appear that eternal life has not the least cognation or dependence on
worldly wealth, either in his procuring it for us, or in our deriving it from
him. What an unnatural and incongruous thing would it be for Angels to turn
worldlings, and reasonable souls have the self-same blessedness to look after
as Angels have.

2. It is unnecessary. for had one man all the world, he could have no more out
of it himself, then one back, and one belly, and the exigences of one person
did require; whatever is more, he does but behold with his eyes, Ecles. 5.11.
God is said to give us all things richly to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6.8, 17. He that has
sufficient to answer the necessity and decency of his estate, is therefore said
to have all because he has as full a supply, as unto those purposes all the
world could make him. A little which the righteous has, is better then the
riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.16. Jacob was not so wealthy a man as Esau, yet
Jacob said, I have all, Esau said, I have much. Jacobs little was all; Esaus
more, was but much. Genesis 33.9.11.

3. It is a disquieting thing. Disquiets in the possessing. Riches are compared
to thorns, Mat. 13.21. a man cannot hug them without being pierced by them, 1 Timothy 6.10. Disquiets in the parting; there is sorrow and wrath in his sickness,
Eccles. 5.17. What a torment is it to flay off the skin of a man alive? Now the
soul by inordinate love does cleave closer to the world, then the skin to the
flesh, and therefore is not torn from it without great pain. It is the saddest
summons in the world to a rich fool, Thou have heaped up for many years, but
within a few hours the cold arms of death shall graspe thee, and carry thee
to Gods tribunal. O what can riches or multitudes of riches do a man good in
that day of wrath? If a Prince had a stone in his bladder too big to be
removed, all the Jewels of his crown could not purchase him a recovery. What
then can treasures avail against worm gnawing in the Conscience?

I shall conclude this Point with these limitatitions:

1. We may use the world, and with diligent labor procure the things which we
need, 1 Cor. 7.31.

2. We may employ our heads, as well as our hands, for labor without wisdom
to guide it, is but a weary idleness.

3. We may receive the things of this world from God in Christ as a fruit of
his gracious Covenant, 1 Timothy 4.8.

4. We may lay up and provide for our selves, and those that belong unto us so
far as the necessities of life, and decency of our particular state and
condition do admit. Christ himself had a bag in his family, Ioh. 13.29. 1 Timothy
5.8. But we may not love, nor set our hearts upon the world: When riches
increase, set not your heart upon them. The world is for the back and the
belly, but God only is for the heart. Though we may eye our own gain, yet the
gain of the world is not that gain which we are chiefly to eye. The soul being
the most precious thing which a man has, the saving, and enriching thereof, is
the only true Christian gain.

First, Take the word (...) here for life, and even so the truth of the Text
will hold; what gain is it to get the world, and to lose the life, Is not the
life more then meat, and the body then raiment? Luke 12.23.

1. All the world cannot hold or lengthen life beyond the period set it by God.
Our times are in his hand, Psalm. 31.15. the efficacy of all second causes is
suspended upon his blessing, man lives not by bread alone, but by every word
which proceeds out of the mouth of God, Mat. 4.4.

2. Life is necessary to the enjoyment of the world, what good does light,
without an eye to see it? Or music, with out an ear to hear it? what good do
dainties, without a mouth to taste them? Or Crowns, without an Head to wear
them? Nay, a man may have his life so clogged with sickness, sorrow, discontent
of mind, distress of conscience, that all the world shall not suffice to revive
and comfort him.

3. When life is lost, the world is all lost with it, a living porter, is
richer then a dead Prince; death translates properties. If a man purchase land
to himself for ever, that ever is no longer then his own life, if he will have
the purchase extend further, he must put in his heirs with himself.

Secondly, Take the word (...) for the soul, as Luke: 12.19, 20. and then the
truth holds much more. For 1. If a man could keep his soul and the world
together, there is so vast a dis-proportion between them, that the one could
never replenish the other, 2. If it could satisfy it for a time, yet it would
cloy and satiate it at the last; there is excess in wordly enioyments, and all
excess is nauseous and painful. 3. If they could replenish and not cloy, that
there were a commensurateness between them, yet there is not an equality of
duration. One generation, says Solomon, passes away, and another comes, but
the earth abides, Eccles. 1.4. If when a man goes away, the earth did go with
him, happily the same content which he found in it here, he would find in it
elsewhere, but when he goes, and that stays behind him, all the content which
he had in the fruition, does vanish in the separation. 4. Being parted the soul
must be for ever, as long as God is merciful to save, or just to punish, and
what comfort is it, think we in hell, for a man to remember the pleasures of a
short life; of which nothing there remains but the worm and the sting? Alexis
apud Athenaeum. l. 10.
The Poet could say, If the headache did come first, no man would be drunk. If
men could feel but a little of hell, before they sin, they would easily by that
understand how empty and vanishing the pleasures of lust are, and how easily
extinguished in a tormented Conscience, as a drop of wine loses all its
sweetness in a barrel of water. Again, what addition is it to the joys of
heaven, for a man to recount the comforts of a perishing world? What content
takes a grave wealthy learned man, in remembering the joy which in his childhood
he was wont to take in his top, and counters? 5. The nature of the soul is
spiritual, and must have spiritual objects to converse about. Sensitive
faculties may be delighted with material objects: Mere natural reason may gaze
with some content upon the beauty, order, contexture, concatenation of natural
causes and effects. But the supreme spiritual part of the soul is of a more
high and noble extraction, then ultimately to delight it self in any thing but
in God from whom it was breathed. It is capable of the knowledge of God, whom to
know is perfect wisdom and eternal life. It is capable of the image and grace
of God, of righteousness and true holiness to beautify, and renew it: Capable
of the peace of God, of the joy of his salvation, of the earnest, the seed, the
seal, the witness of his Spirit, of the sense of his love in Christ, which is
unspeakable and glorious. Capable of that fullness of joy which is in his
presence and of those everlasting pleasures, and rivers of comfort which are at
his right hand. Capable of the heavy wrath of God, which is beyond the fear or
the fancy of man to comprehend. As the goodness of God exceeds our faith, so
the anger of God exceeds our fear 6. The dignity of the soul appears by the
spiritual enemies which war against it: Of whom we may say as the Prophet of
the Medes, Isai. 13.17. that they regard not silver or gold, they fight neither
aganst house, nor land, but against the soul only: Satan says as the King of
Sodom unto Abram, Genesis 14.21. Give me the souls, and take the goods to thy
self. 7. By the guard of Angels which God has appointed to protect it, And
convey it to heaven, Luke 16.22.8. By the heavenly Manna, the breasts of
Consolation the wells of salvation, the bread of life, the feast of marrow, and
fatted things, which the Lord in his Word and Ordinances has provided to see
it; one sentence and period whereof is more worth in an hour of Temptation,
then rocks of Diamonds, ot mountains of Gold. 9. And above all the dignity of
the soul appears by the price which was laid down to redeem it. We were not
redeemed by silver and gold, but by the blood of God, 1 Pet. 1.19. If silver
and gold could have bought the soul, silver and gold happily might have blessed
it, but since no price can purchase it, but the blood of God, no treasure can
enrich it, but the fruition of God. The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance. Psalm. 16.5.

Very many Uses might be made of this most important doctrine: As. 1. To adore
the infinite love of God toward the souls of poor sinful men in finding out
of his own unsearchable wisdom, an expedient which neither men nor angels could
ever have discovered, for the punishing of the sin, and saving of the soul that
sinned.

2. The infinite love of Christ, who so loved us, as to give himself for us, to
make his soul an offering for sin, that our souls might not be undone by it. A
Son to die for servants, an holy, an only and beloved son for rebellious
servants, a Judge for malefactors, to come not only to save but to seek, those
that sought not, that inquired not after him: as there was never sorrow like
his sorrow so there was never love like his love.

^. The infinite mercy of God in revealing Christ unto us, bringing life and
immortality to light by the Gospel, and waiting upon us, that he may be
gracious unto us. If Thales the Philosopher gave thanks that he was born of a
Grecian, Diog. Laert. in Thalet^.
and not a Barbarian, how much more should we bless God, that we are
Christians, and not only Philosophers; that the Lord has taken care not only
to adorn our souls, but to save them.

4. The infinite sweetness of his powerful and most efficacious grace, in
persuading us to give entertainment unto the mercy thus tendered unto us, who of
our selves were ready to believe lying vanities to forsake our own mercy, and
to thrust away salvation from our selves,

5. The great reasonableness and wisdom of true Religion, as being that which
promoteth our supreme interest, namely, the happiness of the soul. Wisdom is
(...), the knowledge of the most honorable things, Arist. Ethic. lib. 6. ^. 7.
and of greatest concermment. He that wins souls is wise, says Solomon,
Prove. 7.11, 30. how much more he that saves his own, Prove. 9.12. 1. Tim. 4.16.
A man may be wise for others, and a fool for himself. Achitophel was a wise man
when he counseled Absalom, but a fool when he hanged himself. Judas a wise man
for others when he preached Christ, a fool for himself, when he betrayed him;
no greater folly in the world then for a man to barter away his soul though it
were for the world it self.

6. We should therefore all be exhorted, 1. Seriously to study the worth of a
soul, the spiritualness, the immortality of it, the image of God after which it
was both created and renewed, the glory reserved for it if it stand, the wrath
prepared for it if it fall. 2. To walk as men that have souls, many walk as if
they had nothing but bellies to fill, and backs to cloth, fancies to be
tickled with vanity, eyes and ears to look after pleasure, brains to entertain
empty notions, and tongues to utter them, but their souls serve them to little
other purpose, them as salt to keep their bodies from stinking. Socrates
wondered when he observed Statuaries, how careful they were to make stones like
men, and men in the mean time by their carelessness, turning themselves in to
very blocks and stones. 3. To secure the salvation of the soul, to take heed of
exposing our principal Jewel unto rapine and miscarriage. Diogen. Laert. in
Socrat.
Keep thy hurt, says Solomon, with all diligence. Prove. 4.23. Give all
diligence, says Peter, to make your calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
that so we may never be without the comforts of God to delight our souls, Psalm.
94.19. that we may be able to say as David did, Return to thy rest O my soul,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee, Psalm. 116.7.4. To prize the
means of that salvation, and to encourage the Ambassadors of Christ, as those
that watch for your souls, and unto whom is committed the ministry of
reconcilation. They study, pray, watch, labor, and sweat for you, Esteem them
highly in love for their works sake, 1 These. 5.13. It is recorded for the
honor of Hezekiah that he spoke comfortably to all the Levites, who taught the
good knowledge of the Lord, 2 Chorn. 30.22. And of Nehemiah, That he took care
of the Offices of Gods House, Nehem. 13.10, 14. Of the good Shun^mite, that she
provided for the Prophet, 2 Reg. 4.8, 10. And of the Galatians, That they
received Paul as an Angel of God, and would if possible have plucked out their
eyes to have done him good, Gal. 4.14, 15. And though you do these things (and
your honor it is that you do it in an age wherein God has suffered seduced
souls to pour contempt upon the Ministers of the Gospel, and as madmen to fight
with the Physicians that heal them) yet give me leave to stir you up by putting
you in remembrance. 5. To resist the enemies that withstand this salvation,
fleshly lusts, worldly snares, Satanical temptations, which war against the
soul, 6. To pity the souls of other men, to promote in our several stations
and employments, the interest of men's souls, to save them with violence, to
snatch them out of the fire, to disquiet wicked men in their sins, to encourage
good men in their ways, to our uttermost power every where to promote the
grace of God which brings salvation to the souls of men. Lastly, To be wise
merchants for for own souls. Our Savior tells us, That the Kingdom of heaven
is like a merchant man seeking goodly pearls, Matthew. 13.45. And as else where
the Virgins are distinguished into wise, and foolish: So may we distinguish
those Merchants who trade heavenward. For as he said, Mala emptio exprobrat
stultitiam: Plin. Epist.
It is a note of folly to make an ill bargain.

Now there are several things wherein the wisdom of a Merchant does show it
self:

1. He considers where the best and most sure commodities are where he is
certain to make a good return, as it is noted of Solomon, 1 Reg. 10.11.22, 28.
and of Tyrus, Ezekiel. 27. So our Christian merchant knowing that the best
commodities come from heaven, has his thoughts and affections most there, And
as those that trade to China, though they cannot travel far up into the
Country are admitted to some skirts and maritine Harbor to receive the
commodities of the Country; so our Merchant though he cannot go to heaven it
self, yet he has access, as it were to the out borders of heaven, the Word and
Ordinances called frequently in the Epistle to the Hebrews (...), Heavenly
things. Here then they watch at the gates of wisdoms house, here they search,
dig, hide, and lay up, that the Word may dwell in them richly, and that they
may be rich in knowledge, Prove. 8.34. Col. 3.16. 1 Cor. 1.5.

2. A wise merchant considers where is the easiest purchase of those
commodities. It is true, heavenly things are in their own nature the most
precious, and do indeed cost the most excellent price. The Redemption of a
soul is precious, Psalm. 49.8. 1 Pet. 1.19. yet because this precious price was
none of ours: we are said to be saved freely, Ephesians. 2.8. to buy milk and wine
without money and without price, Isai. 55.1. for though we must sell all for
this Jewel, if not actually, yet in praeparatione animae, yet it is all no
real or valuable estimation in such a bargain, but like the glass beads, and
such like trifles which we give unto Indians for their silver and gold; like
the sweeping out of dust and rags out of an house when it is to be inhabited;
Christ will not take possession of the soul, till vile lusts, and worthless
affections are purged out, not by way of purchase of him, but by way of
preparation for him. And this is one of the easiest purchases in the world, to
let go dirt, (...), and to receive gold.

3. A wise merchant, though he will make his purchase as easy as he can, will
yet in a rare commodity bid home, and not stick at a final difference; and so
does a wise Christian knowing the unsearchable riches of Christ, never sticks
at any abatement. Many men bid much, proceed far, Herod does many things;
Agrippa is almost a Christian, hypocrites will part with thousands of rams,
rivers of oil, there first borne, Mic. 6.7. but when the child comes to the
very birth, they stay in the place of the breaking forth of children Hos.
13.13. when it comes to this issue, they must shake hands for ever with their
darling and beloved lust, Herod with Herodias, the young man with his worldly
love, the Jew with his legal righteousness, the Greek with his carnal wisdom;
nay, says the hypocrite be the Jewel never so rich, I resolve to keep this
green glass, or this wooden platter, something of mine own: here Christ and
the soul part, and they who came running unto him, go sorrowing from him;
whereas wise Christians consult not with flesh and blood, but go through with
the bargain: Let me have Christ though I have nothing but him.

4. A wise Merchant does husband time and opportunity for his best advantage,
takes the right season for his voyage and commodity; that he may return with
the more speed and profit. As it is observed of the Philosopher, Diogen. Laert.
in Thalete.
that foreseeing a plentiful year of Olives, he rented many Olive-yards, and
by that demonstrated that a learned man, if he would aim at worldly gain,
could easily be a rich man too. It is noted as an excellent part of wisdom to
know and to manage time, Cujus unius avaritia honesta est, as Seneca speaks.
Esther 1.13. 1 Chro. 12.32. Ephesians. 5.15, 17. The Rabbi said. Nemo est cui non sit
horasua, every man has his hour; he who overslips that season, Pirk. Aboth.
may never meet with the like again, If thou hadest known in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace, Luke 19.42. The Scripture insists much upon
a day of grace, and calls upon us to work, before the night come, 2 Cor. 6.2.
Hebr. 3.15. Ioh. 12.35. The Lord reckons the times which pass over us, and puts
them upon our account. These three years I come, seeking fruit, and I find
none, Luke 13.7. I gave her space to repent, and she repented not, Rev. 2.21,
22. from the 13. year, to the 25. year, I have spoken unto you, says the
Prophet, Ier. 25.3. therefore we should learn to improve them, and with the
impotent persons at the pool of Bethesda, to step in when the Angel stirs the
water. Now the Church is afflicted, it is a season of prayer, and learning,
hear the rod, learn righteousness, Mic. 6.9. Isai: 26.8, 9. Psalm. 94.12. Now
the Church is enlarged, it is a season of praise, This is the day which the
Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad therein, Psalm. 118.24. I am now at
an Ordinance, I will hear what God will say, now in the company of a learned
and wise man, I will draw some knowledge and council from him: I am under
temptation, now is a fit time to lean on the Name of the Lord, Isai. 50.10. I
am in place of dignity and power; Let me consider what it is that God requires
of me in such a time as this, Esth. 4.14. As the tree of life brings fruit
every month, Rev. 22.2. so a wise Christian, as a wise husbandman, has his
distinct employments for every month bringing forth his fruit in its season,
Psa. 1.3.

5. In a great City one merchant having one commodity, and another another,
they do mutually interchange them for the enriching of one another: So in the
City of God, one has the spirit of wisdom, another of knowledge, one excelent
at opening scripture, another at stating questions, another at resolving cases,
another at exhortation, and Christian conference, and wise Christians should
improve all advantages of this kind unto their mutual enrichment.

6. A wise merchant has constant intelligence and returns to and from the
Country where his trade lies, is not without a factor there to manage his
affairs; so should the christian merchant; his trade is in heaven, phil. 3.20.
thither should he continually send, and return the commodities of that
kingdom. The Lord Jesus is the Agent of his Church there, to transact their
affairs for them; we should keep constant intelligence with him, pour out our
desires into his bosom, and wait for the answer which he will send. Prayer and
praises are the Vessels in which we send to heaven: faith, meditation, study of
the Scriptures, attendance of the Ministry, vessels by which we hear from
heaven, He shall receive of mine, says our Savior of the holy Spirit, and
shall show it unto you, Joh. 16, 14. This intercourse we must keep continually
open and unobstructed, that Christ may daily hear from us, and we daily receive
from him, that so we may be filled with all the fullness of God, and may have
all the storehouses of the soul replenished from heaven with all abundance of
necessary graces and comforts.

7 A wise merchant does provide for losses, and yet though he venture much,
will assure the main; so should we resolve before hand upon many troubles in
the way to heaven, sit down and consider the cost of our holy profession, Luke
14.26, 28. the ship wherein Christ is, is not secured from a storm. His crown
of thorns, went before his crown of glory, and so must ours; there is a sea and
a wilderness between Egypt and Canaan, through many tribulations we must enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. But this is our comfort, That there is an
assurance-office, wherein all our losses will be repaired an hundred fold, and
that upon Gods own security, whereof we have a record, Marck 10.29, 30. Verily,
I say unto you, there is no man that has left house, or brethren or sisters,
or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the
Gospels; but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this life, house, and
brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with persecution,
(as comforts, supports, encouragements in the midst of his persecutions) and in
the world to come eternal life. There is no aged Christian but will love us in
such a case with the love of a father, no young Christian but will reverence us
with the love of a son, no fellow Christian but will tender us with the love of
a brother, every good man's house, and heart shall be open unto us. Who so ever
does the will of God, will be our brother, and sister and mother, as our
Savior speaks, Mat. 12.50.

8. The wisest Merchants must live by faith and deal much in credit, waiting
long for a good return out of remote Countries; as the Husbandman ploweth in
hope and, sows in tears, 1 Cor. 9. 10. Psalm. 126.5. having Gods promise that
there shall be harvest, Genesis 8.22. So the Merchant trafficketh in hope to enjoy
that which the Prophet calls the Harvest of the River, Isai. 23.3. Such is the
life of a true Christian, he does not estimate his wealth, by the things in his
own possession, but lives by faith, reckons upon a great stock going in another
country, is richer in obligations and promises, then he is in present graces.
There is a mutual trust between God and him, 1. He takes upon trust; receives
from God many talents of time, health, wealth, power, wisdom, learning, grace,
precepts, and improves them to his Masters service, Matthew. 25.16, 17. 1 Timothy
6.20.2. He gives upon Trust, lends to the Lord, Prove. 19.17. dedicates his
merchandise to the Lord, Isai. 23.18. Trusts God with his Name and Innocence,
as Joseph did, as Christ did, 1. Pet. 2.23. with his life and interests, as
David did, Psalm. 31.3: 15. 1 Samuel 30.6. with his children, as Jacob, did Genesis
43.13, 14. with his soul, as Paul did, 2 Timothy 1.12. He is not anxiously
solicitous how to escape this danger; how to repair this loss; how to advance
this gain; how to recover the hundred Talents; he knows that God is a Father
full of love, an heavenly Father full of power, an omniscient Father full of
providence; if his eye see our wants, and his heart pity them, and his
treasures abound toward them, how can his hand forbear to supply them?

Lastly, a wise Merchant is very exact in his Books of account, Preserving a
distinct knowledge of his gains and losses; his improvements, or decays. Such
is the care of a wise Christian to acquaint himself with his spiritual estate,
to make his calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. to prove whether he be in
the faith, 1 Cor. 1^.5. to examine how hissoul prospers, to preserve his peace
of Conscience, and interest in the love of God: He shall never have overmuch
work to do, who is daily doing something. There is something in it that the
Laver of Brass, is said to have been made of looking glasses, Exodus 38.8.
seeing of our faces, and, acquaintance with our estates, is a good preparation
to the cleansing of our selves. I thought in my ways, and turned, says David,
Psalm. 119.59. Let us search and try our ways and turn to the Lord our God,
says the Church, Law 40.

To conclude all, The life of a merchant in order unto gain stands in these
four things. In wisdom, and forecast to contrive; in labor to transact
business; in patience, to wait; and in thriftiness to preserve what his labors
gain: So our Christian Merchant labors, 1. For that wisdom which is unto
salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15. which is the foundation of all duties, Col. 1.9, 10,
considers the field wherein the treasure is, and buys it, Prove 31.16.2. He
prosecutes the dictates of spiritual wisdom, with a work of faith, and labor
of love. It is not empty wishings, and velleities, yawning and drowsy desires
that can make a merchant or a christian rich; much pains must be taken with an
evil heart, with a sluggish spirit, with a stubborn will, with impotent
passions* with strong lusts, with active enemies. 3. He endures with patince,
gives not over the trade of Piety, if his expectations be not presently
answered, but by patient continuance in well doing, comes to glory and honor
at the last, Romans 2.7. Heb. 10.37.4. He hides the word in his heart, stores up
precepts, promises, examples, experiments; what with wisdom, labor, and
patience he has gotten, he does with all care and diligence preserve, that he
may go forward, and not backward, in his holy Profession.

FINIS

