The Pillar and Ground of Truth.

A TREATISE SHOWING That the ROMAN CHVRCH falsely claims to be That CHURCH, and
the PILLAR of That TRUTH, mentioned by S. Paul in his First Epistle to Timothy,
Chap. III. Verse. 15.

Which is explained in THREE PARTS.

Imprimatur.

JO. BATTELY.
May 9. 1687.


LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXVII.

TO THE READER.
AMONG all the places of Scripture, which they of the Church of Rome are wont
to allege for a proof of their pretended Infallibility, I find none whereon
they more rely, than that of S. Paul to Timothy 1 III. 15. That thou may
know how thou ought to behave thy self in the house of God, which is the
CHURCH of the living God, the PILLAR AND GROUND OF THE TRUTH. Which place, say
the Rhemists, pincheth the Heretics wonderfully, and so it ever did: and
therefore they oppose themselves directly against the very letter and confessed
sense of the same.

I have thought it therefore worth my pains, to show how unjust this accusation
is; by opening the plain and evident meaning, the literal and confessed sense
of those words: whereby it will appear that we are far from being Heretics;
and that they, not we, are pinched by this place; and that there is no ground
at all in it for their Infallibility; nor for their vain flourishes, that the
very Name of CHURCH terrifies us, and makes us pale with fear (as Campian
insolently vapoured Ratio III.
,) and that we not only fear, but altogether abhor the word CATHOLIC, so as
to leave it clean out of our Bibles, as the forenamed Rhemists Preface to
Epistle of S. James.
most senslesly misrepresent us.

For as I have proved, in the following Book, that we, not they are the true
CATHOLIQVES, so there is nothing further from truth, (I have likewise shown)
than that the Apostle here speaks, with any particular respect, to the Church
of Rome. Which is so far from striking any terror into us, when it appropriates
to it self the name of CHVRCH; that we look upon the pretense to be as
ridiculous, as the proof is, they give us of it. Which is the sole Authority of
a false S. Ambrose his Commentaries upon this place; who thus glosses: All the
World being God's, yet the Church only is his House: the Rector (or Ruler)
whereof at this time is DAMASUS. Where the Rhemists Annot. in 1 Timothy III. 15.
desire us to note, How clear a case it was then, that the Pope of Rome, was
not the Governor only of one particular See, but of Christ's whole House, which
is the Universal Church, etc. And further improve this conceit, in these words,
The Church which is the House of God, whose Rector (says S. Ambrose) in his
time was Damasus, and now Gregory the thirteenth; and in the Apostles time S.
Peter, is the Pillar of Truth, the establishment of Verity: and therefore it
cannot err.

And truly it is worth our noting how clear a Case it is, that they were sorely
pinched (to use their own word again) for want of proofs; when they betook
themselves to such as this. For it is hard to think that Men of their education
(whom we will not despise, as they do the Heretics, a little before Annot. in
1 Timothy I. 7.
, as most ignorant of the Word of God, not knowing the very Principles of
Divinity) should not know that S. Ambrose was not the Author of those
Commentaries: they being acknowledged by the greatest Men in their Church to be
spurious Brats of some other Writer. Baronius Annal. Tom. V. ad an. 397. n. 38.
for instance says, The Exposition of Ambrose, upon all Paul 's Epistles,
began to be wanting in the time of Cassiodorus: but being plainly lost, it is
apparent, the work of another Author, was foisted in its room. And their other
great Cardinal, Bellarmine, confesses as much in several places; but in one
more fully L. I. de Mitrimonio, cap. 17.
, where he assoils an Objection of Chemnitius (who following the rule of the
Civil Law Tistem quem quis inducit prose, tenetar recipere contra se.
, [the witness which any Man produces for himself, he is bound to receive
against himself] quotes this Book, as Bellarmine often had done, in a Case of
Marriage) by this Answer, That the Author of these Commentaries is not S.
Ambrose, as learned Men know: and more than that, whosoever was the Author, he
was none, ex celebratis patribus, of the famous or eminent Fathers. And indeed
there is great reason for what these, and many others of that Church, say; as I
might show out of the Commentaries themselves, which contradict the very words
of the true S. Ambrose.

But suppose he had been the Author, or these the Work of some celebrated
Writer, it is a clear case (and I desire it may be noted) that these Rhemist
Annotators were not so knowing as they would be esteemed, or not so
conscientious as they ought to have been; when they gather from these words
that Damasus was Ruler over more than his own See, even over the Universal
Church, as S. Peter, they say, was in the Apostles times. For S. Ambrose
himself says, in his Book of the Priestly Dignity Tom. IV. de Sacerdotali
dignitate, cap. 2.
, (which Priests one would think should read) that when Christ said, Feed my
Sheep; those Sheep, and that Flock, not only blessed Peter then received; but
both he received them with us, and with him we all have received them. And it
is an unusual thing in Ancient Writers, to say the same of other Bishops, that
this Writer does of Damasus, when they mean no more, but that they were Rulers
of that part of the Catholic Church, which was committed to their charge.

Thus Arsenius, for instance, writes to Athanasius, as he himself has set down
his Letter, which begins thus, We loving Peace and Unity with the Catholic
Church, over which thou, by the Grace of God do preside or rule, Athan. Tom.
1. Apolog. 2. p. 786. (...).
etc. And more than this, such great Clerks as they should not have been
ignorant, being also such lofty Censurers of the Heretics, that Gregory
Nazianzene (called the Divine, whom they read, it is to be supposed, to learn
the principles of Divinity) says, S. Cyprian was made not only a Pastor, but a
Pastor that had the largest dominion: (...), etc. Orat. XVIII. p. 281.
being set over not the Church of Carthage only, or Africa, but all the West,
and almost all the East it self, and the North and South, unto whom his fame
reached. But if these things escaped their observation, or they studiously
concealed them, they must have been most ignorant of the word of God, as they
say the Heretics are, if they did not know, that S. Paul says the same of the
Elders of Ephesus, that this Writer does of Damasus, XX. Act. 28. that the Holy
Ghost had made them overseers, to feed, that is, to rule and govern, the Church
of God, which he has purchased with his own Blood. And if they knew this, why
were they not so honest as to interpret the later by the former? for there is
no difference between S. Paul's words, and the counterfeit S. Ambrose's. S.
Paul says, the Elders of Ephesus were appointed to rule the Church of God (for
that is the office of a Shepherd, that feeds the Flock) the other says, Damasus
was the ruler of God's Church. If the Universal Church be thereby meant, and
not his part of it only, why should it not be so expounded in the words of S.
Paul? and then Damasus his title to this office is cracked; for there were
Rulers then set over the Church Universal by the Holy Ghost, before he (or his
Church of Rome, perhaps) was in being. But if S. Paul's words must have a more
limited meaning; then with what conscience do they give their S. Ambrose's
words, an unlimited; and not restrain them, as they must do S. Paul's, to the
particular See, committed to his Government?

And it was not easy for them to be ignorant that S. Paul, in these words to
Timothy, speaks of the Church of Ephesus, and not of Rome, and was so far from
having any thought of S. Peter (whom these Annotators make the Ruler at that
time of this House of God) that it is evident, Timothy was the person who
presided in it, and was the chief Pillar and Ground of Truth here spoken of; as
I doubt not I have proved in the ensuing Discourse. Wherein I have also shown,
that other succeeding Bishops, in other Churches, had the same title; nay, many
persons in the Church, that were no Bishops: who were far from thinking
themselves, or being thought by others, infallible; as these Annotators imagine
they must needs be, who are the Pillar and establishment of the Truth. That Is
an inference from these words, for which they had no more warrant; than they
had to entitle S. Ambrose to those Commentaries.

The Author of which also did so little dream of the Infallibility of the
Church, when he glossed upon these words; that he does not so much as make the
Church, the Ground or establishment of the Truth: But says in plain terms,
Firmamentum (as the Vulgar Latin translates (...)) hujus veritatis signa sunt
and prodigia; the establishment of this Truth (left in the Church) are signs
and wonders which the Apostles, that is, wrought to bring Men to the firm
belief of that truth which they preached. Which does not rely, therefore, upon
the credit of the Church; but upon the credit of the Apostles, and of those
Divine Works, whereby God bare Witness to them: which are recorded in the Holy
Scriptures.

From whence alone we ought to derive our knowledge of the Truth, the Apostle
here speaks of: as is most clearly resolved by S. Cyril of Jerusalem, in these
memorable words. Catech. IV. Sect. de Spirito Saycto.
Concerning the Divine and Holy Mysteries of the Faith, we ought not to deliver
any thing, though never so small, without the Divine Scriptures, etc. neither
should thou believe me barely saying these things to thee; unless thou
receivest the demonstration of the things, published, out of the Divine
Scriptures. For this is the safety, or security of our Faith, which depends not
upon words that we invent, but upon the demonstration of the Divine Scriptures.

In which we hear our Lord Christ himself speaking to us: who is more to be
believed than the Church. For the Church, as S. Paul speaks, is subject unto
Christ (they are the words of S. Augustine Tom. VII. Coura Crisconium Gram. l.
2. c. 21.
) and therefore the Church ought not to set her self above Christ: so as to
think that they who are condemned by him may be baptized, but they that are
condemned by the Church, may not be baptized: when he always judges truly; but
Ecclesiastical Judges, being Men, are oft-times deceived.

From them therefore, who are fallible, we appeal to Him, who is infallible;
and has delivered his sentence in the Holy Scriptures: or from a Church
particular, we appeal to the Church Catholic: nay, from the New Church of
Rome, to the Old. For we are not, as they would make the World believe,
affrighted with the Name of the Church; whose judgment we truly honor, as will
appear in this Treatise: while they dishonor it, by confining the Church to
themselves; and then exalting it above the Scriptures of Truth; and making its
mere Name serve to dazzle the eyes of their own People, and to keep them in
profound ignorance: teaching them (...). in. XII. Luke 11.
to oppose the Name of a Catholic Man, and the Catholic Church, as a
sufficient answer to all that we most reasonably object against them. Thus in
their own conceit, it is a kind of Gorgon's head, which they fancy will
immediately stupify us, when it is opposed to us: but, blessed be God, we are
still in our Wits, and understand very well, that this is no better than his
old Artifice, who invented this cheat (as S. Cyprian L. de Vnitate Ecclesie.
speaks) of deceiving unwary Souls by the very Title of the Christian Name. For
just so they now abuse the Name of Church, and the name of Catholic; and by
good words, and fine speeches, (as S. Paul writes XVI. Romans 18.) deceive the
hearts of the simple.

Whom I have endeavored in this small Treatise, to undeceive, and direct in
the way of that TRVTH, of which every Church ought to be the Pillar and Ground.
If any one be not, but in stead of the certain, constant, universally received
Christian Truth, set up uncertain, nay false, lately invented, and particular
conceits of its own; it is not to be relied on, but rejected: though it has
been formerly a Church of never so great Authority. Such the Church of Rome
once was; but now ceases so to be: having by taking upon her too much, lost
that regard, which otherwise it might have had in the Christian World. It is
not the same Church it was in the Apostles times, no nor in the days of Gregory
the Great: as has been unanswerably demonstrated by Bp. Morton heretofore
Catholic Appeal, L. 1. cap. 2.
; and lately by the Author of the Vindication of the Answer of some late
Papers; to which there will never be an ingenuous Reply. Great and many
alterations have been made therein, to the manifest prejudice of the Christian
Faith: of which that Church should have been, as well as others, a Pillar and
Establishment; but has notoriously failed in her duty, by inventing another
Faith, which undermines and endangers that Faith which was once delivered to
the Saints.

Of this I have given so full and so clear an account in these Papers, that I
fear not to expose them to the examination of them that are of a contrary mind:
hoping, though they do not convince them of their errors yet, they will help to
establish the People of our Church, in the present Truth. Which, I doubt not,
they will see to be the truly Catholic, Apostolic Faith; which they ought
not to part withal, but preserve as carefully as they do their life.

And so the cannot fail to do, if they add to Faith, Virtue. In order to which,
I have endeavored to make this Treatise as practical as I could: that we may
not fall into that grand error, of thinking it enough to hold the Truth, though
we hold it in unrighteousness.

God of his infinite mercy, deliver us all from that damnable delusion, and
establish our hearts unblameable in Holiness, before God, even our Father, at
the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, with all his Saints. 1 Thessalonians. III. 13.

PART I.
INTRODUCTION.
IT is a pious reflection which Clemens Alexandrinus makes upon a saying of
Plato, that if truth could never have been learnt, L. VI. Stromat. p. 675.
but either from God himself, or from his dependents; then we, who have the
testimonies of the Divine Oracles, do justly boast, that we are taught the
truth, by the very Son of God. Which he has revealed unto us so plainly in all
things necessary to our Salvation, and transmitted unto us so entirely in the
Holy Scriptures; that it cannot but be a great trouble to all those who love
him and his Religion, to see such wranglings about it in his Church, as if
there were no more certainty among us, what is truth; than there was among the
Philosophers.

The contention about this is so sharp and fierce, that while Men seek after
Truth, they are in danger to lose the very aim and scope of it, which is
Charity: the love of God and of one another. This S. Paul determines to be the
very drift of the Gospel, when he tells Timothy, the end of the commandment is
charity, 1 I. 5.

Nay, they have raised so many doubts about this matter, that poor People are
many times to seek for Truth it self, even in the clearest light thereof. It
being some Men's business, so to confound their thoughts, that they know it not
when they see it: but are still in great trouble about it, even when they have
it.

And where to seek for it, is now grown a great question also. It is to be
found, no doubt, in the Church; but about that there are so many disputes, that
Men are to seek as much as before, if they go to find it there. In short, there
are no words more abused than these two; Truth, and Church: and therefore I
hope it will do some service to Souls, if for their plain and safe direction in
these matters, I rescue those words of S. Paul to Timothy, 1 III. 15. [the
Church of the living God, the pillar and ground of truth.] from those false
glosses that are put upon them, to the great dishonor of our blessed Lord, and
of his Holy Truth.

And for that end, I shall distinctly treat of these four things: First, What
that truth is, of which either the Church, or Timothy, or both, were the Pillar
and Ground. Secondly, What it is to be a Pillar and Ground of the Truth.
Thirdly, Who it is, to whom this Office and Honor belongs, of being the Pillar
and Ground of the Truth: or what we mean, when we say, the Church is entrusted
therewith. Lastly, How it discharges this Office.


I. What is the Truth?
Here we must begin; because we must first know what the Truth is, before we
can know a Society of Men to be the Church: which is constituted and made by
believing and professing the Truth.

And this in effect, is a resolution of that question, which Pilate asked our
Savior, but would not stay for an answer, What is Truth?

Which though it be made a great difficulty by those, whose interest it is to
make things intricate and perplexed; yet, in my opinion, it is very easy to
give satisfaction to it; and we need not go far neither, to seek it. For the
Apostle himself immediately explains what he means by Truth in the words
following; and without Controversy great is the mystery of godliness; God was
manifested in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received up into Glory.

Where we learn two things in general, concerning this matter. First, that the
truth here spoken of, is that which was formerly a Mystery or Secret, which lay
hidden for many Ages and Generations, in the unknown purpose of God, but now is
revealed and manifested, by the Son of God, and his holy Spirit, to make Men
godly.

Which is the other thing we learn from thence, that the truth, which the
Apostle intends, is the Mystery of Godliness, or as he he speaks in the VI.
Chapter v. 3. the Doctrine which is according to Godliness. And therefore
whatsoever does not tend to better Men's lives, by making them do their duties
faithfully both toward God, and toward Men (to some of which the duties that
are owing, are in this very Epistle called showing Piety or Godliness, v. 4.)
we are not to reckon it among the truths, which were deposited with Timothy to
be preferred and upheld in the Church. For God did not design by the discovery
he made of his Mind and Will, in the Gospel, merely to enlarge our knowledge:
but to rectify our wills and affections, by the right information of our
minds, and by acquainting us with such weighty truths, especially such
wonderful revelations of his love, as cannot but irresistably sway us, if we
lay them to heart, unto his Obedience.

But, that we may not be left to guess at this truth, or mystery of Godliness,
without any certainty, he sets down a particular of it: and reduces the whole
mystery of Godliness, to these Six heads.

I. The principal is this, that the eternal Son of God, came down from Heaven,
and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin Mary, and was made Man; that
he might suffer for us, and make himself an offering for our sins. All this I
take to be included in these words, God was manifested in the flesh. Which
cannot be meant of God the Father, for it is expressly said in other places,
that it was Jesus Christ who came in the flesh, 1 John IV. 2. and is here
declared to be God, that is, the eternal Son of God, the Word made flesh, 1 John 14. Which does not denote merely his being made Man, but likewise his
suffering for us: he taking our flesh on purpose, for this very end, that
therein he might, by his Death, make an atonement for Sin. And so the very
phrase flesh and blood signifies in Scripture (as it does commonly in the
Hebrew Writers) this weak, frail, mortal, suffering State, wherein we are at
present: into which our blessed Lord put himself, when he manifested himself in
our flesh. So we read expressly, II. Hebr. 14. where to take part with us, in
our flesh and blood, is to make himself liable to sufferings and death. In
these few words therefore, are contained many principles of Christian truths,
viz. that Jesus Christ was really God (not God the Father, whose being is here
supposed, but God the Son) and that he was incarnate, and really made Man, of
the Substance of his Mother: being perfect God, and perfect Man: and as really
suffered for us in the flesh, as S. Peter speaks, 1 IV. 1. Which were the
Doctrines that were first assaulted by the Devil, and his Agents in the
beginning of our Religion (such as Simon Magus and the rest of that Tribe) but
proved to be undoubtedly true, by the mighty power of his Spirit.

II. Which is the second part of this Mystery, justified in, or by the Spirit.
Which sufficiently convinced all gainsayers, that he was no less than the Son
of God, though in the likeness of sinful flesh; and that by a Sacrifice for
sin, he condemned sin in the flesh. VIII. Romans 3. For as he was conceived in
his Mothers Womb, by the Holy Ghost, I. Luke 35. So at his Baptism he was
anointed with the Holy Ghost and with power (X. Act. 38.) there being then a
visible descent of the Spirit of God, in a Glorious manner upon him, together
with a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, III. Matt. 17. And as it then lighted on him, so it abode, and
remained on him, I. Joh. 32, 33. as appeared by the power of such Miracles, as
neither Men nor Devils could work, but only the Spirit of God. Which was so
evidently true, that to ascribe them to the Devil, was the blasphemy against
the Holy Ghost, XII. Matt. 28.31, 32. III. Mark 29, 30. by whose power not only
Devils were cast out, but even the Dead were raised: whereby he was manifested
to be the resurrection and the life, XI. Joh. 25. By the same Spirit he himself
also was raised from the Dead, and declared again the Son of God with power, I.
Romans 4. And having all power in Heaven and Earth given him, he sent the Holy
Ghost upon his Apostles on the day of Pentecost, as a further Justification of
him, XV. Joh. 26. V. Act. 32. Nay, more than this, by the laying on of their
hands poured it out upon others, who believed on his Name, II. Act. 38. VIII.
17. Which was the unction from the Holy One, whereby they knew all things, as
St. John calls it 1. II. 20. i. e. were assured of all the Christian Truth,
revealed unto them. For all these, were illustrious witnesses unto Christ, and
justified this grand truth that he was God manifested in the flesh (for such
ends and purposes, as he pretended) against all opposers, who accused it of
falsity.

And who is there that does not see several other principles of God's holy
Truth, contained in this? particularly that the Holy Ghost is God, the third
person in the Holy Trinity, being the Spirit of God: which knows the things of
God (as the Spirit of Man does what is in him, 1 Cor. II. 11.) and led or
guided the Apostles into all Truth, XVI. Joh. 13. and dwells in the whole body
of the Church, as his Temple, 1 Cor. VI. 19. (which no created Spirit can do)
and gave such a Divine testimony to our Savior, that to speak against it, was
unpardonable blasphemy.

That other great article of our Faith also is included in this, which S. Paul
declares in these terms: Though he was crucified through weakness, yet he
lives by the power of God, 2 Corinthians. XIII. 4.

III. This was a thing notorious to the Angels themselves: which is the third
particular in this Mystery; Was seen of Angels: both at his birth, III. Luke 9,
10, 13. and in several passages of his life, IV. Matt. 11. XVII. 5. I. Joh. 51.
and at his death, XXII. Luke 43. and at and after his Resurrection, XXVIII.
Matt. 2. XX. Joh. 20. and also at his Ascension, I. Act. 10, 11. when they
testified to the Apostles that this same Jesus who was taken up from them into
Heaven, shall so come, in like manner as they had seen him go into Heaven.
Where when he came, they all Worshipped him, I. Hebr. 6. and admired at the
wonderful Wisdom of God, which was made known to them by the Church (1 Pet. I.
12.) especially this Mystery of Christ, as the Scripture calls it, which is the
fourth particular in this Catalogue of Christian Truths.

IV. That this Doctrine, thus confirmed and attested, was preached unto the
Gentiles: who were assured, that they should be made fellow-heirs with the
Jews, and partakers of God's Promise in Christ, by the Gospel, as S. Paul
speaks (III. Ephesians. 6.) Unto whom this grace was given, to preach among the
Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ; and to make all Men know, what is
the fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of the World was hid in
God, who created all things by Jesus Christ.

An astonishing Grace this was; declaring the infinite love and kindness of
God: that they who thought not of it, who had no promises to make them expect
it, who were strangers to God and the Covenant of Promise, were on a sudden
surprised with the revelation of God's good will to them in Christ; and by
belief of it, were made fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of
God. That is, the Church was made truly Catholic; all the World being taken
into fellowship with the Apostles, whose fellowship was with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John I. 3.

V. And another great wonder was, that notwithstanding all the opposition which
was made by the Potentates, by the Philosophers, and Disputers of the World, by
the Devil also and his Angels (who though they also saw (...) and could not but
confess him, yet set themselves against him with their whole power) and
notwithstanding all the strong prejudices that were in Peoples minds against
it, this whole Mystery of Godliness was entertained and received with great joy
every where. Which is the fifth particular, seen of Angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the World. So mightily grew the Word of God and
prevailed, as S. Luke speaks Act. XIX. 20. The reason was, because Christ the
Head of the Church, being raised from the dead, was exalted at God's right
Hand, far above all Principality and Power, and every name that is named,
either in this World, or in the other: so that neither Men nor Devils, could
hinder the propagation of the Gospel, by the working of that mighty Power,
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the Dead, and set him at his
own right hand in the, Heavenly places.

VI. For that is the last part of this Mystery of Godliness, he was received up
into, or in Glory: that is, in a glorious manner received up into Heaven. And
being gone into the Heavens (as S. Peter writes, 1 III. ult.) is on the right
hand of God; angels, and authorities and powers being made subject to him. So
subject, that from henceforth he expects, till all his enemies be made his
footstool, X. Hebr. 13. and having vanquished Death, which is the last Enemy,
and raised Men out of their Graves, he will judge them according to their
Works. For he was received up into Glory, to be the Judge of quick and dead.

These are the Principal Points of that Truth, which ought to be supported and
maintained in the Christian Church: being the substantial and necessary
Articles of our Faith, without the belief of which we cannot be Christians.

For the fuller Explication of which I shall make Six observations: the first
of which the Apostle himself here suggests; and the rest will fairly follow
from thence.

1. First the Apostle notes them to be such Truths as were without
Controversy: about which there was no dispute among serious Christians. 2. And
therefore these are the truly Catholic Doctrines, and these alone. 3. The
fundamental Truths, upon which our Religion and the Church it self is built. 4.
And therefore he that holds close to these, cannot be a Heretic. 5. But they
that call Men so, because they believe not other things, which they have made
necessary, have rent the Christian Church, and are guilty of that sin, of which
they falsely accuse others. 6. Which guilt is the greater, because the best and
most learned Men among them, have confessed those Doctrines, which they have
superadded to the Ancient Truth, to be doubtful, superfluous, and unknown to
the first Ages of the Church: that is, not truly Catholic Doctrines.
I.
The first of these ought to be well weighed: that the Truth, which is to be
supported and maintained in the Church, is so evident and so abundantly
attested, that it is confessed by all Christians. Thus that word (...), without
controversy, or confessedly signifies, as we may learn from the use of it
among the Ancient Greeks; one of which [Diodorus Sinopensis] speaks of their
Supreme God, just as the Apostle does of the Mystery of Godliness Apud
Athenaeum, Lib. VI. cap. 9.


-- (...)
(...).
Jupiter the Friendly is, without controversy, or by common consent agreed to
be, the greatest of the Gods. In like manner the Apostle is to be understood,
when he says the same of these great and venerable Doctrines of Godliness:
Which are such, as are confessed by all, by a common agreement; and doubted of
by none. For they are no other, than those which are contained in the Apostles
Creed; about which there is no question among Christians, but they all consent
unto it, being baptized into the belief of those Truths: in which the whole
Church has agreed, every where, in all times, down from the Apostles days, to
this present Age.

For the Church, says Irenaeus L. I. Contra Haeres. c. 2.
, though dispersed throughout the World, to the ends of the Earth, received
from the Apostles and their Disciples the Faith, which is in one God, the
Father Almighty, who made the Heaven, and the Earth, and Sea, and all that is
in them: and in one Christ Jesus, the Son of God, who was Incarnate for our
Salvation: and in the Holy Ghost, who preached by the Prophets the
dispensations, and approaches of God, and the Birth of the Virgin, and the
Suffering, the Resurrection from the Dead, and the Bodily Ascension of our Dear
Lord Christ Jesus into the Heavens; and his coming from thence in the Glory of
the Father, to gather together all things, and to raise all humane flesh; that,
according to the good pleasure of the Father invisible, every knee of things in
Heaven, or Earth, or under the Earth, may bow to Christ Jesus; our Lord, and
God, and Savior, and King, and every Tongue may confess him; and he may do
Righteous Judgment upon all; and send the Spirits of wickedness, and the Angels
that transgressed and apostatized, together with ungodly, unjust, lawless, and
blasphemous Men, into eternal fire; but to the just, and the holy, and such as
observe his Commandments, and persevere in his Love, either always or by
Repentance, graciously bestow life, give immortality, and put them in
possession of eternal Glory.

This is, (...) (as he calls it) a little Body of Truth; the Rule of Faith, (as
Tertullian often speaks) instituted by Christ; which nullas habet apud nos
quaestiones L. de praescript. cap. XIV.
, is not doubted of, nor has any questions about it among Christians, but such
as Heresies have brought in, and which make Men Heretics.

And therefore this is the Truth, of which the Church ought to be the Pillar
and Ground to the end of the World: but not presume, as I shall show anon, to
bind all Christians, upon pain of perishing everlastingly, to believe what is
not contained in this Rule of belief. For it alone is sufficient, as appears by
this; that into it, all the Articles or Parts (as a learned Man of the Roman
Church speaks Rigaltius Ib.
) of which a Christian consists, are digested, as it were, into one Body.

II.
From whence it follows that these are the true Catholic, and the only
Catholic Doctrines. Catholic they are, because spread every where: and the
only Catholic, because none besides these, till very lately, were received as
part of the Christian Truth, which must necessarily be believed, if we hope to
be saved.

Hear how Irenaeus L. I. cap. 3.
proclaims this, immediately after the foregoing words: which Haeres. XXXI. n.
30, 31.
Epiphanius thought so considerable, that he has transcribed both these
Chapters into his Book against Heresies.

The Church, as we have said, having received this Preaching (or Doctrine) and
this Faith, preserves it most carefully, as if it inhabited but one House;
though it be dispersed through the whole World. And with unanimous consent,
Preaches, and Teaches and Delivers these things, as having but one Mouth. For
though there be different Languages in the World, yet the force of that which
is delivered is one and the same. So that neither the Churches situated in
Germany believe otherwise, or have any other Tradition, nor those in Spain, nor
those in France, nor those in the East, nor those in Egypt, nor those in Libya,
nor those in the midst of the World; but as the Sun, that Creature of God, is
one and the same in the whole World, so the (...), the Preaching, or Doctrine
of the Truth shines every where, and inlightens all Men, who are willing to
come to the knowledge of the Truth. And neither he, among the Governors of the
Church, who is most powerful in Speech, teaches different things from these
(for no Man is above his Master) nor he that is weak in Speech diminishes the
Tradition. For there being one and the same Faith, neither he that is able to
speak a great deal concerning it, does enlarge or exceed: nor he that can say
but a little, does take away, or make it less.

Which is such a plain declaration that the Creed contains the whole
Apostolical Tradition (or Faith, for they are the same in his Language) and the
only Catholic Doctrine; that if we were at this day to contrive words on
purpose, for the asserting this Truth, we could not invent any more full or
express than these. Which show us that this Faith is sufficient not only for
the ignorant, the Catechumens, and beginners in Religion; but for the most
improved in Christian knowledge; for those that instructed and ruled the
Church, who had no Authority to preach or impose any other belief.

This is a thing that runs through his whole Book: for he repeats it again, in
fewer words, in the latter end of the next Chapter, that the true Church has
but that one and the same Faith (before mentioned) throughout the whole World.
Which in the 19th Chapter, he calls the Rule of Truth, by which all error was
discovered: for holding this rule, though they speak very various and many
things, we easily evince that they have deviated from the Truth.

And again, in the third Book L. III. Chap. 3.
, he has recourse to the same Rule of Truth, unto which whosoever will
hearken, may see what is the tradition of the Apostles, manifested in the whole
World, in every Church. Where he says they were able to tell what Bishops were
settled by the Apostles and their Successors, until his time: who neither
taught nor thought of any thing like to the dotages of the Heretics of those
days. And because it would have been too long to reckon up all the Churches, he
instances in the Church of Rome, (to which all had occasion to go, upon some
business or other, because it was the Imperial City) by whose Bishop he says,
that Tradition, and that Preaching, or Doctrine of Truth, which was from the
Apostles in the Church, is come to us; and is a most full proof, that one and
the same life giving faith, which was from the Apostles in the Church, is
conferred to this time, and delivered in Truth. The very same, which Polycarp
wrote to the Philippians (mark these words, which they of the present Roman
Church are wont to conceal, that they may make the World believe Irenaeus
thought the Tradition of the Apostles, that is the Christian Faith, was to be
sought only in their Church) and which was in the Church of Ephesus, founded by
Paul, and having John continuing in it, till the time of Trajan: which Church
is a true witness of the Tradition of the Apostles.

And that there may be no mistake about this Tradition, L. III. Cap. 4.
he repeats it again in the next Chapter, and informs us (in very remarkable
words) it was nothing else but the Doctrine contained in the Creed.

Since these things are so plain, we ought not to seek further, among others,
for truth; which we may easily find in the Church: For the Apostles left most
fully in it, as in a rich Repository, all things that belong to truth: So that
every one, who will, may take from thence the Water of Life, etc. (out of the
Holy Scriptures, he means, as appears by what follows); And suppose the
Apostles had not left us the Scriptures, shall we not follow the Order of the
Tradition, (or Rule of Faith) which they delivered to those, unto whom they
committed the Churches? To which Ordination many barbarous Nations, who believe
on Christ, assent, having the Doctrine of Salvation, without Paper and Ink,
written by the Spirit in their Heart, and diligently preserving the ANCIENT
TRADITION: believing in one God, the maker of Heaven and Earth, and of all
things which are therein, by Christ Jesus the Son of God; Who out of his most
eminent love to his Creature vouchsafed to be born of the Virgin, uniting Man
to God by himself; and suffering under Pontius Pilate, and rising again, and
being illustriously received in glory, shall come again, the Savior of those
that are saved, and the Judge of those that are judged: Sending into eternal
fire, the misshapers of Truth, and the contemners of his Father, and of his
coming. Those that have believed this Faith without Letters, we, in our
Language, call barbarous: but as to their opinion, and custom, and
conversation, they please God, because of their Faith, by which they are most
wise: living in all Righteousness, Chastity, and Wisdom. Unto whom, if any one
should speak in their Language, those things which Heretics have invented;
they would presently stop their ears, and run away, not enduring to hear the
blasphemy. Thus by that OLD TRADITION of the Apostles ( viz. the Creed) they do
not so much as admit into their thoughts, the portentous talk of those
Heretics in his days.

These things I have thought fit to set down, the more largely, because they
are an evident demonstration, what the OLD TRADITION of the Apostles is; which
is nothing else, but that summary of Christian Truth contained in the Creed:
unto which they would suffer no other Tradition to be added; but contented
themselves with this, as fully sufficient: and by this judged of all other
things, that pretended to come from the Apostles: and were every where so well
instructed in this, that in those Churches which as yet had not received the
Apostolical Writings (the Holy Scriptures of the N. T.) they had this Doctrine,
as the contents of those Scriptures: and were thought most wise (being wise
enough to salvation) in this faith alone, without any other.

But because this is such a very important Truth, I shall take a little more
pains, to set down the sense of the Church in all Ages, concerning it: that the
Reader may be satisfied, there is no other Truth, but this alone, which is
absolutely necessary to his Salvation. Which they sometime comprehend in fewer
words; but never add any one article, beyond those in the Creed.

If we had the Letters of Ignatius entire and sincere, we should be able to
tell what he took for Truth, immediately after the Apostles were dead. And thus
much is evident from them as they now are, that they or he who contrived the
Epistle to the Philippians under his name (for it is not thought to be his)
took this to be the Doctrine of that Second Age: when after the mention of the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and that the Son of God was truly made Man, truly
born, and truly crucified, dead, and rose again (not seemingly, not in
appearance only, but in Truth) they make him conclude (...). He that believes
these things, as they are, and were really done, is a blessed Man. Which is an
undoubted testimony they took this Creed to be sufficient to salvation: which
Ignatius in an unquestioned Epistle of his to the Church of Smyrna, calls the
unmovable Faith, wherein he blessed God, they were perfected, or knit
together; mentioning no other Articles, but those before named.

Polycarp also, in the same Age, wrote an Epistle to the Philippians, wherein
they that had a mind and took care of their salvation, L. III. Cap. 3.4. and
Eusebius. Hist. L. IV. c. 14.
might learn, the character of his Faith and the Doctrine of Truth: which was
the very same as Irenaeus relates in the forenamed Chapter, with that set down
by him, which he calls that one and only Truth which he received from the
Apostles, and delivered to the Church.

And what they taught in Asia, and Irenaeus in France, that Tertullian, in the
latter end of the same Age, taught in Africa; that there is but one only
immovable, irreformable Rule of Faith L. de Velandis Virg. C. 1.
(that is, there is no other form of believing but this, as de la Cerda
honestly interprets the word irreformabilis) in one God, Almighty, the Creator
of the World, and in his Son Jesus Christ, born of the Virgin Mary, crucified
under Pontius Pilate, raised the third day from the dead, received up into
Heaven, and sitting now at the right hand of the Father, and shall come to
judge the quick and the dead, by the resurrection also of the Flesh.

This he calls in that place, the Law of Faith: which he sets down, in more
words, in another Book; where he Prefaces to it by this remarkable proposition
as he calls it, L. de praescription. c. 9.
that there is one, and the same certain Doctrine instituted by Christ, which
all people ought to believe; and consequently to seek, that, when they have
found it, they may believe. Now the inquisition of one certain appointment
cannot be infinite: which is an encouragement to seek till one find, and
believe when he has found; because there remains, says he, Nothing more but
to preserve and keep, what thou have believed. For thou believe this also,
that there is nothing else to be believed. And therefore no further inquiry to
be made, when thou have found and believed, that which was appointed by him,
who did not command thee to enquire after any thing, but what he appointed.

Upon which principle having a little further enlarged, he proceeds to lay down
the Ib. Chap. XIII.
Rule of Faith (that one certain appointment, which if one believe, there is
nothing else to be believed) whereby we believe there is one God alone, and no
other but the Creator of the World, who made all things of nothing, by his
Word, emitted before all things. That Word called his Son, seen variously in
the name of GOD by the Patriarchs, heard in the Prophets, and at last brought
down by the Spirit and power of God the Father into the Virgin Mary, made flesh
in her Womb, and born of her, became Jesus Christ: and thereupon preached the
new Law, and the new promise of the Kingdom of Heaven; wrought miracles, was
crucified, rose the third day, was taken up into Heaven, sits at the right
hand of the Father, sent the vicarious power of the Holy Spirit, who works in
believers: shall come in glory, to take holy persons to the enjoyment of
eternal Life, and the celestial promises, and to condemn the profane to
everlasting fire: both parties being raised up again, with the restoring of the
flesh.

This is the Rule, about which, he there says, there are no questions: the
Rule, in which Faith entirely consists; that Faith which will save a Man: unto
which curiosity ought to yield: for to know nothing against the Rule is to know
all things. And beyond this Rule, he there expressly argues, Ib. Cap. X. XIV.
Vbi enim erit finis quaerendi? Vbi statio creaendi? etc.
. there is nothing to be believed: for if we still be to seek for Faith, where
shall we rest? Where shall we make an end of seeking? Where shall we make a
stand and stay our believing? Or where shall a full st p be put to finding?

And that this was the constant Doctrine of those times and places, it appears
from hence, that as Irenaeus often repeats this Rule and this alone, so does he
a third time insist upon this, even after he became a Montanist; as the only
Rule that had run down to their times from the beginning of the Gospel: which
he had always professed, and now much more, being more fully (as he fancied)
instructed by the Paraclete, the leader into all Truth. Who durst not (it
seems) though he pretended to Revelations, adventure to alter this Rule: which
Tertullian recites again, Adv. Praxeam, Cap. 2.
in the same terms, without any inlargements, as he had done in his former
Books.

And thereby satisfies us, that he did not casually make this the Rule of
Faith, but that it was his constant sense: which though he do not express in
the very same words and syllables, it only shows they had no other sense, but
this in their minds. And, as Vigilius L. IV. adv. Entychi^nos.
speaks about this very matter, nec praejudicant verba, ubi sensus incolumis
permanet, the words do not make a wrong opinion, where the sense remains safe
and sound. Which may be applied to all the forms of belief, which were in the
Church of Rome, of Aquileia, and in the Churches of the East, before the great
Council of Nice: none of which differ in sense (though in some words they do)
nor have one Article of Faith more, than the Creed now contains: which
Tertullian Apolog. Cap. 47.
once more calls the Rule of Truth, which comes transmitted from Christ, by his
companions, or Apostles: and in another place, most significantly, that ONE
EDICT of GOD, which hangs up (as the Edicts of the Emperor did in a Table) to
be read by all De Resurrect Carnis Cap. 18.
.

Nor was there any other Faith in the next Age to this (in the third Century)
as we may be satisfied from Origin, who in his Preface to his Books (...),
thinking it necessary first to lay down a certain line, and manifest rule, by
which to inquire concerning other things, and having distinguished between
things necessary to be believed, and those which are not necessary; he gives
the sum of those things, which were manifestly delivered by the Apostolical
Preaching: and it is nothing else, but the present Creed: about which, he
says, there is one sense of the whole Church.

And in his first Book against Celsus, who said the Christian Religion was
(...), a clancular Doctrine, which they hid and concealed, he avows that the
Christian Doctrine was as well known in the World, as the Opinions of
Philosophers. For who does not know that we believe Jesus was born of a Virgin,
was crucified, rose again from the Dead, will come to Judgment, and punish
Sinners and reward the Righteous according to their Deeds? Nay, the Mystery of
the future Resurrection is divulged, though laughed at by unbelievers. These
were the great things which were commonly taught, and all obliged to believe;
as for others, which were not common, the Philosophers, he tells him, had their
abstruse Doctrines as well as Christians. To this purpose we meet with a
notable passage in Epiphanius (in the succeeding Age) which shows that the
substance of the Christian Faith concerning our Savior was commonly known,
even by those who did not profess it; and understood to be this which Origin
mentions. For a Jew coming to see an eminent Man of his Nation who was sick,
whispered this in his Ear, when they despaired of his life, Hares. XXX. n. 9.
Believe in Jesus who was crucified under Pontius Pilate the Governor, being
the Son of GOD, and afterward born of Mary, the Christ of GOD, and raised from
the dead, and that He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.

S. Cyprian Epist. ad Magnum de bapt. Novat. edit. Rig. p. 152.
also plainly shows there was no other Faith in his Church: when he answers
those who said, the Novatians, held the same Law that the Catholic Church
held, and baptized into the same Creed; believing the same God, the Father, the
same Christ the Son, the same Holy Ghost; that this would not avail them (for
Chore and Dathan and Abiram, believed the same God with Moses and Aaron); and
besides, they did not believe remission of sins, and eternal life, by the holy
Church; since they had left the Church.

Lucianus also a famous Presbyter of the Church of Antioch, and a Martyr for
the Faith of Christ, left a form of believing, written with his own hand
Sozomen. L. III. c. 5.
, if we may believe the Bishops assembled at Antioch, who sent it about in the
time of the Arian Controversy, to prove they were none of his followers, but
held (...), the Faith which had been set forth from the beginning: and it is
this, as Socrates reports it L. II. Eccles. Hist. c. 10.
; We have learnt from the beginning to believe in one God of the whole World,
the maker and preserver of all things intelligible and sensible; and in one
Only begotten Son of God, subsisting before all Worlds, and being together with
the Father who begot him; by whom all things were made, whether visible or
invisible; who in the last days came down, by the good pleasure of the Father,
and took flesh of the Holy Virgin, and having fulfilled the whole Will of his
Father, suffered and rose again, and returned to Heaven, and sits at the
right Hand of the Father, and shall come to judge the quick and dead, and
remains King and God for ever. And if it be needful to add it, we believe the
Resurrection of the flesh and life everlasting.

I will not trouble the Reader with a larger Creed of theirs which there
follows, more fully explaining the Doctrine of the Trinity; because it belongs
to the following Age, Cent. IV.

In which, it is known the Nicene Fathers met to settle the Controversy about
the Son of God: but did not make any new Creed, or add one Article to what had
been believed before; but only explained one Article, the sense of which the
Arians perverted. No, they were so far from enlarging the Christian Faith, that
when they met together they recited no other Creed, but that of the Apostles:
as Laurentius Valla affirms he had read in some ancient Books of Isidore; who
collected the Canons of old Councils. And accordingly when they had drawn up
that Creed, which they published, they did not think they had made the least
change in the matter of Faith; but declared that, this Epiphanius in Anchorat.
was the Creed delivered by the Holy Apostles. Which S. Ambrose Sermon. 38.
Hieron. Epist. ad Pammach.
in that Age calls clavem the key, S. Hierom indicium the mark or sign of
Faith: in which after the confession of the Trinity, and of the Unity of the
Church, the whole Mystery of the Christian Religion is concluded, in the
Resurrection of the flesh. And which Greg. Nazianzen, in his second Letter to
Cledonius, calls, Orat. L. II. beginning.
(...), a short boundary and rule of our sense or judgment: i. e. of the Faith
of Christians.

S. Austin especially in a great number of places, declares, that this is the
only Faith required to make a Man a Christian. Particularly in his L. de Fid:
and Symbolo. Tom. III.
Book he wrote on purpose about this matter; which he begins thus, Since the
just live by Faith, the greater care must be taken that Faith be not corrupted;
and then adds, Now the Catholic Faith is made known to the faithful, in the
Creed. Which having explained, he concludes his Book in these words; which few
words are known to the faithful, that believing they may be subdued to God; and
being brought under his Yoke may live aright; and living aright, may cleanse
their Heart; and their Heart being cleansed, they may understand what they
believe.

In like manner before he begins the Explication of the Book of Genesis De
Genesi ad literam L. imperfectius.
, he sets down what the Catholic Faith is; because Heretics were wont to
draw the Scriptures to their own sense, against the Catholic Faith. And the
Catholic Faith, by which he considers all things, is nothing else but that in
the Nicene Creed: beginning with the belief of God the Father Almighty, and
concluding with the belief of eternal Life, and the promise of the heavenly
Kingdom.

Which is agreeable to the direction he gives to others, in his Book of
Christian Doctrine L. III. c. 2.
; that in all ambiguous things, the rule of Faith be consulted, lest any sense,
that is contrary thereunto, be admitted. Which, he elsewhere says Epist. LVII.
, is the rule of Faith common to little and great in the Church.

It is needless to add any more out of that Father; and I shall but briefly
mention the Creed of Pope Damasus in the same Age (among S. Hierom's Works Tom.
IV.
) which is only a confession of the blessed Trinity, with the rest of the
Articles concerning the Conception, Birth, Death, Resurrection, Ascension,
Exaltation, and coming again of our blessed Savior, to raise us from the Dead,
and to give to every Man according to his works: concluding with these
observable words; Read these things, believe these things, retain these things:
subjugate thy Soul to this belief, and thou shall obtain life and reward from
Christ.

But the words of the great Athanasius alone are sufficient to this purpose: in
the Letter which he, and the Bishops with him, sent to the Emperor Jovinian
Tom. I. page 245. and (...).
, where they tell him the Faith confessed by the Nicene Fathers, is that which
was preached (...), from the very beginning: unto which all the Churches every
where consent, whether they be in Spain or Britain, or France, or all Italy:
with those in Dalmatia, Dacia, Mysia, Macedonia, and all Greece, all Africa,
Sardinia, Cyprus, Crete, Pamphylia, Lycia, Isauria, Egypt, Lybia, Pontus,
Capadocia, and their next Neighbors, with all the Churches of the East (a few
excepted who were Arians) whose minds they knew, and whose Writings they had to
produce. And then having set down the Nicene Creed, they conclude: In this
Faith it is necessary for all to remain, as Divine and Apostolical: and not to
change it. For which he gives this reason, in another account of it, to
Epictetus Tom. I. page 582.
Bishop of Corinth: because it is sufficient for the overthrow of all
ungodliness, and for the establishment of a pious Faith in Christ.

Which is a plain declaration, that this Faith is not defective: and that in
the Creed, commonly ascribed to him, there was no intention to add any new
Article of Faith, but only to explain the old. For a whole Synod ( viz. that at
Sardis) forbad, he tells us in another place Epist. ad Antioch. p. 576.
; any other Faith to be written but this, with which all should rest contented,
(...), etc. because there was nothing wanting in it, but it was full of
godliness: and that there ought no new Faith to be set forth, lest this should
seem to be imperfect, and occasion should be given, to them that had a mind, to
be often writing and defining concerning Faith.

I omit that Confession of Faith which S. Basil makes, in his Book of the true
Faith Tom. II. page 354.
: and two others in Epiphanius; of both which he says, that the Faith of the
Holy Church In Anchor.
, and that they were delivered by the Apostles. Which is a further
confirmation, that though they added many more words to the Apostles Creed, yet
they added no new Article of Faith: but only expounded more largely the meaning
of some part of it, upon the occasion of some Heresies, which troubled the
Church in those times. When it was so far from their thoughts to add any new
thing to the first Creed, that among the numerous Creeds, we find, in
Athanasius Epist. de S^^^d^s Arim. and Sel^^ciae.
, in Eusebius, and others, there is not one of them, that makes any such
attempt.

Nor did the Second General Council of Constantinople design any more; but only
(...) to strengthen and confirm the Nicene Faith, as Socrates L. V. cap. 8.
speaks. Which Constantinopolitan Creed, or one very like, Cyril of Jerusalem
expounded in his Church: and says it was the only Faith delivered by the
Church, and fortified by all the Scripture Cateches. V. p. 44.
. For since all are not able to read the Scriptures, and some by their want of
understanding, others by their business are hindered in acquiring that
knowledge, therefore, lest Men's Souls should be lost by ignorance, we have
comprehended, in a few sentences, (...), the whole Doctrine of Faith. Which he
carnestly presses them to have written not in Paper, but in their Heart: and to
carry it about with them as their Viaticum in the whole course of their life:
and besides this to receive no other. No, says he, if I should change my mind,
and teach the contrary, do not believe me; no nor an Angel from Heaven, as the
Apostle speaks, if he should Preach any other Gospel, but that you have
received. For these Articles of Faith were not, as it seems, composed by Men:
but the principal things being gathered together out of the SCRIPTVRE, they
fill up one Doctrine of Faith.

But it is more than time to proceed to the Fifth Age, in which we find them so
steadfast in this persuasion (that the ancient Creed contained all things
necessary to be believed) that the Fathers assembled in the Third General
Council Can. VII.
at Ephesus, expressly decreed, that it should not be lawful for any Man to
produce, or write, or compose (...), any other Faith, besides that defined by
the Nicene Fathers.

And that, if any durst be so bold as either to compose, or offer any other
Faith, to those that would be converted, from Heathenism, or Judaism, or
whatsoever Heresy; if they were Bishops, or Clergymen, they should be
deposed; if Laymen, they should be anathematized. By which we may learn what
would have become of the Pope himself, if he had attempted then, what his
Successors in these latter times, have done.

For so sacredly did they keep to this, that S. Cyril of Alexandria Tim. V.
pars 2. p. 103.
tells Joh. Antiochenus, they could not endure that the Faith defined at Nice,
or the Symbol of Faith there made, should by any means be shaken: nor do we
suffer our selves or others to change one word of what is there, or to go
besides it, so much as in one syllable; remembering him that said, remove not
the ancient Landmarks, which thy Fathers have set thee: for it was not they
that spoke, but the Spirit it self of God, and the Father. Which he confirms by
the forementioned Letter of Athanasius to Epictetus: which some, he says, had
set forth adulterated and depraved, and therefore he transmits it to him
sincere and uncorrupted, out of ancient Copies. And he had the greater reason
to say, they could not alter one word of it; because the Council of Ephesus it
self, though it decreed against Nestorius, that the blessed Virgin was (...),
the Mother of God, yet they would not add that word to the ancient Creed: but
thought it sufficient to determine the point against him. This Cyril further
declares in an Epistle to Acacius Ib. p. 112.
; where he confutes those who accused him of receiving a new Creed, in these
words: None ever required of us a new Exposition of Faith, nor do we admit of
any from others; (...), etc. for the divinely-inspired Scripture suffices us,
and the vigilance of the Ancient Fathers, and the Symbol of Faith; which is
exactly conformed to all right opinions.

And it is well known that the next General Council at Chalcedon renewed this
Canon of the Council of Ephesus: Decreeing in the very same words, with very
little alteration, that no Man should produce or write any other Faith, nor
think or teach otherways: under the penalties beforementioned; only, with this
difference, that to Laymen are added Monks, against whom the Synod decreed an
Anathema, if they presumed to teach any other Faith.

In the Sixth Age, the same was again repeated in the Fifth General Council at
Constantinople, under the Emperor Justinian: they solemnly professing, in their
Third Session, that they embraced all the Four foregoing General Councils;
which is renewed in their Eighth Session, and all their Decrees confirmed, with
a particular defense of the last Council at Chalcedon; concluding with the same
solemn Decree, that none should dare to teach or write any thing contrary to
those constitutions, but if he were a Bishop or Clergyman he should be
deposed; if a Monk or Laick, anathematized.

Justinian himself also in his Epistle to the Bishops at Constantinople In
Collatione I. quintae Syn.
takes special notice, how the Fathers in the Council at Chalcedon
anathematized those who had delivered, or do deliver any other Creed, but that
which was expounded by the 318 Holy Fathers, and explained by the 150 Fathers;
that is the Apostles Creed, expounded by the two first General Councils at Nice
and Constantinople. For we Tom. V. Labb. Edit. p. 422.
would have you know (says he) that those things which were expounded and
defined by the four holy Councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus the first,
and Chalcedon, concerning ONE AND THE SAME FAITH, we keep and defend and follow
them, and all that are consonant to them. And whatsoever is not consonant to
this, or may be found by any person written against those things, which were
defined concerning ONE AND THE SAME FAITH in those four Councils, or in one of
them, that we execrate, as altogether abhorrent from Christian piety. And this
Emperor was no mean Divine (though Baronius is pleased to slander him as
illiterate, and presumptuous for meddling in matters of Faith) for Pope Agatho
himself, and the whole sixth General Council, who approved of Agatho's Letter
Cont. VI. Act. 4.
put him in the rank of the most excellent Fathers and Ecclesiastic Writers.
For to prove out of the Fathers, two Natures in Christ, he tells Constantine
Pogonatus, that S. Cyril, S. Chrysostom and a great many other Bishops, whom
he names, taught this, and praeomnibus, etc. and above all these, that zealous
defender of the true and Apostolic Faith, Justinian the Emperor of pious
memory, whose integrity of Faith did as much exalt the Christian Commonwealth,
as by the sincerity thereof, it was pleasing to God, etc. which is enough to
make the defenders of the present Roman Church, blush at the insincerity of
their great Annalist who makes this Emperor to have been a perfect block, not
past his A. B. C. Ad At. 528. n. 2.551. n. 2. and many other places.
whom one of their own Popes, (who lived in the next age to him, and is Sainted
by them) makes equal (to say no more) unto S. Chrysostom, and the greatest
Bishops that had been in the Church.

I might add the praises which Pope Gregory the great gives of him in many
places: but I shall rather observe how he in the later end of this Age,
concurrs with him, and with the forenamed Councils, in this opinion; that no
other Faith but this was to be admitted. For giving an account of his Faith L.
I. Epist. 24.
as the manner was, upon his advancement to the Papacy, and speaking of the
four first General Councils, in so high a Style, that he professed to receive
and reverence them, as the four Books of the Holy Gospel; he gives this reason
for it: because on these, as one a square stone, the structure of the Holy
Faith arises, and the rule of every ones life and action consists. So that
whosever does not hold this solid ground, although he appear a Stone, yet he
lies out of the building: After which words, he also professes his veneration
of the fifth Council, and approves of all that they ordained.

This custom (in the Roman Church particularly) of giving an account of their
Faith, to their Brethren when they were newly advanced to the Priesthood, is
mentioned by Pope Gelasius Epist. 2. ad Laurentium Epise.
; and seems to have been begun, upon occasion of the great factions which were
raised against the Council of Chalcedon. Whereupon Childerick King of France,
as soon as Pelagius was advanced to the Sea of Rome, upon the death of Vigilius
(whose sentence had been condemned as heretical in the 5th Council) desired to
know if he held the definition of the Council of Chalcedon (which contained the
Nicene, Constantinopolian, and Ephesine Faith:) unto which he answered in a
Letter, which is in the body of the Canon Law Decret. pars 2. Causa XXV. q. 1.
c. X.
, that he received the definitions of the 4. General Councils concerning the
Catholic Faith; and then having rehearsed the Creed, I believe in one Lord,
Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost, viz. the Father Almighty, etc. he thus
concludes. This therefore is my Faith, and the hope which is in me by the gift
of the mercy of God: of which S. Peter commands us to be ready to answer to
every one who asks a reason, or an account of us.

From which it appears sufficiently, that they had no other account to give of
their Faith, in those days, than that which we now give in our Church: who
believe all that they did then, and believe, as they did, that nothing more is
necessary to be believed.

But it will be useful if I give a brief account also of the sense of the
following Ages in this matter. And in the VII. Age Pope Agatho, before
mentioned, sent a Synodical Epistle (from himself and 125 Bishops assembled at
Rome) to the 6th General Council, held also at Constantinople, in which there
is a confession of their Faith (which they say they were taught by the
Apostolical and Evangelical Tradition:) which consists of no more Articles than
are in the foregoing Creeds. It is inserted into the Acts of that General
Council Sess. IV. Sextae Syn.
, wherein those Creeds were again recited and confirmed, in the same words and
under the same penalties, as in the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon: with a
severe prohibition of so much as a (...) a new manner of speech, or invention
of a word, to the subversion of what was then determined.

Which was done more largely, in the Council immediately following, called
(...) (being a kind of supplement to the former sitting in the same place)
where it was decreed, in the very first Canon, that the Faith delivered by the
Ministers of the Word, (...), the divinely chosen Apostles, who were eye
witnesses to him, should be preserved (...) without any innovation, immutably
and inviolably. And then they ratify distinctly the Decrees of the Nicene
Council, and the other five following General Councils, which they name in
order, with the occasion of them: and conclude with these words. We neither
intend to add any thing at all to what was formerly defined, nor to take away
any thing: nor can we, by any means do it.

In these two Councils Pope Honorius was condemned as an Heretic: which I
mention only for this reason; that the ground of his condemnation was, because
he had consented to the defiling of the undefiled Rule of Apostolical
Tradition, viz. the Creed. They are the words of Pope Leo the second; who
receiving the Acts of the sixth Synod, which were transmitted to him,
anathematized Honorius, because he had not adorned that Apostolical Church,
with the Doctrine of Apostolical Tradition.

In the next Age (which was the VIIIth after Christ) the second Council at
Nice, which set up the worship of Images, past the same condemnation upon him:
and making mention of the six Act. VII.
foregoing Councils, they confirm and establish all that had been delivered
from the beginning: only they fraudulently add, to bring in their Image
worship, whether written or unwritten. Which made the first alteration in the
Doctrine of the Church: all the foregoing Councils, having derived their Faith,
wholly from the Scriptures. As the following Council at Frankfort did, where as
the worshipping of Images was condemned; so the Holy Scriptures were highly
extolled, in words which signified they thought them their only safe Directors.
The thirtieth Chapter of the second Book of the Capitulare of Charles the
Great, abounds with such expressions as these, the Scripture is a Treasure that
wants no good, but is redundant in all that Good is. And in the beginning of
the Third Book, he and the Fathers there assembled, give an account of their
Faith, in a Creed, which they intitule, A Confession of the Catholic Faith,
which we have received from the Holy Fathers, which we hold and believe with a
pure heart. It is that in S. Hierom's Works, inscribed, Symboli explanatio ad
Damasum I. which they thus subscribe, This is the true integrity of the
Catholic tradition of Faith, which we believe and confess with a sincere
heart, etc. This is the true Faith, this confession we preserve and hold: which
whosoever keeps whole and undefiled, he shall have everlasting Salvation.

Thus far therefore, they were not got beyond the first Creed, of which this is
the explanation. Nor was John Damascen himself advanced any further; but
confined his belief to what is contained in the Law and the Prophets, Apostles
and Evangelists, (...) L. 1. Orthod. Fid. cap. 1.
, seeking for nothing beyond these. For since God is good, and envies no body,
he concludes that he has revealed there all that is profitable for us, and
concealed only those things we are not able to bear. And therefore let us love,
says he, these things, let us abide in them: not removing the Eternal
Boundaries, nor going beyond the Divine Tradition.

Which they seem to have preserved, without exceeding the ancient limits, in
the beginning of the Ninth Age. For in a Council at Mentz An. 813. Can. XLV.
, care is taken for teaching the People the Creed, (which they call signaculum
fidei, the seal of Faith) and the Lords Prayer; for which end they are required
to send their Children to School, or to the Monasteries, or their Parish
Priests, that they might rightly learn the Catholic Faith and the Lords
Prayer.

Hitherto therefore the Catholic Faith was contained in the common Creed,
which had been from the beginning. But toward the latter end of that Age, the
Council of An. 859. Act. 10. Can. 1.
Constantinople (which the Roman Church calls the the VIIIth General Council)
began to talk of the Regulae Patrum, the Rules of the Fathers (in stead of the
ancient word Regula fidei, the Rule of Faith, which is the Apostles Creed) and
called them the Secondary Oracles. And therefore professed not only to hold all
that the Catholic Church received from the Apostles, and the General
Councils: but from any Father or great Doctor in the Church. Which was the
ready way to change the Faith of the Church; and to turn particular Men's
Opinions, into matter of common belief: though no new Article was as yet put
into the ancient Creed.

The two next Ages are acknowledged to be so barbarous, by the Writers of the
Roman Church, that they are ashamed of them: and in some Collections they have
made of the Councils, there is not so much as one mentioned in the Tenth Age.

And in the following, there were so many frivolous things debated, and such
Corruptions crept into the Christian Doctrine, that they run on very fast, to
the introducing a new Creed into the Church.

Yet this is remarkable that in the time of Thomas Aquinas, who flourished in
the XIIIth Century, the Scripture still continued the only Rule of Faith; and
the Apostles Creed, a sufficient summary of the Faith therein contained. For in
the resolution of this doubt, Why should Articles of Faith be put in the Creed,
since the Scripture is the Rule of Faith, to which it is not lawful to add, or
from it to substract; his Anwer is Secunda 2 ^ae. Q. 1. Art. IX. ad primum.
, that the Truth of Faith is diffusely, and after diverse manners, and sometimes
obscurely contained in Scripture: so that long study and exercise is required
to find out the truth of Faith there, which they that have abundance of
business, have not leisure to use. And therefore it was necessary that out of
the sentences of Holy Scripture, something manifest and clear should be
summarily gathered, which should be propounded unto all to be believed: Which
truly is not added to the Holy Scripture, but rather taken out of the Holy
Scripture.

And resolving next of all, that doubt, There is one Faith (as the Apostle
says IV. Ephesians.) but many Creeds, his answer is Ib. ad (...).
, that in all the Creeds the same truth of Faith is taught. But it was
necessary the people should there be instructed more diligently in the truth of
Faith, where errors sprung up, lest the Faith of the simple should be corrupted
by Heretics. And this was the Cause why it was needsul to set forth more
Creeds: which differ in no other thing but this; that those things are
explained more fully in one, which are contained implicitly in another.

To the same purpose, many other of that sort of Writers declare their sense,
in the following Ages.

And this also is worthy of great remark, that no longer ago, than at the
Council of Florence begun 1438 (which the Greeks call the VIIIth General
Council) the Authority of the abovenamed Ephesine Canon, about holding to the
Nicene Creed, was pressed with great earnestness by the Greeks, upon the Latins
there assembled. For they said it was by no means lawful to add (...) Tom.
XIII. Lab. Sess. X. p. 162.
, not so much as a syllable, nor a phrase, nor a word: and laid such a weight
upon it, as to affirm, No man will accuse that Faith of imperfection, unless he
be mad. Ib. p. 163.
And they likewise backed it with a passage in a Letter of Pope Celestine to
Nestorius Ib. p. 167.
, where he says, who is not to be judged worthy of an Anathema, that either
adds, or takes away? (...). For that Faith which was delivered by the Apostles,
requires neither addition, nor diminution.

Unto which the Roman Bishops had nothing to reply, but that the Canon did not
forbid another exposition (...), consonant to the Truth in that Creed: Ib. p.
167.
but only (...) any thing that was different, or contrary to it. Both these
they acknowledge to be prohibited, in those words [ No man shall bring in
another Faith than that at Nice] (...), that is, contrary, or opposite, or
different, or diverse, or strange from the true Faith. Where it is remarkable,
a different, another Faith, is acknowledged to be forbidden, as well as a
contrary. Nay, they acknowledge that none but a General Council could make so
much as (...) another explication of the Articles of that Creed, though not
different from it.

In the Creed of the Apostles that is, there are some things contained
implicitly (as Thomas Aquinas you heard speaks) and being virtually there,
either in the Letter or the sense, may be drawn from thence by evident
consequence (such as the Deity of Christ, his two Natures, the Catholic
Church, which was included in those words I believe the holy Church, as this
Article is expressed in the old Roman Creed, and the like) and yet such an
explication, these Fathers confessed, could by no Man, no assembly of Men, less
than an Ecumenical Council, be lawfully made and imposed upon the Church. For
which they quote Aquinas (whom Ib. p. 163.
they call (...)) that there never was (...) an explication of the Creed, but
in an Ecumenical Council, and he speaks of any Creed whatsoever, which was
common in the Church.

And therefore in conclusion they absolutely deny that the Latin Church had
added any thing to the Creed. For the Nicene, and the Constantinopolitan Creed
are both one: So that the one being read, the other is understood: For though
they differ in words, they agree in sense and in truth. And the like they
affirm of all other Creeds: and thereby answer the objection that they had
added a word to the Creed, about the procession of the Holy Ghost, from the
Father, and the Son: which is true, they confessed, with respect to the words,
but not with respect to the sense. For still the Creed remains (...) Ib. p. 170.
one and the same; though it differ in the words. And therefore it follows it
was not properly an addition, but one and the same thing, (...), or the
exposition of the very self same thing.

All which I have set down thus largely, to show that thus far therefore, all
things continued as they had done from the beginning: that is, notwithstanding
the new Opinions there were in the Church; there was no new Creed made, no new
Article added to the Creed; nothing, but what had been so at the first, made
necessary to Salvation.

Which is the last thing I observe, that till the conclusion of the Council of
Trent, that is, till a little more than an hundred years ago; there were no
other Creeds, but those which we confess and believe in this Church: which are
the Apostles Creed expounded, not enlarged by any new Articles. But then
indeed, Pope Pius IV. in pursuance of the Councils Order, framed another
Confession of Faith, consisting of no less than XII. new Articles, added to the
old: never heard of in any Creed, throughout the whole Church, till this time.
And it must be called and esteemed a New Faith: and it makes that to be a New
Church; which falsely calls it self the Ancient Catholic Apostolic Church of
Christ. For it is none of these, neither Ancient, nor Catholic, nor
Apostolic: but New, Roman, Tridentine Church; derived I mean from the Roman
Bishops at Trent.

It will be fit I think to set down this New Creed; that the Reader may compare
it, with those I have shown were hitherto the entire Faith of the Catholic
Church. It may be found in several of our Writers; but I wish it were in every
bodies hand, and therefore take the pains to transcribe it, for the benefit of
those into whose hands this Book shall come.

Pope PIUS his Creed.
IN. Believe and profess with a firm Faith, all and every thing, contained in
the Symbol of Faith, which the holy Roman Church uses, viz. I believe in one
God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, etc. to the end of that we
call the Nicene Creed. After which immediately follow the New Articles, in
these words:

The Apostolical and Ecclesiastical Traditions, and the rest of the
Observations and Constitutions of the same Church, I most firmly admit and
embrace.

I also admit (or receive) the Holy Scripture according to that sense, which
the holy Mother Church (to whom it belongs to judge of the true sense) has
held and does hold: nor will I ever understand and interpret it, otherwise than
according to the unanimous consent of the Fathers.

I profess also that there are truly and properly, Seven Sacraments of the New
Law, instituted by Jesus Christ, our Lord; and necessary to the Salvation of
mankind, though not all of them necessary to every Man, viz. Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders, and Matrimony:
and that they confer grace; and that, of these, Baptism, Confirmation, and
Orders cannot be repeated without Sacrilege.

I likewise receive and admit, all the received and approved Rites of the
Catholic Church, in the solemn Administration of all the abovesaid
Sacraments.

All and every thing, which was defined and declared about Original sin, and
Justification, by the most holy Council of Trent, I embrace and receive.

I profess likewise, that in the Mass is offered to God a true, proper, and
propitiatory Sacrifice for the quick and dead: and that in the most Holy
Sacrament of the Eucharist there is truly, really, and substantially the Body
and Blood, together with the Soul, and Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ: and
that there is a conversion made of the whole substance of Bread into his Body,
and of the whole substance of Wine, into his Blood; which conversion the
Catholic Church calls TRANSUBSTANTIATION.

I confess also, that under either kind (or species) only, whole and entire
Christ, and the true Sacrament is received.

I constanly hold there is a Purgatory; and that the Souls there detained, are
helped by the suffrages of the faithful.

As also that the Saints who Reign together with Christ, are to be worshipped
and invocated; and that they offer Prayers to God for us: and that their
Relics are to be venerated.

I most firmly assert, that the Images of Christ, and the Mother of God, the
always-Virgin, as also of other Saints are to be had and retained: and due
honor and veneration to be bestowed on them.

I affirm also, that the power of Indulgences was left by Christ in his Church,
and that their use is most wholesome to Christian People.

I acknowledge the holy Catholic, and Apostolic Roman Church to be the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches: and I promise and swear true Obedience, to
the Bishop of Rome, Successor of S. Peter the Prince of Apostles, and Vicar of
Jesus Christ.

All the rest also, delivered, defined and declared by the sacred Canons, and
Ecumenical Councils, especially by the most holy Synod of Trent, I receive and
profess without doubt: and likewise all things contrary, and whatsoever
Heresies condemned, rejected and anathematized by the Church, I in like manner
condemn, reject and Anathematize.

This true Catholic Faith, without which no Man can be saved, which at
present I freely profess, and truly hold, I will most constantly retain and
confess entire and inviolable (by God's help) to my last breath: and take care,
as much as lies in me, that it be held, taught, and preached by my Subjects, or
those, whose care belongs to me in my Office.

I the aforesaid N. Promise, Vow and Swear: So help me God, and these holy
Gospels.

This Bull (as they call it) bears date on the Ides of November, 1564. and
concludes in the usual manner, with threats of the indignation of God, and of
his blessed Apostles S. Peter and Paul, against all that shall inrringe or
oppose it.

And every Reader, I suppose, discerns that this is not merely a confession of
Faith, but likewise a solemn Oath. And so the Title of it bears, A Bull
concerning a form of an Oath of profession of Faith. Which Oath all
Ecclesiastical Persons, whether Secular, or Regular, as they distinguish them,
and all Military Orders are bound to take.

And it is as easy to observe, that this is perfectly New, both as an Oath,
and as a profession of Faith. Never was there any such Creed imposed before, or
so much as framed: much iess tied upon Men by an Oath. For when these Fathers
met at Trent, and were to make a profession of Faith, by rehearsing the Creed
which the Roman Church uses Sess. III.
, (so the words are) they could find none to profess, but the Nicene Creed; no
larger Creed was in use; no not there, in the Roman Church: but these very Men
who afterward turned New Creed-makers, were forced to be content with that.

And therefore this new Profession, is most impudently pretended to be the true
Catholic Faith: being in no sense Catholic, neither as to place, nor time.
For it was no where used, till they made it, no not there; nor is now every
where believed; and was not at all believed, in any Church, for above 1500
Years; nor now used in that Church it self, when they admit Members into the
Catholic Church, by Baptism: but they are put into a state of Salvation, by
believing, as before, the old Nicene Creed alone.

Which is direct contradiction to their new Creed, which they make necessary to
Salvation: but can never show to be contained implicitly in the old. For it is
as impossible to draw Water out of a Pumice, as to extract out of the Apostles
Creed, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, Worshipping of Images, Seven
Sacraments, the Traditions and other Constitutions used in the Roman Church.
Which was never so much as thought to be the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches; or to have power to impose new Articles upon the whole Church:
especially such large ones, as take in all the definitions of that Council of
Trent; which they themselves are not agreed to this day, how to expound.

Nor had that Synod, if these Articles could have been shown to be contained in
the old Creed, any power to explain it, and declare them (according to what
they confessed at the Florentine Council) being far from a General Council; no,
not of these Western parts of the World.

And clearly showed it self to be but a factious Party in the Church, by that
very Explication which they made of this Article, the holy Catholic Church:
which they thus expound, the holy Catholic, Apostolic Roman Church, the
Mother and Mistress of all Churches. For it is certain the Apostles could not
intend the Roman Church should be comprehended under the Catholic Church, any
more than every other Church, which was then, or should be hereafter; because
it was not in being: there was no Roman Church at all, when notwithstanding,
the Church was Catholic.

And hereby Salvation is impiously confined to the Roman Church alone, by
making the Catholic Church of no larger extent than that.

And this against the resolution of their greatest Doctors, who think it no
matter of Faith, to be persuaded that the Apostolic See is fixed to Rome.
Which Bellarmine L. IV. de Pont. Romano cap. 4.
proves from hence, because neither Scripture nor Tradition affirm it. Nay, if
Christ had bidden Peter to place his See at Rome, he does not think it would
follow, that he placed it there immoveably. And therefore no Man, according to
their own sense, is bound to believe the Apostolical Church cannot be separated
from the Roman; which if it should happen, and the Apostolic See be removed,
suppose to Paris; the Creed must be altered again, and it must run thus: I
believe the holy Catholic and Apostolic Parisian Church, the Mother and
Mistress of all Churches.

In which latter part of the Exposition to this Article, they force Men to
swear to a downright falsehood. For if the Roman Church be the Mother of all
Churches, she must be the Mother of her Grandmother, the Church of Jerusalem.
And it is no truer that she is the Mistress of all Churches: For all Churches
were not taught the Faith by her; nor do they own her Authority over them.

But it is time to draw to an end of this matter.

We in this Church of England, have always professed and preserved a true
reverence to the IV. first General Councils. One, or rather two, of which has
forbidden under the greatest penalties, any Man to produce, or compose, or
offer, any other Faith, besides that established by the Fathers at Nice: which
Theodoret L. I. Hist. Eccla. c. 7. L. II. c. 22. L. IV. c. 2.
in innumerable places calls (...) the Exposition of Faith, and (...), the
Faith expounded, the Apostolical Faith explained.

And therefore, even for this reason alone, we cannot receive the Creed of this
Council at Trent, which is manifestly another Faith; added to the Confession of
the Nicene Creed: which old Creed, it is madness (as the Greeks at Florence
said) to think insufficient. For it is to think they were all damned for 1500
Years and more, who knew nothing beyond this, necessary to be believed: which
no Man in his wits can believe.

For it is contrary to the very Faith it self; which teaches us, as Tertullian
speaks, to believe this in the first place, that there is nothing to be
believed beyond this. And we believe so, with the greatest reason, because to
admit any other Articles of Faith, is to make endless Schisms in the Church; as
to believe contrary Articles, is to fall into dangerous Heresies. We know not
where to stay, if we rest not here: for by the same Authority, that made these,
more additions may be made continually, without end.

There is therefore no such Authority in the Church, that can do this: but that
Church which pretends to it, has thereby forfeited the Authority, which
otherwise it might have had. As the Church of Rome has done: which in the
conclusion of that Council, contradicted what it asserted in the beginning. For
there, in its entrance, as I observed Sess. III. Decretum de Symbolo fidei.
, they thinking it necessary, according to the example of the Fathers, to make,
in the very first place, a confession of their Faith; and pretending to arm
themselves thereby, as with a Shield, against all Heresies, they repeat the
Creed, quo Sancta Romana Ecclesia utitur; which the holy Roman Church uses, as
that Principle in which all that profess the Faith of Christ, necessarily
agree; and the firm and ONLY Foundation, against which the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail. And they think fit to express it totidem verbis, in so many words,
as it is read in all Churches: And then they say, the Nicene Creed, and not one
word more.

Which is a plain Confession, that this was the Faith of all Christians, and no
more, till that time; that it was the Only firm Foundation; that which was read
in all Churches; in which all agree; the Shield against all Heresies; the whole
Faith then used in the Roman Church. And therefore with what Conscience could
they make such a division, and miserable destruction, in the Christian World,
as they have done; by a vast number of new Articles, in which all Christians
neither do, nor can agree; and which were not to be found in their own Creed
before?

No reason can be given of this, but the immense ambition of that Church, to
give Law to all others. Unto which we cannot with a good Conscience submit:
especially when they impose such a heavy Yoke, as this belief. Which is the
true Makebate between them and us; the manifest cause of that fearful Schism,
which they, not we, have made, by altering the true Catholic Faith, and
Church, and Communion into a Roman.

This is the true distinction between them and us. We are Catholics; they are
Romans. We believe the Catholic Faith of all Christians; they (as
distinguished from us) believe the Roman Faith, which none believe but
themselves. We believe that which has been ever believed; they believe that
which was never believed, till yesterday, in comparison with the Ancient Faith.
Ours is the belief of the whole Body of Christian People; theirs the belief of
a Sect.

For the Truth I have shown, which ought to be supported in the Church, in
nothing else but those uncontroverted mysteries of godliness, contained in the
Apostles Creed: which I have proved to be the only Catholic Doctrines,
embraced by all Churches whatsoever. They being not the Doctrines of a Sect
merely, but in which we, the Roman, the Greek, the Ethiopian, the Syrian, and
all other Christians are perfectly agreed.

There are particular Men, and some small companies of them, here and there,
who understand some few of these Doctrines otherwise than they ought; but there
is no national Church, of any Country, but entertains all these entirely and
sincerly, as they have been expounded from the beginning, according to the
Nicene Creed (which by the way, is the only Creed the Abassines have, that
Creed called the Apostles, being not found among them Ludolph. Histor. Aethiop.
l. 3 c. 5. number. 20.
) and thereby are members of Christ's Body, though they do not believe other
Doctrines; which are only boldly called Catholic, by the Roman Church, but
are not truly so: but only particular Doctrines of their own Church in which
the Catholic Faith and Church is not concerned. As they themselves confess,
by admitting persons into the Catholic Church (which I noted before) unto
remission of sins, and eternal life, without any other belief, but that which
we profess.

Which makes us think that we might more safely swear, they themselves believe
this to be sufficient; than they swear, as they do, that none can be saved
without the new Faith, which they have added to the ancient Creed.

I have been the larger in this second observation, because it is of great
moment for the settling of our minds in peace, about right belief: and this
being settled, I may sooner dispatch those that follow.

III.
And the next is, that these therefore, and these alone are the fundamental
Truths, upon which our Religion, and the very Church it self is built.

By fundamental Truths or Doctrines, we mean such Catholic principles, as are
necessarily to be distinctly believed by every Christian: whereby they being
built as it were, upon them, become a Church.

Such truths no doubt there are; for the Church being called here the House of
God, must have a Foundation. Which Foundation is either Personal or Doctrinal.
The personal foundation is Christ, the chief Cornerstone, and the Apostles and
Prophets, as Ministers of his, who laid this foundation. Ephesians. II. 20. The
Doctrinal are those grand Truths, taught by them; which make up our Faith in
Christ. That Common Faith, as it is called Titus I. 4. that Faith, which is
alike precious, in all 2 Pet. 1.1. the first principles of the Oracles of God,
Heb: V. 12. (or as it is literally in the Greek, the Elements of the beginning
of the Oracles of God) the principles of the Doctrine of Christ, or the word of
the beginning of Christ, Hebr. VI. 1. the form, or draught, the breviate or
summary (as it may be translated) of sound words or doctrines, 2 Timothy I. 13.
the Faith once, or at once delivered to the Saints, Judge 3. and particularly
committed to the trust (1 Timothy VI. 20.) of those who were to instruct others,
in the common Salvation.

And what can those truths be, but those great Doctrines contained in the
Creed; which, it appears from what I have said, the Apostles left in all the
Churches which they planted? For we find these were in every Church, as
Irenaeus assures us; and these altogether one, as Tertullian speaks, and the
immovable, unreformable Rule of Faith: and therefore may thence conclude, they
were that (...) which S. Paul deposited with Timothy 1. VI. 20. that good, or
that fair, most excellent thing deposited with him, or commended (as an ancient
Writer translates it) to his trust, to be preserved by him: the Creed, as Cyril
Catech. IV. p. 24 edit. Paris. 1640.
of Jerusalem pithily speaks, being (...), a brief sum of necessary Doctrines.

In some sense, it is true, there is nothing revealed in Holy Scripture, but it
may be called fundamental; if we respect only the divine Authority, by which it
comes unto us: upon which account nothing there delivered may be denied, but
ought to be believed, with all humility, when the knowledge of it is offered to
us. But if we respect the matter and moment of all things contained therein, we
cannot but see there is a great difference; and that the knowledge of every
thing there is not equally necessary, but we may be truly pious though we
should be ignorant of some of them. For who can think, for instance, that it is
of the same necessity, to be able to give an account of the Genealogy of our
Savior (mentioned I. Matthew. III. Luke) and to believe that he is the Son of
God, made flesh for our Salvation?

That foundation therefore which was laid in every Church (as it was at Corinth
1 III. 11.) were such Doctrines concerning Jesus Christ, as every Christian was
bound to learn, and actually believe: in other points it sufficed, if they had
a pious preparation of mind to learn and believe any thing revealed in the
Scriptures, when it was sufficiently cleared to them.

Now these two things, that there are such fundamental truths, or first
principles, and that they are no other than those contained in the Creed; ought
to be asserted and maintained for the honor and glory of God our Savior:
which is much concerned herein. For it tends much to the glory of the Almighty
lover of Souls, that it should be believed he does not lay equal weight upon
all truths, nor made them alike necessary to be received, for the obtaining his
favor and grace: and that it should be certainly known, and be without
Controversy and question, what those truths are, which he expects should be
received and heartily embraced, in order to our Salvation. For otherwise, the
most of Christian people must necessarily perish: who either are not capable of
knowing more than these great things, or have not the means of knowing more, or
not with any certainty: but must be content to rest here. As well they may; for
why was the Creed called by the name of the Symbol of Faith, but because it was
the mark, or sign, which might serve to distinguish true Christians, who
embraced it, from Infidels, or misbelievers, who did not receive it, or were
defective in it?

This is the true reason of the name of Symbol which is as much as tessera and
signaculum, quo inter fideles and persid s secernitur Maximus Taur. de Trad.
Synb.
, the token, mark, or badge, whereby the faithful were known and distinguished
from the persidious. And therefore it comprehends briefly all the Fundamental
points of Faith: else it could not be a distinctive note or character,
sufficient to sever right Believers from Infidels, Heretics, and Apostates.

But so it was, that they who owned this Creed, were owned for Christians; they
who did not confess it, were rejected: for by a Man's answer to this, who was
examined, he was discovered (just as a Soldier is by the Word) si hostis sit,
an socius (as both Isidore, and Ruffinus before him speaks) whether he were an
Enemy, or a fellow Soldier of Jesus Christ. To this Test alone every one was
brought, by this touchstone he was tried, whether he were a Christian of the
right Stamp, or a false adulterate coin (as the Ancients speak) which is a
demonstration that they looked upon this as a perfect summary of the Catholic
Faith: sufficient of it self (as you heard Athanasius (...).
speaks) for the overthrow of all impiety, and for the establishment of piety
in Christ. Nay, this sense of the word Symbol, is owned by the Roman Catechism
it self. Cap. 1. Quaest. 3.

IV.
From whence it necessarily follows, that no man can justly be called an
Heretic, who heartily embraces, and steadfastly holds to this Faith. How should
he, when there is no Catholic, no Fundamental Article of Christian Truth; but
he is persuaded of it, and professes it? No part of that Creed, which is the
Sign, the Mark, and Note, as you have heard, whereby Christians are approved,
and discerned from misbelievers, as well as unbelievers, which he doubts of,
and does not acknowledge.

It is a very lamentable thing, that the imputation of Heresy should be so
frequent and familiar among Christians; upon the account of different Opinions
only, which they are passionately in love withal, though no parts of the
Catholic Faith. They of the Church of Rome especially are so foully guilty of
this, and so strangely fiery, that they not only account us Heretics; but look
upon us as little better than Infidels, nay seem to have more kindness for
Jews, which they tolerate among them, when they will not suffer us: who believe
all the Creeds that were known in the Church, for above 1500 years. For they
call themselves Catholics, in distinction from us: whom they will not allow
to be members of the Catholic Church; though we have a clearer title to it
than themselves. For I have shown that we unfeignedly believe whatsoever is
truly Catholic, and reject nothing but what is merely Roman.

We embrace that form of Faith, which they themselves say Catech. Romans pars 1.
cap. 1. Q. 2.
was composed by the Apostles for this very end, that all might think and speak
the very same thing; and that there might be no schisms among them, whom they
had called to the unity of Faith: but they might be perfectly joined together
in the same mind and in the same judgment.

It is not our fault, then, that there is not this unity and perfect agreement;
for we steadfastly hold that which should thus link us all together: but it is
their fault; who have forsaken this Apostolical method, by making another form
of Faith, which instead of uniting has broken Christians all in pieces. For we
cannot agree to that, because it does not contain Catholic truths, which
according to Vincentius his rule, have been held every where, always and by
all: but are the Tenants only of a particular Church; which has no power to
lay any other Foundation than that which was long ago laid, in the truly
Catholic Church.

Which Catholic Church we believe better than themselves, who appropriate the
name of Catholics to their own party: and thereby restrain the Catholic
Church, to those of their opinion. This certainly was the Heresy of the
Donatists: who esteemed all other Christians to be no better than Pagans
Optatus L. III. tait. Parn. 1631.
: and were reproved, by the true Catholics, just as we now answer for our
selves, in such words as these, Do you call one a Pagan, after the profession
of the Faith? Can he be a Pagan who has believed in the name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost? For that is a short Creed, which comprehends all the
Articles of the Christian Faith, as S. Hilary L. 2. de T^^^itate.
discourses; who not only calls this forma fidei certa, the certain form of
Faith: but (having mentioned those words, Go baptize them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost) asks this question, what is
there, that is not contained in that same Sacrament, of humane Salvation? or
what is there, that remains or is obscure? All things are full and perfect, as
coming from him that is full and perfect. And thus he concludes all his Books
on that Subject, with this Prayer L. XII. de Trin.
. I beseech thee, preserve this undefiled Religion of my Faith, and grant me
this voice of my Conscience to the last breath: that what I professed in the
Symbol of my Regeneration, being baptized in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, I may always obtain, viz. I may adore thee our
Father, and thy Son, together with thee; and do honor to thy Holy Spirit, who
is of thee by thine only begotten. For he is a sufficient witness to Faith, who
said, Father, all mine are thine, and thine are mine, my Lord Jesus Christ, who
remains in thee, and from thee, and with thee always God: who is blessed for
ever and ever.

Which I the rather mention because it serves to illustrate the prudence and
charity of S. Austin and the rest of the Christian Bishops of those days, who
though they looked upon the Donatists as Heretics (in denying the Church to be
Catholic by confining it to themselves) yet distinguished them from such
Heretics, as erred in the prime, and most Fundamental truths of our Religion;
about the Divinity, and the Incarnation of our Christ and such like. That is,
they made a difference even in the Articles of Faith, and looked upon some as
more Fundamental than others: being of more importance, and of greater weight
and moment: and therefore judged more mildly of them, than they did of such, as
denied the Holy Trinity; or held any Doctrines which impeached the glory of the
Father, or of the Son, or of the Holy Ghost. And therefore they still called
these Donatists, Brethren; they pitied them as Men seduced by their Guides, and
professed sincere love and affection to them, whether they accepted it or no.
Though such was the peevishness of that Sect, that they abused this charity of
good Catholic Christians toward them; just as they of the Church of Rome do
our charity now. For from thence they took occasion to argue that they were in
the right, even by the Concessions of their Adversaries; which justified both
them and their heretical Schism. For you, said they, August. L. 2. contra lit.
Petiliavi. cap. ult.
can find no faults in our baptism, nor consequently in our Faith, into which
we baptize; for if you could, you would baptize those over again who come from
us to you, as we baptize those again who come from you to us. Which is as much
as to say, you allow there is a Church and Salvation among us, but we allow no
Church, no Salvation among you; therefore it is safest for all to join with us,
not with you.

Which is the very Charm whereby they of the Church of Rome endeavor now to
work upon the spirits of simple people among us: though no wiser, than this
argument of a company of mad men would be if they had so much cunningremaining
as to say to us, we deny you to be Men, but you allow us to be Men, therefore
we are fit for all Men's society, not you, who are but a herd of Beasts. And
what S. Austin answers to the Donatists, is a full answer to the present
Romanists; which is this in short L. 1. de Baptisino contra^ Donatistas C. X.
(for it is besides my business, to do more than mention these things) when we
speak favorably of you, it is for the sake of What you have of ours, not for
what you have of your own: let that which you have of ours be set aside, and we
approve of nothing at all among you.

But I will not further enlarge upon this, nor say much of the next: which is
very plain.

V.
They therefore, who condemn those as Heretics, who Excommunicate them and
pronounce Anathema's against them, that believe the whole Catholic Faith; are
the great disturbers of the Christian World, and the true cause of the
Divisions and breaches that are in the Body of Christ. And who they are that do
thus, is visible to every eye: the Church of Rome having thought fit not to
rest satisfied, with the simplicity of those often mentioned Catholic
fundamental Truths, which are without Controversy and unquestionable; but, as
if that Faith which the old Christians thought complete, they take to be
defective, have adjoined as many more n^w Articles, to the old body: and that
under the pain of damnation, if we do not believe them.

I have told you what they are, and if you look them over again, you will find
that upon those have all the Contests risen between us and them. The necessary
fundamental Truths, which constitute the Church (which was built upon no other
for many Ages) are on both sides unquestioned: but because we question, or
rather deny those which they would impose, which we are certain are no part of
the Christian Doctrine, they call us Heretics. That is, because we will not
yield Obedience to their usurpt authority; because we cannot believe their new
inventions, to be Catholic, and fundamental Doctrines. Here is the true
reason of all the miserable ruptures that are in this part of the World: nay,
this is the just grievance and complaint of all Christians (who know any thing
of these matters) but themselves alone.

VI.
And their guilt is herein the greater, because the best learned among
themselves have confessed these Additions to the Creed, to be doubtful
opinions; unnecessary and superfluous Doctrines; Novelties unknown to the
ancient Church. Concerning every one of which ( three things) our Authors have
given the clearest evidence.

1. The first of them (the doubtfulness of those Doctrines) appears in this,
that there is not only variety, but contrariety of judgment about them, in
their own Church: which argues plainly great perplexity and uncertainty. Of
which there needs no other proof (as Doctor Potter Answer to Charity mistaken,
p. 69.
observes) but the famous Books of Bellarmine; who in the entrance upon every
Question there stated, gives an account of the Contentions and Contradictions
of those, who have-written upon it among themselves. And at this day they are
not better agreed in the Explication of several Points in difference between
us: See the late Answer to the Bishop of Meaux's Exposition of Faith.
particularly about the Worship given to Images, and the Invocation of Saints;
which some of their greatest Doctors, mollify and sweeten (as they do other
points) into downright Heresy, as such Explications are accounted by others.

2. The very same may be clearly shown out of their own Authors, and has been
demonstrated by our Divines concerning the Second thing, that those Doctrines
are not necessary, but superfluous. For the Roman Catechism Praefat. S^ct. 12.
it self having observed that their Ancestors had most wisely distributed all
that belongs to saving Doctrine, into these four heads (for the help of the
Peoples understanding and memory) the Apostles Creed, the Sacraments, the
Decalogue and the Lord's Prayer; immediately confess, concerning the first,
that all things which are to be held by the Discipline of the Christian Faith,
whether they have respect to the knowledge of God, or to the Creation and
government of the World, or to the redemption of Mankind, or belong to the
rewards of the good, and the punishments of the bad, are contained in the
Doctrine of the Creed. From whence this question naturally arises, how come so
many new Articles to be made necessary, if all things belonging to the
Christian Faith be contained in the Apostles Creed? I can see no reason for it,
but only to maintain the grandeur of the Roman Church: for there is no more
simply necessary for all to be believed (as Bellarmine himself confesses L. IV.
de Ver^o Dei, C. XI.
) but the Articles of that Creed; and therefore the rest are superfluous, and
ought to be discarded, as not so needful but that Men may be saved without them.

3. And for the Third, that they are mere Novelties unknown to those in old
time, there are the like confessions of ingenuous Men amongst them. Aeneas
Sylvius afterward Pope Pius II. confesses, Epist. 288.
that before the time of the Council of Nice, little regard was had to the
Roman Church. Which is a plain contradiction to Pope Pius the fourth's Article
of New Belief, that she is the Mother and Mistress of all Churches: for none
can doubt but they understood their duty in those days, and practiced it also,
to their Betters, especially to a Parent.

The same may be said of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, which some
Schoolmen have said not to be very ancient: among which are Scotus and Gabriel
Biel. They are the words of Suarez, Disput. Tom. 3. Disp. 30.
unto whom many other testimonies may be added of the Doctors of that Church:
particularly Alphonsus a Castro, who says the ancient Writers spoke very
seldom of Transubstantiation: he should have said, Not at all, for Cassander
honestly acknowledges it to be a Novelty. See a late Treatise of
Transubstantiation, by an Author of the Roman Communion, Part I.


The like is acknowledged of the Sacrifice of the Mass: which neither Thomas
Aquinas nor Gabriel Biel, long after him, believed to be proper, or
propitiatory; but give the same account that we do, why the celebration of this
Sacrament is called a Sacrifice of Christ, viz. because the Images of things
are called by the names of the things which they represent, (for which S.
Austin is quoted) and because by this Sacrament we are made partakers of the
benefits of Christ's Passion Sum Par. III. Q. 83. Artic. l. Respond.


That Purgatory was for a good while unknown, and but lately known to the whole
Church, is confessed by our Bishop Fisher Ross. contra L^t^. Art. XVIII.
: who by the whole Church, means only the Latin Church; for in the same place
he says, to this day it is not believed by the Greeks. The same he says of
Indulgences; which began with Men's fears of Purgatory.

The same I might observe of the Seven Sacraments and the rest of their
Articles; but I will only observe the contradiction to which they swear in the
very first new Article, wherein they declare that they embrace Apostotical and
Ecclesiastical Traditions: and yet consent at the same time (by swearing to all
that is decreed in the Council of Trent) to administer the Holy Communion but
in one kind; which for a thousand Years and more (in some places for 1300
Years) was administered in both kinds every where, even in the Roman Church, by
an undoubted Apostolical Tradition, and Ecclesiastical custom and practice:
which continues in all other Churches to this day.

Which observation evidently convinces them to be guilty of the most fearful
sin, in cursing and damning those, who do not receive these Novel Doctrines:
though they faithfully embrace all the Doctrines of the truly Catholic Faith;
and had rather die than deny any part thereof.

But let us be of good comfort; we are safe enough, notwithstanding all these
Anathema's, which they thunder out against us: For I have proved, that were
these Doctrines true, as they are certainly false, which they press upon us;
yet we should not be Heretics, if we did not believe them; and so not fall,
upon this account, under the sentence of damnation. Because it is only the
denial of the great and fundamental Truths, that can make us incur such a
danger: other Truths there are of which we may be ignorant, without danger of
perishing; provided we still hold the Foundation, and keep the Faith, as the
Apostle speaks, with a life according to it.

They themselves therefore knew that these terrible Anathema's, are but bugbear
words, which they use to affright Children withal: For they who can read what
the wisest and best of them write, will find that they confess, these new
Articles to be superfluous; while they plainly say the Apostles Creed contains
all things necessary to Salvation.

Thus Gregory of Valentia In secunda secundae Disp. 2. Q. 7.
, The Articles of Faith contained in the Creed, are as it were the first
Principles of Christian Faith -- in which are comprised the sum of Evangelical
Doctrine, which all are bound explicitly to believe. -- Thus the Fathers judge
when they affirm this Creed was composed by the Apostles, that all might have a
short Summary of those things which are to be believed, and are scatteredly
contained in the Scriptures. Thus also writes Filiucius and a great many more:
even the Trent Catechism it self, as I have shown before. So that we have
nothing to do; but to hold fast that which we have been taught from the
beginning, and to make it the Rule of our Lives, as well as of our Faith.

And that now, I must tell you, for a Conclusion of this part of my Discourse,
is the Grand Truth of all; the main point of the Christian belief: that the
intention of all Divine Truths, and of Faith it self, is to make us truly
godly. They can do us no service, if they do not produce this effect.

Whence it is that in this very Epistle of S. Paul, he calls Christianity the
Doctrine that is according unto godliness, 1 Timothy VI. 3. and a little after,
calls it godliness, v. 6. But Godliness, that is the Christian Religion, with
contentment is great gain. And indeed we may well be contented, with the
Christian Faith and Hope, and think our selves happy in such glorious
expectations hereafter: nay look upon our selves, as exceeding great gainers,
whatsoever we lose here upon this account, if we lose not the hope of immortal
life.

In the Epistle to Titus also, in the very first Verse, he calls it the truth
which is after godliness: which is the very Truth, that is the subject of my
Discourse; as appears by what follows, when the Apostle says it is a mystery
of godliness. Not a cunning device to get Money, to advance our wordly Grandeur
and Pomp; much less a crafty Artifice to excuse us from living well, or to
palliate wickedness, and show us a way, how to be saved though we live ungodly
(which is the great drift of too many Doctrines, wherewith the World is
troubled) but a wonderful contrivance of the Wisdom of Heaven, effectually to
root out all Impiety, to plant all manner of Virtue in our Hearts; and to take
all kind of excuse from us, if we do not become truly good.

Whence it is that the Apostle describes Christian Women, in this Epistle to
Timothy II. 10. by this Character, that they profess godliness. Let them be
adorned, says he, as becomes women professing godliness, with good works. Not
merely professing the Truth, or the Faith, but Godliness; which comprehends all
Christian Virtue: though if he had said, professing the Truth, it had been of
the same import; because that truth, is godliness.

Hence all the Truths I have mentioned, are called Fundamental; not only
because the Church is built upon them, but because they are the Foundation of
all Christian practice, which ought to be superstructed upon them. And
therefore let us neither be i^norant of this; nor let our knowledge of it be
empty and idle, without effect. That is,

First, Let us not be so foolish as to imagine we shall obtain Salvation merely
by being of a right Belief; and holding the right Faith. Which is not an
unnecessary caution; for this seems to be the very business of a great many Men
in the World, to put Men in hope of life eternal; if they do but quit that,
which they call Heresy, and embrace the Faith they propound unto them: though
their hearts and lives remain just as they were before, without any real
amendment. This is certainly not a Mystery of Godliness, but the very Mystery
of Iniquity: not the Wisdom of God, but the Witchcraft of the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil, to lead them securely into destruction.

But we have not thus learned Christ, as the same Apostle speaks elsewhere,
(IV. Ephesians. 20, 21.) if so be we have heard, and have been taught by him, as
the truth is in Jesus: that we put off, concerning the former conversation, the
old man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful lusts; and that we be
renewed in the spirit of our minds, and put on the new man, which after God is
created in righteousness, and holiness of truth. Mark here what the Truth is,
as it is in Jesus, (that we may not be deceived by our own, or others lusts)
that is, in the Christian Religion: it is that which teaches us to abandon all
wickedness, and not to think of throwing a covering over it to hide it, but to
put it off: that which renews us in the very spirit of our minds; which makes
us new Creatures; and really restores the Divine Image in us, in Rightousness
and sincere Holiness.

Thus we have learned Christ, thus we are constantly taught, in this Church:
And therefore,

Secondly, If the Truth has not this effect upon us, in vain do we pride our
selves in the name of Orthodox believers. Upon such S. John has passed this
censure, 1 I. 6. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, and do not the truth. Where you may observe, by the way, there is a
doing of the truth expected from us, and not merely believing it.

It was expected from the very Heathen, proportionable to what they knew: for
they are accused by S. Paul upon this score, that they held the Truth of God in
unrighteousness, I. Romans 18. Some Truth they knew, and it taught them to do
better than they did: and their not doing so, was their condemnation. And if
natural Truth, taught them righteousness of life, much more does this Divine
Revelation which God has made in Christ Jesus, instruct us therein: and if
they were found guilty for holding that Truth in unrighteousness, much more
shall we be found so for holding, in the like wickedness, these supernatural
Truths; which we know only by a special Grace of God; which has revealed them
unto us for this very purpose, to teach us, that denying ungodliness and all
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world, 2 Tit. II. 12.

Which if we do not, mark the consequence: either we shall not hold the Truth;
or if we do, the Truth will not save us, but only serve to condemn us.

Sometimes by living wickedly Men lose the very Truth, either in whole, or in
part: as the Heathen, S. Paul there shows, did, I. Romans 21, 22, 23. Read the
words, and you will not wonder if the same sad fate attend Men's Impiety now:
which the Truths of the Gospel so directly oppose; that if they cannot prevail
with Men to leave their wickedness, their wickedness will prevail with them to
leave the Truth.

This belief, for instance, that Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, who died
for us, and rose again, will come to judge us (which is the sum of
Christianity) is so manifestly against those sins which Men commit against his
Laws, that, if they be persuaded they shall be judged according to his Gospel,
it must needs make them very uneasy in their sins. Which therefore if they
will not quit, their sins will tempt them to be rid of this belief; which
disquiets and disturbs them in the enjoyment of those Lusts, on which they have
set their Heart.

Or if it have not this effect, to make them wholly disbelieve, the life and
judgment to come, yet it tempts them to adulterate the Christian Faith (as too
many Christians have done) and to devise easier terms of happiness than the
Gospel propounds: inventing such a Religion, as will favor them in their sins,
and comply with their inclinations to follow their foul Lusts, and yet not
perish eternally. And it is not hard to show, if this were a proper place for
it, that abundance of false notions, if not all, which Men have about Faith,
have sprung from this cause.

But suppose Men do still hold the Truth, though in unrighteousness, what will
they get by it? since it will not save them, but only serve to condemn them.
For this is a part of the Evangelical Truth, as you read in the place now
named. (I. Romans 18.) that the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.
And again we read in the next Chapter of the righteous judgment of God, who
will render to every man according to his deeds: to them who by patient
continuance in welldoing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, eternal
life: But unto them that are contentious, (or will not yield to evident
convictions) and obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil, etc. v.
6, 7, 8, etc.

Where you see there is an obedience to the truth, expected from us: unto which
if we will not submit, but obey unrighteousness; then that very Truth tells us
we must expect nothing, but the inexpressible displeasure of the Almighty,
against every such refractory opposer of the Truth, which he should obey. There
is no exception from this Rule; for (as it there follows, v. 11.) there is no
respect of persons with God.

Would to God they would seriously lay this to heart, who now seem to be
possessed with a mighty Zeal for Truth, and for a right Faith: that they be not
so deceived by this warm Zeal, as to miss the end of Faith, the Salvation of
their Souls; which can by no means be obtained, no not by Faith it self,
without an Holy Life.

PART II.
What it is to be a Pillar and Ground of Truth: and to whom this Office belongs.
HAving shown with some care what the Truth is of which S. Paul speaks (which
was the first thing I propounded) the two next may be explained together with
less pains: viz. what, and who is the Pillar and Ground of these great Truths,
which are necessary to be believed by all, that will be saved.

I.
And as for the first of these, they of the Church of Rome would have us by a
Pillar and Ground, to understand that which is the very Foundation of our
Faith: that upon whose Credit and Authority all Christian Truth, and the
certainty of our Religion depends. For taking it for granted that the Church is
this Pillar, and presuming also that they only are the Church; they thence
infer that we can be sure of no Truth, but from them: and that they give
authority and certainty, to the very Word of God it self: and likewise,
whatsoever the Church, i. e. they declare to be Truth, is therefore to be
received: insomuch that if they make any new Articles or Faith, we are to give
a full assent to them; because all Truth depends upon the credit of their
Church. This sounds strangely in the Ears of those that are not accustomed to
such Language: and may be thought perhaps a misrepresentation of their
Doctrine. But ^^^larmine (to name no more) vouches this to be the Catholic
sense of this place: and from the words Pillar and Ground of Truth, proves that
the Church cannot err, either in Believing, or in Teaching L. II. de Council.
(...) c. 2.
: and again, that whatsoever the Church approves is true, and whatsoever it
disapproves is false L. III. de (...) Milit. c. 14.
.

But this only shows that they are hard put to it, to find proofs for their
high pretenses. For it will appear, in the process of this Discourse, first,
that it can never be proved, the words Pillar and Ground, have respect to the
Church, and not rather to Timothy: for which there is good Authority as well as
Reason. I shall let the Authority alone, till its proper place, and only note,
Secondly, That there is good reason not to refer this to the Church; for having
called the Church a House, it does not seem a congruous speech, immediately to
call the same Church a Pillar: as on the other side it is very agreeable, to
call Timothy a Pillar, in that House; and to wish him to behave himself
therein, like other great Persons, to whom, in other places, he gives the name
of Pillars. But, Thirdly, if it do relate to the Church, it no more concerns
the Church of Rome, than any other Church: and immediately relates to the
Church of Ephesus, in which Timothy presided. Which Church of Ephesus Council.
Floreat. (...) ult.
, with other Churches of the East, condemned this Headship of the Bishop of
Rome, upon which they build a Sovereignty over our Faith. And further, if we
should suppose Fourthly, That the Apostle respects the Church Universal; and
likewise that it is not only bound in duty to be, but also actually is, the
Pillar and Ground of Truth; yet, Lastly, it can never be proved that he speaks
of any other Truth, but those grand Fundamental Articles of Faith, those
Catholic Doctrines which were once delivered to the Saints, and which,
blessed be God, are maintained in every Church to this day: not of all truth
whatsoever; much less of an absolute freedom from all manner of error.

For, letting these things alone at present, I shall show that this is all that
can be meant by the Pillar and Ground of Truth, if it refer to the Church (as I
am content to admit) not that the Church (as they absurdly affirm) is the very
foundation of our Faith, upon which it relyes: but that it firmly retains,
upholds, and professes the Christian Truth, against all the force, violence and
opposition, of Earth and Hell, of Men and Devils, that endeavor to overthrow
it.

That this is the natural import of the phrase I will manifest, First, from the
propriety of the words; Secondly, from clear reason and the Holy Scripture.

I. First from the propriety of the words in the Greek Language. In which (...)
frequently signifies, such a Pillar as stood before their common Halls and
Courts of Judicature: upon which the Decrees and Orders of the Court, were wont
to hang or be fixed. Unto which Tertullian alludes, when speaking of an Article
of the Creed (in the place above named L. de Resurrect. Carnis, C. 18.
) he says, Vnum opinor apud omnes EDICTVM DEI PENDET, I suppose one Edict of
God hangs up among all, viz. to be read by them: having just asked before,
quonam titulo Spes ista proscripta est: by what TITLE this hope ( viz. of the
resurrection) is proposed and held forth to all. And the word (...) ground
signifies not the foundation, but the Seat where any thing is placed; so as to
be settled and laid up, to remain and abide there. And, at the most, can mean
no more, than the stay, or establishment, the seat or settlement of Truth:
(...), Oecumenius renders it, the confirmation of truth; or if we will have
these words allude to a building, because the Church is here called the House
of the living God, as elsewhere the Temple of God, (which is the same) they
signify no more but supporters and upholders, without which the edifice would
fall to the ground. And the most we can make of them when they are applied to
the Church, with respect to the truth, is this; that the Church sustains and
keeps it from sinking, or falling, as a Pillar firmly settled upon a Basis,
sustains and upholds the fabric laid upon it. This consists in these three
things, which I shall distinctly, though but briefly, mention: for the Reader's
clear information in this matter.

First, The Church is that Body of Men, which preserves and keeps, which
maintains and holds up the Christian Faith: which God has committed to its
care, as he did to the Jews the Divine Oracles, delivered in old times. And as
the Church will answer it to God, and not be guilty of betraying its trust, it
must constantly preserve the truth committed to it; that it be not lost and do
not perish. This might be divided into two, that the Church is the keeper and
Conservator of all the Holy Scriptures, and the Divine Truths contained
therein: and that by faithful keeping them, it upholds and supports the Truth,
as a Pillar does the building which rests upon it. But this is sufficiently
included in what follows.

Secondly, the Church is not only to preserve the Truth, but to profess it, and
to give attestation to it: that is, to bear witness that this is the Truth of
God, and this alone, which he has revealed for the Salvation of Mankind. By
which means it does not only hold up the Truth, but hold it out to others; as
the Sacred Edict or Decree of God; which all are to take notice of and observe.
And so,

Thirdly, It is by this means to promote and propagate the Truth, and not let
it fall to the ground: as a building does, when the Pillars, that supported it,
are removed.

In brief; As Heretical Churches were the Pillars and Stays of falsehood; they
maintained and defended it, they testified to it, and endeavored to continue
it, and leave it to Posterity: just so is the Church of Christ, the Pillar and
Ground of Truth; it professes the Christian Faith, it maintains it as the Truth
of God; and notwithstanding all the persecutions, troubles, losses, torments,
whereby its Enemies would shake the constancy of those who maintain the Truth,
they testify to it, and declare to future Generations, that this, as S. Peter
speaks, is the true grace of God, wherein we stand.

This is the first consideration, to assure us of the true meaning of these
words.

II. The Second, is as strong; for plain reason makes it evident, that this,
not the other, is the sense of them. The Church, that is, cannot be the very
foundation upon which the Truth is built, not that which gives it authority,
and makes it to be Truth: for the quite contrary is declared by Truth it self;
that the Truth is the foundation upon which the Church is built, and which
makes it to be a Church. So S. Paul instructs this very Church of Ephesus, who
were built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner Stone; in whom all the building fitly framed
together, grows into an holy Temple in the Lord: In whom ye also are builded
together, for an habitation of God through the Spirit, II. Ephesians. 18, 19, 20.
It was therefore a Church of Christ, because it held the Truth, which He and
his Apostles taught. And so a great number of the Ancient Fathers expound those
words of Christ to S. Peter, Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock; i. e. upon the
confession of Faith which thou have made, upon that Truth thou have confessed, I
will build my Church. Matthew. XVI.

We can own no Society of Men to be a Church of Christ, unless they profess the
true Faith of Christ. And therefore the true Faith must be known before we can
know whether they be a true Church or no, who call themselves by that Name: and
consequently they do not give authority to the Truth, but the Truth to them;
because the Truth must be supposed, before they can have any authority.

Observe the above recited words I beseech you; which say, the Church is built
upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, etc. i. e. upon the Truth
revealed by them in the Gospel. It is a Church by holding and believing this:
for if this be not the thing which makes a company of Men to be a Church of the
living God; tell me, why the Mahometans are not his Church? They are a society
of Men professing some belief, and having some truth and devotion, and being
governed by Laws as well as we. There is no reason why they belong not to the
Church of Christ, but because they have not the Truth as it is in Christ.
Therefore the Church does not make the Truth; but the Truth makes the Church:
the Truth does not rely upon the Church, because it is before the Church, which
relies upon it.

Which was the Doctrine of the Church it self in after Ages; as it were easy
to show, if I intended to write a great Book. I will content my self with two
Testimonies in ancient times, the one is of S. Chrysostom, who thus expounds
these very words, the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth.
Not like that Judaical Temple: (says he) for this is it, which keeps together
and contains the Faith and the preaching (or Doctrine) (...). For the Truth is
both the Pillar and the Ground, or foundation of the Church: The other is S.
Austin in his third Book upon the Creed, to the Catechumens Tom. IX.
, which begins thus, You know this ( viz. the Creed) to be the foundation of
the Cathlique Faith, upon which the edifice of the Church arose, being built by
the hands of the Apostles and Prophets. And with this of Gabriel Biel in latter
Ages, L. 3 in sentent. Did. 25. Dub. 3.
Catholic truths, without any approbation of the Church, are in the nature of
the thing immutable, and immutably true: and so are to be accounted
unchangeably Catholic. Which brings to mind another remarkable saying of S.
Austin, who after he had produced in his first and second Books against Julian
the Pelagian, the testimonies of XI. great Doctors, viz. Irenaeus, Cyprian,
Reticius, Olympius, Hilarious, Ambrosius, Innocentius (where, by the way, it is
observable he mentions the Bishop of Rome only as one of the eminent Bishops,
not as Head of them all) Gregory Nyssen, Basil of Caesarea, John Chrysostom,
Hierom, makes this reflection upon their consent (which he looked upon as the
voice of the Catholic Church) Qui tamen veritati auctoritatem non suo
tribuere consensu, etc. who notwithstanding did not give authority to the Truth
by their consent; but received testimony and glory by partaking of the Truth.

They endeavor indeed to put by such evident conviction as this, by a little
distinction; that though in it self the Church is built upon the Truth, yet in
respect to us the Truth is built upon the Church. Which appears already to be a
vain conceit, unto those who consider; that the Church cannot be the foundation
of Truth to us, unless we first know it to be the true Church of Christ; and
endued with this privilege from God to be the Ground of Truth; in this sense
which I am now confuting. But whence should we know this? If it be said, from
the Truth which it professes; then the Church is not the Foundation of the
Truth to us, for we must know the Truth, before we can know that to be the true
Church, which calls it self the Foundation. If we say from the Church; then the
Church is the Pillar and Ground of it self; and we believe it to be the true
Church, because it says it is. Which is so absurd and dangerous, that the
Mahometans, as I said, will be as true a Church as any else: they may boldly
put in for their share of this privilege: Nay, if confidence, and power can
carry it, ingross it wholly to themselves.

It remains therefore that this is the true sense of the words which I have
given. The Church keeps the Truth, and keeps it up: It is the Conservator of
it, and preserves it from falling to the ground: it proclaims it, and holds it
forth to others: it continues the truth in the World, and settles it in men's
minds: but it self is built upon this Truth, not the Truth upon it. Which
derives its authority from God, who sent Jesus Christ into the World to teach
us his will, and gave him power to send his Apostles, as he had sent him: God
bearing them witness, with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles, and
gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own will.

This will be the more plainly laid open, if I spend a little time, in showing
what is here meant by the Church, which is commonly thought to be the Pillar
and Ground of Truth; and was the third thing propounded in the beginning to be
explained.

III.
The Church or House of God, signifies every where a company of Christians
united under their Pastors, unto Christ their Head, by a sincere Faith; and
joined one to another by Brotherly love and communion. Where ever we find such
a Society of Men and Women, there is a Church: and all the Societies of this
kind, throughout the World, make up that which we call the Catholic, or
Universal Church; the whole body of Christ, or Christian Church. Of which the
Church of Ephesus here spoken of was a part: one eminent company of Christians
professing the truly Catholic Faith, and joined to Timothy as their chief
Pastor, for the worship and service of Christ; and for to be the Pillar and
Ground of Truth, as these words must be interpreted, if they relate unto the
Church.

They indeed, who are now of the Roman Communion, understand by the Church,
only the Pastors of the Church. And some of them, this Church representative,
as it may be called; that is, the whole assembly of Christian Bishops, as many
as can meet together, representing all the Churches under their care. But
others understand only one Bishop alone, the Pope of Rome; who is then the
Church Virtual, in whom all the power of all the Bishops in the World is
united. But as there are no such notions of the Word Church in Scripture; so,
if they be applied to this place, they will appear very wild fancies, unto any
Man who will soberly consider the scope of it. For it is very evident, that the
Church is here mentioned as distinct from Timothy, who was the prime Pastor of
it, and who is directed how to behave himself in it. Therefore if this Church
was the Pillar of Truth, the whole multitude of Believers at Ephesus, united
under him and the rest of their Pastors, must be looked upon as having an
interest in this great privilege and honor, as well as duty, to be the
Conservators and Supporters of the Christian Faith, which they had received.
For S. Paul, as I said, is instructing Timothy how to demean himself, in this
Society, which he calls the House or family of God: that is, among true
Believers in Christ, formed into a Society under the Government of their
Guides: who were to take the greater care, that every one in the Church was
well taught, instructed and ordered, because they were the Pillar and Ground of
Truth.

This made S. Paul very solicitous, that Timothy should carry himself well, and
be a good Pastor in that Church, of which the Holy Ghost had made him chief
Overseer. And not knowing when he might have opportunity to see him, and give
him personal instruction by word of mouth, he wrote this Letter to him for his
direction; that he might fully understand how to discharge this Office. And
therefore these words, it appears by the verse foregoing ( v. 14.) relate
partly to what went before, and partly to what follows. These things write I
unto thee, hoping to come unto thee shortly: but if I tarry long, that thou
may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of God, which is
the Church of the living God, the Pillar and Ground of Truth. And without
controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, etc. Which whole Paragraph is
to be understood as if he had said, in more words. Though I hope shortly to
discourse with thee face to face, yet not knowing what may hinder and retard my
hopes, I have sent the above written instructions to thee; not to trouble the
Church with vain disputations, about the rites of the Law, and such idle
questions as the Jews are apt to raise: but, to remember (as I have said in the
beginning of this Letter v. 4, 5. of the first Chapter) that the end of the
Commandment is charity, the love of God and of our neighbor. This therefore
teach them; and instruct them also to make prayers, supplications and
intercession, with giving of thanks for all Men: for Kings, and all that are in
authority (Chap. II. 1, 2, 3, 4.) teach them all likewise how to pray ( v. 8.)
and instruct the Bishops and the Deacons and all the rest in their Office and
Duty: for it is of great concernment, that they be well informed; because this
Church, over which thou art set, is the very Seat of Truth, which is not to be
found in any other place, but in such a company of Believers. Who ought to
uphold and defend it, when thou art dead and gone; and therefore had need be
well settled and established in it: especially in the great mystery of
godliness, wherein all Christians agree, and about which there is no
Controversy. That so the Church may never let it go, and this Truth may not
dye and fall to the Ground, when we are laid in our Graves; but be delivered to
those that come after, as the very Oracles of God.

Who now is there so blind, as not to be able to see, that by the Church is
meant, not merely the supreme Governor of the Church, which was Timothy; but
all that company of Christian people, under their several Bishops and Teachers,
who belonged to Ephesus. All of which S. Paul left Timothy, when he himself
went into Macedonia, to take care of, and to charge that they taught no other
Doctrine (as you read, 1.3.) and in this House, or Family he was, when S. Paul
wrote this Epistle to him; not in a General Council, for there was none, in
three hundred Year after this time. Therefore he does not speak of the Church
Representative, as it is called; much less of the Church Virtual, as they term
it; that is, the Pope. For then, mark what sense the words will make; I have
wrote to thee (not knowing when I shall see thee) how to behave thy self in the
Bishop of Rome: as if he would have us fancy Timothy in the Popes Belly; and
himself gravely instructing him, how to carry himself with great circumspection
and discretion there.

I do not love to use such words; but there are no other I can find so apt to
represent the gross absurdity of their Doctrines, who take upon them to give
infallible interpretations of Holy Scripture, from the Universal Bishop, the
grand and only Oracle of Christendom, as they would have him esteemed: or from
such Councils as they are pleased to call General, and can obtain their
approbation. You see what godly ones we are like to have, if we give up our
Faith to them: how they will pervert the plain words of God, to serve their own
interest; and wrest them from their natural and easy sense, to another which
is so forced, that there is no Man so rude but would readily discern the
absurdness of it, if he were permitted to read, and did consider, the Holy
Scripture. For their great Cardinal Bellarmine alleges these very words to
prove that General Councils, confirmed by the Pope, cannot err Lib. 2. de
Contil. Auctoritate C. 2. Class. 2da.
: nay, that particular Councils, approved by the Pope, have the same privilege
Ib. cap. 6. Denique.
: where it is evident to the weakest understanding, that the whole company of
Christians, that were at Ephesus united to their Pastors (without which they
could not be a Society or Company) are the Church here spoken of: and therefore
are the Pillar and Ground of Truth, (if this relate to the Church) and not
merely some particular person in that Church: much less a General Council of
all the Bishops in the World; and least of all, one Bishop; in whom Timothy
could not be said, in any sense, to be; as he is here said to be in that
Church, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, viz. in that Church whereof he
was the chief Governor: which was the Pillar and Ground of Truth in that part
of the World. For this is not an Office appropriated to any particular Church,
but belonging to the Catholic Church, and to every single Church, as it is a
Member of the Whole.

And here it will be very profitable, I think, to note these six things, for
the full explication of this place of Scripture.

I. The first of them is that which I now mentioned; that every particular
Church, one as well, and as much as another, is a Pillar and Ground of Truth;
in that sense which I have declared. This is not a prerogative which belongs to
some one Church; but a privilege, appertaining to the Universal; and to every
particular, as a part of it. For if the Church at Ephesus, was a Pillar of
Truth, as S. Paul here affirms; then by the same reason, the Church of Antioch,
the Church of Corinth, the Church of Rome, and the Church of Jerusalem, had the
same authority. For that which made any one of them a Church, made the other
so, viz. the true Faith of Christ there professed, and union with their
Pastors, for the Divine service: and therefore that honor or Office, which
belonged to one of them, must of necessity belong to another; because they were
but so many members of one and the same Body. That is, every one of them, in
their several Countries, wherein they were planted, had the truth of God
committed to them; which they were to maintain and support unto the very death:
and endeavor that every one, who was a Stranger to the words of eternal life,
might by their means know and believe them.

And accordingly every Church has contributed unto this, and no one Church,
could ever with any reason pretend to be the sole supporter or defender of the
Christian Truth. Of which there is this plain demonstration, that then the
Church is most of all the Pillar and Ground, or Buttress, as some translate it,
of Truth, when it is assaulted by Heresies; and not only beats them off, but
beats them down and suppresses them. Now all Heresies were not quasht and
confounded by S. Peter and his Successors in the Church of Rome; but by other
Apostles and Evangelists, and their Successors in other Churches. This is
demonstrated by a learned Man, of the Roman Communion Joh. Launoii Epist. pars
Quinta Antonio Varillao p. 35. etc.
, by XII. famous instances, out of a far greater number. S. John for example,
not Peter or any of his Successors, struck down the Nicolaitans, S. Paul the
Nazarens and Cerinthians, S. Luke the Ebionites, as he proves out of good
Authors, particularly Hyginus: who relates how the Bishops of other Sees (not
the Bishops of Rome) quasht the Ptolemaites, the Noetians, and diverse other
Heretics: as the Synod of Antioch did. Paulus Samosatenus Enseb. L. VII.
Eccles. Hist. c. 22.
and the first General Council of Constantinople (where Damasus Bishop of Rome,
was not present, either by himself or his Legates) did Eunomius and other
Heretics. Which leads to the second thing I would have observed.

II. That every eminent Pastor in the Church, who labored in the word and
Doctrine, as S. Paul speaks in this Epistle, V. 17. had these very titles
anciently bestowed upon him, of the Pillar and Ground of Truth, because the
Bishops were the principal Trustees with whom the Faith was deposited (as may
be observed in the words of Irenaeus before mentioned, and many other ancient
Writers, and in S. Paul's words to Timothy, when he bids him to keep the
depositum he had committed to him, and commit the same to other faithful or
trusty persons, who should be able to teach it to others, 2 Timothy I. 14. II. 2.)
and because they were principal Instruments in defending the Truth against
opposers; in propagating the Christian Faith to those who were ignorant of it;
and in preserving the rest of the Church in the belief of the Truth, which they
had entertained, by their constant instructions, and zealous exhortation, to
hold fast what they had received.

Nay, we shall rarely, if at all, find any Bishop of Rome, called the Pillar
and Ground of Truth, but several other Bishops are frequently called by this
name. S. Basil for instance Epist. LXII. Tom. II.
, writing of the Bishop of Neocaesarea newly dead, bewails his loss very much,
because he was (...), the Ornament of the Churches, (...), (the very words of
the Apostle here in this place) the Pillar and Ground of Truth; (...), a strong
and firm establishment of Faith in Christ, etc. And upon the same occasion
writing to the Church of Ancyra Epist. LXVII.
whose Bishop was called Athanasius, it appears by some of the foregoing
Epistles) he says, (...), a Man is fallen, who was indeed a Pillar and Ground of
the Church. And complaining in another Epistle Epist. LXX.
of the miserable estate of their Churches, he says, among other things, (...),
the Pillars and Ground of the Truth are dispersed: the Bishops, he means, were
banished from their Flocks. Which he bewails in another place in the very same
Language, only putting both the foregoing parts of their Character together,
(...), Epist. CCCXLIX.
etc. whom I account the Pillars and Ground, both of the Truth and of the
Church: and honor them so much the more, the further off they are banished
from their Churches, and account that separation the greatest punishment.

In the very same Language S. Gregory Nazianzen addresses himself to S. Basil
Orat. XIX. beginning.
, whom he calls, (...), the Pillar and Ground of the Church, the prop of Faith,
the habitation of the Spirit. And so he calls Athanasius, (...) Orat. XXI.
, the Pillar of the Church: and in another place Orat. XXIII.
, (...), the prop, or stay of the Faith. And writing to Eusebius, Bishop of
Samosat Epist. XXIX. Tom^.
, he thus begins, What shall I call thee, (...), etc. Shall I call thee the
Pillar and Ground of the Church, or a Light in the World, etc. or the Stay of
thy Country, or the Rule of Faith, or Ambassador of the Truth, or all these
together, and more than all these?

But that which is most worthy to be noted under this head is, that S. Gregory
Nyssen De vita Mosis. Tom. I. p. 226.
expounds this very Text of Timothy, and makes him, not the Church, the Pillar
and Ground of Truth. For discoursing concerning the Ministers of the Divine
Mysteries, as Pillars of the House of God, he says, (...), etc. S. Paul
wrought and fashioned Timothy to be a goodly Pillar, making him (as he speaks,
with his own voice) (...), the Pillar and Ground of the Church, and of Truth.
As if he took the sense of these words to be this, But if I tarry long, that
thou, who art the Pillar and Ground of Truth, may know how to behave thy self
in the Church, etc. And indeed the Apostles are called (...), Pillars in the
II. Gal. 9. not only S. Peter, but James and John also. And here we are taught,
as he truly observes, that not only Peter, James and John were Pillars, not
only John the Baptist was a burning Lamp: (...), but all that by themselves
support the Church, all that by their work are shining lights, are called both
Pillars and Lamps.

Which names were afterward applied to Christian Bishops, by the most eminent
Persons in the Church; who hereby plainly declared, what they understood by
these words of S. Paul: and that they looked not upon this as a privilege
peculiar to any one Bishop, or any one Church; but common to all Churches, and
especially to the principal Persons in the Church, who were the Leaders and
Guides of the rest: and so more peculiarly entrusted with the preservation of
Divine Truth, and the chief Pillars and Supporters of the Faith. And thus
Origin (or whosoever he was that wrote the Homilies upon the Song of Songs Hom.
III. Basil. p. 598.
,) seems to have understood this place; for having observed from hence that the
Church is God's House, and applied these words to the explication of the last
Verse of the first Chapter of the Canticles, where it is said, the beams of our
house are Cedar, he concludes that hereby are meant those who are validiores,
of greatest strength in the Church: Et puto quod convenienter hi qui
episcopatum been ministrant in Ecclesia, etc. And I think that they who well
discharge the Office of a Bishop in the Church may conveniently be called
Beams, by which the whole Building is born up, etc. viz. by supporting and
defending the Christian Faith, upon which the Church is built. And thus the
Abyssine Christians, at this day call not only S. Mark, but their great Doctor
S. Cyril by the name of Columnae Ecclesiae Alexandrinae Ludolphi Histor.
Aethiop. L. III. c. 12. n. 51.
, the Pillars of the Church of Alexandria: because Cypril was a mighty assertor
and defender of the Truth, against the assaults of Heretics. Upon which
account, Rupertus Tuitiensis L. VII. oper. de Sp. Sancto, cap. 19.
calls S. Austin by the same name, that S. Paul here calls Timothy, columna and
firmamentum veritatis, the Pillar and Ground, or strong stay, of Truth. Which
Language is common among the Jews, who call Abraham, for instance, the Pillar
of the World Maimon. de cultu stell. c. 1. n. 5. and More Nevohim, Pars III. c.
29.
, with respect to the true Religion which he maintained: which is the very
Language of Ignatius, concerning the Apostles, of whom he thus speaks, (...)
Epist. ad Philadelph.
, the Pillars of the World, the Apostles; mentioning together with them, the
Spouse of Christ, viz. the Church.

I have been the more copious in this, because it shows that the ancient
Doctors thought all Bishops to be equally concerned in this Office, and Honor;
it never entering into their minds that any one had an interest in it more than
the rest; much less that one (the Bishop of Rome) had it solely to himself.

III. But further I observe that the Martyrs, though not Bishops, are
frequently called by this name. So the Churches of Vienne and Lions, in their
Letter to the Churches of Asia and Phrygia, concerning the blessed Martyrs who
had suffered among them, say that God delivered the weaker sort, and opposed to
the fury of the Enemy, (...), those who were firm and steady Pillars, able by
their Patience to draw all the violent assaults of the Devil upon them Apud
Eusebius. L. V. Histor. Eccles. cap. 1. p. 155. edit. Vales.
. Among whom they mention Sanchis a Deacon, and Maturus a mere Novice, and
Attalus, born at Pergamus, (...) Ib. p. 157.
: Who had always been the Pillar and Ground (or stay and strength) of
Christians in this place: that is, settled and sustained others in the
Christian belief. And so Eusebius speaks of other Martyrs at Alexandria in the
time of Decius, (...), L. VI. Eccles. Hist. cap. 41.
etc. firm and blessed Pillars of the Lord, who strengthened by him, and having
might and power answerable to the strength of their Faith, became admirable
witnesses of his Kingdom. For they could not be shaken with the fear of death
and torment; and so by their stedfastness confirmed and established others in
the Christian Faith; and were eminent Instruments likewise of converting
strangers to our Religion: who saw their pious and meek constancy under the
greatest sufferings, joined with the greatest charity, bowels of mercy and
compassion, toward their bloody persecutors. For whom they begged pardon and
forgiveness of God, desiring nothing more than they might come to that heavenly
Kingdom, which they testified to them; by parting with life it self for the
sake of it.

Neither is this merely the Ecclesiastical Language, but the Holy Scripture it
self gives those this honorable title; who constantly endured tribulation for
the Gospel sake, though it did not cost them their lives. Thus our blessed Lord
speaks to the Church of Philadelphia, III. Revel. 12. Him that overcomes, will
I make a Pillar in the temple of my God. Which signifies partly, that he should
be an eminent Instrument of upholding the Church, and preserving many in the
profession of Christianity, by his constancy and firmness in it: and partly,
that he should be so established himself by the grace and power of God, that he
should never fall (according to that of S. Peter, 1 V. 10. But the God of all
grace, who has called us unto his eternal glory, after that ye have suffered a
while, make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you): and partly, that
he should be made in the highest sense, a PILLAR, that is, an Apostolical Man,
who should be advanced to the most eminent employment in the Church; of
teaching and instructing, of Governing and Ruling, as a principal Pastor, in
the Temple of God. In one word, be an Angel of the Church, (as he speaks in the
beginning of this Letter, v. 7. and in all the rest) an illustrious Minister
and Messenger of God, to publish the glad tidings of Salvation to the World.

Such the Apostles were: whom Theodoret calls the Pillars of the Truth, with
peculiar respect to their sufferings. Behold, says he, Orat. de providentia,
Tom. IV. p. 441.
Peter and John, (...), etc. the Towers, or Bulwarks of Godliness, the Pillars
of Truth, supporting the Structure of the Church: being scourged by the Jews,
but rejoicing and glorying, (V. Act. 41.) that they were counted worthy to
suffer shame, or to be disgraced, for his Name. And such like were these
victorious Souls, as Arethas Comment. in III. Rev. 12.
expounds our Savior's words to this Church; For he that conquers, says he,
the adverse powers, (...), is constituted a Pillar and Ground of the Truth;
rejoicing himself immutably (so he interprets in the temple of my God) and
establishing others in goodness, that they may not fall from their stedfastness.

IV. Any eminent person also in the Church, though not a Martyr, is sometime
called by this name in Ecclesiastical Writers. For instance, Jo. Damascen thus
addresses himself to Jordanes the Archimandrite, (...), Epist. ad eu^n de
Tri^agio.
O most Divine Father, the Pillar and Ground, or stay, of Truth. Nay, thus
zealous persons in the Laity, especially if they were of great quality,
contributed to the support of the Faith, by supporting these Pillars of it. So
S. Basil, in one of the forenamed Epistles, having bewailed the banishment of
their Bishops, whom he calls the Pillars and Ground of Truth, prays Terentius
(a Count of the Empire) to preserve himself safe, that they might have some to
rest upon; God having graciously made him (...), Epist. 345.
a support and a prop in all things to us. But they of the Clergy more
particularly, though of the Order below Bishops, were looked upon as having no
small share in this Office. For S. Cyril of Alexandria Lib. V. in Esaiam, Tom.
2. p. 768.
having mentioned Christ as the foundation, and believers in him, as precious
Stones built upon him, unto a holy Temple; compares their instructors in the
Mysteries of Religion to the most precious Stones (such as those mentioned,
LIVE. Isa. 11, 12.) which God uses, some in laying the foundation, others as
buttresses; some for the Gates, others for the Walls, of the holy City, that
is, the Church: that all her Children may be taught of God.

V. Nay, one of the forenamed great Doctors of the Church warrants me to add,
that every pious member of the Church, in his place and calling, has his share
in this great trust. For whosoever, says S. Gregory Nyssen, Hom. XIV. in Cant.
Canticorum, p 684.
is perfected in these two great Commandments, to love God, and to love his
Neighbor, he is framed to be (...), a Pillar and Ground of Truth, according to
the language of the Apostle. By both these, we may become such Pillars, as
Peter, and James, and John; or if there be any other, since them, that has
been or shall be worthy of this name. And he does, in effect, say the same in
the place before named; De vita Mosis.
where he observes the Apostle requires others to be Pillars, as well as
himself, when he says, (...), 1 Cor. XV. 58. be ye steadfast (or stable)
unmovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord. For he that is thus
firmly fixed and settled (as the word (...) signifies) and diligent in well
doing, whatsoever trials he has to shake him, he supports Religion, he
maintains the credit of it in the World, he does great service to the Truth, by
showing how good, how useful, how laborious, it makes those that embrace it.

And I am sure it lies upon every one of us, as an indispensable duty to hold
fast the Truth, and to profess it, and practice it; and, notwithstanding any
danger or trouble unto which it may expose us, to testify unto it, if need be,
by constant, patient, peaceable suffering for Christ's sake. And he that does
thus, is according to his measure, though never so mean a person in the Church,
a Pillar and Ground of Truth. And thus Theodoret expounds these words, he calls
(...) the assembly or congregation of those that believe, the House of God and
the Church: and these, he says, are the Pillar and support of Truth. For being
founded upon the Rook, they both remain unshaken, and preach by their deeds the
truth of their Doctrine. And Theophylast also, (...). The Church is a
constitution, or an assembly of truth: For all things that are done in it, are
true, nothing shadowy, as under the Law, etc.

VI. I have but one thing further to add; That the more and the better they
are, who join in this work, the greater support they give to the Truth.

First I say, the more, the greater number there are of those who maintain the
truth, by preaching, writing, suffering, or well doing, and the greater credit
they have in the World; the stronger Pillars they are, and the surer does the
truth seem to be in the eyes of those to whom they represent it. Upon which
account the Doctrine of S. Paul and Barnabas, which he had received by
revelation as well as other Apostles, yet being communicated to James and
Cephas and John, who were eminent Pillars, and been approved by them, received
the more strength by their concurrent testimony, II. Gal. 2, 5, 9. And it was
still more confirmed by the whole Council of Apostles and Elders at Jerusalem
(XV. Act. 2.25.) so that it was received joyfully at Antioch (V. 31.) and the
Churches in other Cities were established in the Faith, and increased in number
daily. XVI. 4.5. For which reason the testimony of a great assembly of Bishops,
was a greater support and strengthening to the Faith, than the testimony of
single persons. They were the principal Trustees, as I observed before, to
whose fidelity the truth was committed: and when they met together in a Council
to discharge this trust, it gave great force to the truth declared by them.
Which they knew so well, that in ancient times, such Councils were wont to
desire the consent of other Bishops, who were not there, for the greater
establishment and confirmation of the Faith, as Theodoret L. 2. Hist. Eccles.
C. 6.
relates of the Council of Sardica, whose Letter he has set down to all the
Bishops in the World; desiring them, (...), as present in Spirit with them, to
consent to their Synod, and by their subscription to decree, that concord might
be preserved, among all their fellow Bishops every where. Nay, the great and
first general Council of Nice it self, Theodoret. L. 1. Eccles. Hist. Cap. 8, 9.
wrote to the Church of Alexandria, and the rest throughout Egypt, Libya, and
Pentapolis, to give them an account of their decrees. And Constantine also
certified all absent Bishops, who could not come to the Council, of their
proceedings: That there might be one Faith (as his words are) and sincere
charity, and a concording Religion, or Piety, preserved among them all.

It was upon the same score that sometime they sent particularly to the Bishop
of Rome for his concurrence (as the Council of Carthage, August. Epist. XC,
XCI, XCV.
and others did in the business of Pelagius) not because they imagined their
decrees would be of no force without his consent (that is an ungrounded fancy)
but because he was an eminent Bishop in the Church of Christ; by whose
concurrent testimony the Truth would be still more confirmed, and their
Churches would have the greater comfort de communi participatione unius
gratiae, from the common participation of one grace: by knowing, that is, that
they were of the same belief.

The like may be said of the Martyrs, who, when they suffered in great numbers,
gave the more amazing testimony to the Truth, which terrified the Devil
himself, and staggered their very Judges: as S. Basil speaks Tom. 1. Hom. XX.
of the XL Martyrs, who all together, as if they had had but one Mouth, cried
out, when they were examined, I am a Christian. By such resolution as this our
Religion was not only upheld, but mightily increased: And the more the number
of Christians increased, the more was Truth spread abroad, till it grew to be
the prevailing Religion; and the Kingdoms of the World became the Kingdoms of
our Lord, and of his Christ.

2. But it was not mere numbers that did the business; for their extraordinary
Piety and Purity in those early days, had the greatest hand in it. Which was
the second thing I desired to be noted under this last head, that the better
the Pastors and the People are, the greater service they do to the Truth; and
the more prevalent their testimony is, when it appears by their lives, that
they have no other interest to serve, but that of Truth and Godliness.

And when all is done, it will be found that the sanctity of those who assert
God's holy Truth, their pure and undefiled Religion which keeps them from being
spotted by the World, is that which will be the most powerful to move Men's
minds, and will make the easiest way for its entertainment in Men's Hearts.
Nothing can give a Church such authority, and make its testimony so credible,
as its integrity and sincere Devotion; its study of purity in Heart and Life;
its designing clearly the good of Souls, and not worldly advantages; its
universal charity and kindness: which invites even strangers to attend unto it,
and much more its own Members.

And therefore I must note for a conclusion of this part of my Discourse, that
when we speak of the Church, i. e. the whole company of believers, and say that
it is the Pillar and Ground or establishment of Truth, it is meant principally
of those, whose Faith brings forth fruit and works by love. These are the main
supporters of the Christian Religion; who do not merely profess it; but are
acted and live by their Faith, in all holy obedience to Christ. For they are
living Stones built upon him the foundation of all; the true living Body of
Christ, who are animated by his Spirit, and with whom he has promised to make
his abode: and consequently are the only persons, who to purpose support and
maintain, and defend the Truth. Which would in a little time, be suppressed or
obscured, depraved or varied, concealed or misinterpreted; if the wicked only
had the conduct of it. Who are no more to be accounted Pillars of the Truth, i.
e. can no more alone support and uphold it, than a Reed, a Straw or a rotten
Stick, can support a building. This is the ancient Doctrine of the Church it
self, as appears by what S. Austin says, in his Preface to the Exposition of
the XLVIII. Psalm Tom. VIII. Enarratio in Psalm. XLVII.
. Where taking the firmament, which was made the second day, to be an emblem of
the Church, he says by the Church we ought to understand Ecclesiam Christi in
Sanctis, etc. the Church of Christ in his Saints; the Church of Christ in those
whose names are written in Heaven, the Church of Christ in those who do not
yield to the temptations of this World. Ipsi enim digni sunt nomine FIRMAMENTI,
for these are worthy the name of Firmament, or strength. Therefore the Church
of Christ in those qui firmi sunt, who are strong (concerning whom the Apostle
speaks, we that are strong ought to bear the infirmities of the weak) is called
the FIRMAMENT. For hearken and acknowledge, how this Church is called by this
name in the Apostolical writings (and then he quotes this place to Timothy)
which is the Church of the living God, columna and firmamentum veritatis, the
Pillar and support of Truth.

By these principally the Truth is maintained: For it is most plainly delivered
by the Apostles themselves, that Men and Women, by their wicked lives, did turn
Apostates from the Faith. And we find by experience, as well as their
instructions, that nothing does more quench the Spirit of God, nothing is more
contrary to true Wisdom, than filthiness and impurity, which we must abandon
therefore, and not think we can do very considerable service to the Truth, by
the bare profession of it: but upon the foundation Christ Jesus, we must
seriously endeavor to raise the superstructure of a holy life, whereby we
shall adorn, recommend, and effectually promote our Religion.

It must not be denied indeed, that a multitude professing true Faith in
Christ, though their lives be not so regular as they ought to be, are not
unserviceable to our Religion: Nay, in some cases, by their steadiness in the
Truth, give no small support unto it. Especially, when they likewise continue
united together, by partaking constantly of the same Sacraments. Whereby they
are joined to those who are truly good, and remain a part of the Christian
society; till their lives be so bad that they are thrown out of the Church, as
not fit to have Communion with it. And therefore out of such a Church,
consisting of those that profess the Faith of Christ entirely, and worship him
purely, without any dangerous mixtures, no Man ought to depart; merely because
every one therein is not knit to Christ by such hearty love and obedience as
that Faith ought to produce. For they that are only in outward Communion with
such a Church, are in a good way to something more: and therefore ought not to
be rejected, as no Christians. For by external Communion, the inward lively
Communion with God our Savior, is produced, set forward, and promoted: and it
is something to own Christ, and acknowledge him for our Lord and Master; and
receive constant instructions from his Ministers, whereby we are convinced of
our duty. Which though it does not at present make them good and faithful
Servants, yet they may be so in time: and the way to make them so, is not to
leave them to themselves, by separating from them; but to admonish, reprove and
exhort them to become living Members of Christ's Body, that they may do him
greater service, by recommending his Religion effectually to the World. As all
those do, who separate from the wickedness of the World, though they continue
mixed with the wicked that are in the Church; till they can, in an orderly
manner and after regular proceedings, be thrown out of it. Whereas, on the
contrary, they who upon pretense of the wicked being mixed with the godly,
depart from the external Communion of the Church; have very much dishonored
Religion, and help to destroy the Church by endless separations.

For when they have so departed from the Church, they are not sure they depart
from the wicked: though it be sure they have left the Communion of a great many
good Men and Women, who are mingled in common, with the bad. And what advantage
can such Men propound unto themselves, or unto true Religion and godliness:
when they certainly forsake the society of a great many truly good Men, for an
imaginary departure from the wicked? Because after all the care they can take,
they cannot be sure there are no wicked among them: but they leave a Church, in
which it is notorious there are a great number of holy People, and erect
Congregations, for ought they can certainly know, of such as conceit themselves
Religious, merely from this separation.

This is not the means therefore of upholding Truth, and of promoting
godliness. But if we be seriously bent on that, the Apostle has shown us the
way in the next Epistle, 2 Timothy II. 19. Let every one that names the name of
Christ depart from iniquity. Whosoever does so, he is an excellent Servant of
Jesus Christ, and of his Truth: which was promoted by nothing more, I might say
by nothing so much, as by the eminent Piety and Virtue of the first Preachers
of Christianity, and of the generality of those who were called by Christ's
name. Some bad people there were among them (as we learn by the Church of
Corinth) which did not unchurch them, nor make them unfit for communion with
them. For in a great House (as the Apostle there speaks in the next verse, 2 Timothy II. 20, 21.) there are not only vessels of Gold and Silver, but also of
Wood and of Earth; and some to honor, some to dishonor. But if a Man purge
himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified and meet for
his Master's use, and prepared unto every good work. Thus the Apostle writes
immediately after these words, Let every one that names the name of Christ,
depart from iniquity. Whatsoever becomes of others, he shall become an useful
Servant of his Master Christ, a vessel of Honor, or an instrument to do him
honor, by being fitted to every good work.

There are eminent testimonies of this, not only in Christian but in Pagan
Writers also, that hereby the Truth of Christ prevailed and got the upper hand
in the World. For Julian Epist. XLIX. a^ Ar^arium, and in fragm. p. 557.
himself upbraids the Priests of his Religion, with the mavelous piety of the
Galilaeans (as he calls Christians) whose singular Humanity, and Charity even
to Strangers, nay to Pagans, when those of their own Religion neglected them,
together with the gravity of their manners and composed behavior (though he
call it feigned) had such great effect, that by this means, as he acknowledges,
Christianity so increased, that its growth could no way be hindered, but by
their outdoing Christians in these worthy qualities.

And such an eminent virtue it must be, and that alone, which can restore our
Religion to its primitive luster: Nay, that which will preserve it from being
lost, where it is planted. For as fast as true piety and virtue decays, so fast
does the Church go to ruin. And therefore if we have an hearty love to our own
Church, and the saving truth of God, which is there professed and asserted, we
must study to uphold it by this means. Not by seeking for a purer Church (which
is impossible, as to Faith and Worship, and Manners too, to be found) but by
endeavoring to amend one another, by purifying our selves in the first place
from all filthiness both of the flesh, and of spirit; and then by admonishing
others that do not live as they ought, of the error of their ways, and calling
them to Repentance.

Which course I wish all they who have separated from our Communion, would
consider whether they ever took? Did they not first forsake us, and then say,
before they tried, that we have people incorrigibly wicked among us? This is
not the way (to say nothing of what sort of people they have among themselves)
of saving us all from perishing: but, as it proceeds commonly from too much
pride, and conceitedness, and from great want of Charity; so it produces
lamentable effects. For under a pretense of making the Church more holy, it
destroys both holiness and the Church: by breaking the unity of it, by
disgracing Religion, by turning it into disputes and vain jangling, by endless
separations under the notion of great and more refined purity; till the Church
be crumbled into so many little bits and fractions, that little more than the
name of a Church remains.

Let us therefore preserve Union among our selves as much as is possible, that
we may preserve the Church and Truth. And then there may be the more hope of
reclaiming the ungodly: who will receive an admonition or reproof far better
from one of their society, who calls them brethren; than from one that
separates from them as mere Strangers and Foreigners, with whom they have
nothing to do in matters of Religion.

Would to God this were more seriously practiced among us; that we would be as
forward, charitably to reprove Men for their wickedness, as we are even to
reproach them, perhaps uncharitably, for their false opinions. It might be a
means of their cure, an effectual remedy for their amendment, when piously and
prudently administered: and a means of bringing those back, who are gone astray
from us, that there may be no divisions among us, but we may be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.

PART III.
How the Church discharges this Office, of a Pillar and Ground of Truth.
WHAT the Psalmist says concerning Jerusalem, or the Church of the Jews, which
was wont there to assemble, is more fully verified in the Christian Church:
Great and glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou city of God, LXXXVII. Ps.
1. This great City, S. John saw descending out of Heaven, having the glory of
God, XXI. Rev. 10, 11. And in the Verse before, calls this Church, the bride,
the lambs wife. There is a special presence, that is, of God in it; and a
special love of the Lord Jesus to it. For it is, the body of Christ, and the
fullness of him that fills all things. To this, S. John says, they shall bring
the glory and honor of the nations: against this, our Savior promises, the
gates of hell shall not prevail. The pure water of life, clear as crystal runs
therein: here grows the tree of life, (XXII. Rev. 1, 2.) and it is, as it were,
the paradise and garden of God.

Which things show what an honor, what an happiness it is, to be a Citizen of
this Holy Jerusalcm. Whosoever they be, that by a cordial Faith in Christ, and
sincere love to him, join themselves to this Body, are made Members of Christ,
Children of God, Companions of Angels, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.
They are under the protection of the Almighty; under the guidance of his Holy
Spirit; under the care and tender love of that great and glorious Lord, who is
the Prince of all the kings of the earth, and has all power in heaven, as well
as earth, invested in him. For the Church is the house and family of God, nay
the temple of the living God, (2 Cor. VI. 17.) for he has said, as it there
follows, I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people: I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord God Almighty.

These things are great indeed, and exceeding glorious.

But not content with these privileges, which are as a Royal Diadem, and Crown
of Glory, on the Head of the Church; there are those who would adorn her with
prouder Titles: and set her forth in an adulterous dress, and a presumptuous
glory; making her, in a manner, equal to her Head, the Lord Christ. For they
have snatched one of the incommunicable properties of God, and fixed it, as a
Jewel, on the top of the Churches Crown: telling us that she is an infallible
Guide, who cannot mislead us. That is, though she may go astray, and play the
Harlot, in life and practice, yet she cannot err, nor mistake in her judgment:
So that if we listen to what she says, we shall never wander, but always be in
the right.

For the proof of this, they first suppose themselves to be the Church of
Christ, and they alone: and then they abuse this place of Holy Scripture, to
assert this Divine Prerogative to be in his Church; that is, in themselves. But
I have exposed the bold folly of these pretenses, by showing, that the Church
here spoken of is the Church of Ephesus; and that Timothy was the principal
Pillar and Ground of Truth in this Church. Which does not signify, I have
shown, that either the Church, or Timothy, were the very Foundation of the
Christian Faith, upon whose credit the Authority, the Truth, and Certainty of
all Religion depends: but the Supporters of the Truth; who testified,
maintained, upheld, and propagated the Faith of Christ.

For the more full understanding of which, I shall briefly show (before I
proceed to the last thing propounded) first what power it is that we herein
ascribe to the Church; particularly to the Bishops and Governors thereof:
Secondly, what power it cannot pretend unto, nor ought to be yielded to any
Church, or Person whatsoever.

I. As for the first of these, what the power is we allow the Church, when we
say it upholds, maintains and testifies to the Truth, it is as much as to
enquire of what Authority the Testimony of the Church is, how much it ought to
weigh with us, and how far we ought to yield to it: to the Testimony, for
instance, of the present Church of which we are Members (for it has as much
Authority as any other) when it propounds Truth to us, and presses it upon our
belief. Are we to believe it, merely because the Church says it?

In answer to which we affirm, that the Testimony of the Church, is that
whereby we are both informed of the Truth, and induced, as by the first
external motive to Faith in Christ. Mr. Hooker calls it the Key, as others do
the Door, which lets us into the knowledge of the great Mystery of Godliness,
which is preserved in this House of God.

If we allow it not this, we allow it nothing: nor can it, or any Person in it,
be said to be a Pillar and Ground of Truth, unless it do something to the
bringing us acquainted with the Truth; which it propounds and sets before us,
and testifies to be that which Christ has left with his Church, to be
delivered down to all Generations. For it conveys the Holy Scriptures to us,
and calls upon us to consider and study them: that therein, by the help of the
Pastors of the Church (to whom this Office, I have shown, principally belongs)
we may find all necessary Truths, in order to our Salvation. Which Testimony
being the Testimony of Men, that profess Faithfulness, Honesty and a good
Conscience, as the great thing in their Religion, is the highest of all humane
Testimonies: and cannot but work very strongly and powerfully upon Men's minds,
when Christians are such as they profess to be: and as they are, it ought to
work thus far upon all sorts of Men, even upon those who are out of the Church;
as to incline them to have a reverend regard to that Faith and those
Scriptures, and to look into them and consider them; which they see such
multitudes of People, and some of them very wise, as well as devout, constantly
esteem as the very Truth of God, transmitted to them from his Son, by the
Apostles, who attended on him from his first appearing, till he went to Heaven.

This moved S. Austin when he was yet in part an Infidel, being a Manichee, to
believe the Gospel, according to that famous Discourse of his, in answer to the
Epistle of Manichaeus, which contained in a manner the whole Belief of that
party; Ego non crederem Evangelio, nisi me Ecclesiae Catholicae authoritas
commoveret Tom. VI. contra Epistolam Fandamenti, Cap. 5.
; which is to be thus translated, according to the Phrase of the Asricans, I
had not believed the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic Church had
moved me thereunto. For it is evident (as has been shown by our Writers, since
the beginning of the Reformation D. Whitakeram de sa^^a Sc^i^t. Q. 3. cap. 8.
) he speaks of himself when a Manichee, as the words immediately following
declare, Those whom I obeyed when they said, Believe the Gospel; why should I
not obey when they say, Do not believe Manichaeus? Which does not signify that
the credit of the Gospel, is founded upon the Churches Authority, but that this
was the first motive to incline him to look into the Gospel, and consider it as
a Divine Book, which would inform him in the way of Salvation. Thus he explains
himself in the very foregoing Chapter, where setting aside the sincere Wisdom
taught in the Church, which they would not believe, he reckons up abundance of
other things, which might serve to keep him in the Catholic Church, viz. the
consent of People and Nations, etc. and then thus concludes: These numerous and
great, and most dear ties of the Christian name, may very well hold a Man that
believes in the Catholic Church; although by reason of the slowness of his
understanding, or the defects of his life, the truth do not yet show it self
most openly unto him. Whereas among the Manichees there were none of these
things to invite, or to hold him, but a bare promise of Truth wherewith they
made a noise: which if they could have shown so manifestly that it could not be
doubted, he confesses it was to be preferred before all those things, whereby
he was held in the Catholic Church.

Which words are an evident proof that he speaks of the Authority of the
Church, as only moving and inducing him to believe the Scriptures, and to join
himself to their Society, before the TRUTH was manifested to him; which he was
to sind there (in the Scriptures) and which he preferred before the Authority
of the Church. Which he, elsewhere, tells the Donatists was not to be believed
upon its own credit; L. de unitate Ecclesie, cap. 16.
But whether they hold the Church, let them not show but from the Canonical
Books of the Divine Scriptures: for we neither do not say that we ought to be
believed, because we are in Christ's Church, because that Church which we hold
was commended to us by Optatus, or Ambrose, or other innumerable Bishops of our
Communion, or because it is approved by Councils, or because Miracles are every
where wrought in it: These and such like things, are therefore to be approved,
because they are done in the Catholic Church: but it is not therefore
manifested to be the Catholic Church, because these things are done in it.
Our Lord Jesus himself, when he rose from the dead, and offered his Body to be
touched as well as seen by his Disciples, lest they should think there was any
fallacy in it, judged it meet rather to confirm them by the testimonies of the
Law, and the Prophets and Psalms; showing how all things were fulfilled, which
were predicted. And so he commanded his Church, saving, that repentance and
remission of sin should be preached in his Name, beginning at Jerusalem. This
he testified was written in the Law, the Prophets and Psalms: this we hold
commended from his Mouth. These are the Documents, these the Foundations, these
the strong Grounds of our Cause. We read in the Acts of the Apostles of some
Believers, that they sought the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so.
What Scriptures? but the Canonical Books of the Law and the Prophets: to which
are added the Gospels, the Apostolical Epistles, the Acts of Apostles, and the
Revelation of S. John. Search all these, and bring forth something manifest,
whereby ye may demonstrate the Church, either to have remained only in Africa,
or to be to come out of Africa, etc. This is an illustrious Testimony, he
thought the Church it self was to be warranted by the Scriptures, which did not
therefore receive their Authority from the Church, but give it all the
Authority it has. And after all, it was not the Authority of the present
Church barely that moved him when he was a Manichee; but of the Catholic
Church from the beginning. Occham Fr White's Answer to Fisher's second
Conference, p. 24.
thinks he speaks of the Church in the Apostles times alone, which moved him to
Believe. And others (as Gabriel Biel) confess he speaks of the Authority of the
Church, a tempore Christi and Apostolorum, etc. from the time of Christ and of
the Apostles down to his days.

Such Authority cannot but weigh (...) much, even with those that do not yet
believe, if (...) ^eriously pondered: but much more with those, that are
already Christians. Whether they be Novices and weaklings, who are as yet
doubtful in the Faith, though in the Church: the Testimony and Authority of it,
ought to confirm and quiet their minds (as it did S. Austin's, it appears by
the place before-named) and keep them close to the Christian Society, till they
may themselves come better acquainted with the Truth, and more fully understand
the Holy Scriptures, which the Church delivers to them, and puts into their
hands, as the Word of God. Or whether they be more grown Christians (and indeed
all sorts of Persons in the Church) who ought to be so far wrought upon even by
its Authority, as to be persuaded thereby to read constantly, to consider and
ponder seriously, and to practice those plain Lessons faithfully, which the
Holy Scripture teaches them; till it work effectually upon their hearts, and
purge them so thoroughly from all bad affections, that they may more perfectly
understand the Truth.

Thus much is indisputable; for God has appointed outward means for the
conveying Divine Truth, to our Belief; and this means is ordinarily the Church:
to which we ascribe these two great things, in this business. Answer to Charity
mistaken, Sect. V.
First, the office of a Witness, testifying the Authority of Holy Scripture to
us: Secondly, of an Instrument in Gods Hand, to lead us into the understanding
of the Scriptures, and by its Ministry, in preaching and expounding them, to
beget a Divine Faith in us.

But further than this, we cannot, we must not go. For the last resolution of
our Faith is not into the Testimony of the Church, but into the Testimony of
God himself, which we find recorded in the Holy Scripture, delivered by the
Church unto us. Thus S. Austin most admirably discourses in that very Book
against Manichaeus Cap. XIV. contra Epist. quam vocant Fundamenti.
his Letter, from whence the forenamed saying, (I had not believed the Gospel,
unless the Churches Authority had moved me to it) is wont, at every turn, to be
objected to us, by those of the Romish persuasion. Thou do nothing, but
praise what thou believe, and deride what I believe. Now since I can be even
with thee, and do the very same, praise what I believe, and deride what thou
believe; what is to be done? but that we leave and relinquish those, who
invite us to know things certain; and afterward require us to believe things
uncertain (let those of the Roman Church mark this) and that we follow them,
who invite us first to believe, that which we cannot yet see into; that being
made stronger in the Faith it self, we may come to understand what we believe:
NOT MEN NOW, BUT GOD HIMSELF INWARDLY ESTABLISHING AND ILLUMINATING OUR MIND.

It is impossible to read this passage, and not see that this Father thought
our Faith is not ultimately resolved into the Testimony of the Church: but by
that, being invited to believe the Holy Scriptures, we are established (upon
the serious reading of them) in the Christian Faith, and Knowledge of the
Truth, by God himself. Upon whose Word, in the Holy Scripture, and not upon
Men, we bottom our Faith. Upon the Testimony and Authority of God the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost: and the Testimony of divine Men, inspired by them; who by
Miracles, and Signs, and mighty Deeds, and a prophetical Spirit, proved
themselves to be sent of God; and have left his Mind and Will upon Record in
the Scriptures of Truth. Which the Church indeed, in all parts of the World
has kept and preserved, and faithfully transmitted down to us; and now
propounds to our Faith: but it is not merely what the Church says, that makes
us believe; but what God himself says in the Holy Scriptures, concerning his
Son Jesus Christ; and what Jesus Christ says, concerning his rising from the
Dead, and sending the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles. Which being fulfilled,
evidently proved him to be the Son of God, the Savior of the World: and them
to be his Apostles, and Ministers, who declared to Men the true way of
Salvation.

So the Church directs and guides us to the Scriptures of Truth; but they
resolve and assure our Faith, being the very Word of God. The authority of
God's Church is the first motive, which leads us to esteem the Scriptures: but
being led thither, we find in the matter of them that which gives us full
satisfaction, by bestowing our pains in reading, or hearing, and considering
the Mysteries contained therein. The Church holds out this light to us; but it
is by this light that we see what is the mind and will of God. To this the
Church points us, and bids us attend to it; for this it disposes and prepares
us; it leads us by the hand to this as the only sure foundation of our Faith;
(because herein we find God himself speaking to us) and moreover by the
Ministry of the Church we are assisted in understanding the sense of the Holy
Scriptures: but they contain in themselves that Divine Authority and Truth,
whereby we come to a certain Faith. The Church tells us such and such things
are true; and we find them to be so, by examining the Scriptures. Which the
Beraeans searched daily, whether those things were so, which the Apostles
preached: and therefore many of them believed; not merely because the Apostles
told them they ought so to do, but because they found what they said, in the
Holy Scriptures, XVII. Act. 11, 12. And so far as any Church speaks according
to the truth contained therein, it is to be believed and followed. But if it
bring no Divine word for its warrant, if it propound other Doctrines, which are
not there, it has no authority to make such Doctrines, the matter of our
Faith: much less, to set up its own authority above the Scriptures; as they do
who say, The Scriptures receive their authority from the Church Which is the
Doctrine of no less Men than Baronius and Bellarmine, to name no more.

The former of Ad Annum 53 (...) X, XI.
which argues, that because we receive these Holy Books, to be writings of the
Apostles and Evangelists, and not forged under their Names, upon the testimony
of the Church; therefore all the writings of the New Testament, received their
authority from the Churches tradition; which is fundamentum Scripturarum, as he
ventures to say, the foundation of the Scriptures. The other L. 2. de
Sacrament. C. 25. Tertium.
is no less positive, that if we take away the authority of the present Church,
and the present Council, we call in doubt the whole Christian Faith. For the
firmness of all ancient Councils, and of all Doctrines, depends upon the
authority of the present Church.

This is very presumptuous talk: for by the Church they mean themselves; and
then by the testimony of the Church (that is their own testimony) they mean
such a Divine witness, as assures us by its own authority, without any other
proof. Which are the great points of difference between us, in this matter. For
we assert, first, that the office of leading Men to the Holy Scriptures, and so
to Faith, belongs to every Church as much as to them: and, secondly, that no
Church can bring People to Faith by its own testimony and authority, but by the
Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures: nor is any Church whatsoever to be heard in
matters of Divine Truth, further than it can prove its Doctrines by the
authority of God's Word, and teaches things agreeable thereunto.

II. Which leads to the Second thing; briefly to show what power and authority
the Church cannot pretend unto in matters of Faith.

1. And, first, it appears by what has been said, that it has not a
Sovereign, Absolute, Prophetical authority, independent upon the Rule of the
Holy Scriptures: so that we must take whatsoever it says for true, without
consulting them. This is the ambitious pretense of the great Doctors of the
Roman Church, who give the Church (meaning thereby the present Roman Church) an
authority over all things, not depending on the Scriptures; but upon which the
Scriptures themselves depend: So that without the authority of this Church, all
truth is doubtful. Which is a manifest principle of Infidelity; making all
Religion stand to the courtesy of a company of Men, who in such matters are
the least to be trusted of all other Christians that we are acquainted withal.

2. The Church has no authority to propound any Doctrine, as necessary to
Salvation, which is not delivered in the Holy Scriptures; but depends solely on
the authority of its own Tradition. This is another of their ambitious
attempts, who having arrogated to themselves alone the whole power of the
Church; make that power so unlimited, that it can supply the defects of the
Scripture; and make things unwritten to become matters of Faith. Which is such
an unbounded Prerogative, that we may have a new Faith, as often as they please
to pretend a Tradition for it; though they cannot prove it. For we must rest in
the authority of the present Church which affirms it; and that against the very
Scripture it self, which tells us it is able to make a Man of God perfect; and
against the testimony of the Universal Church, which, I have shown, forbids the
producing of any other Faith but that which was evidently delivered by the
Apostles there.

3. We cannot allow the Church an Infallible authority, that is, such an
assistance in her Doctrines and proposals, that she cannot err in any thing she
defines. In Controversies indeed arising about matters of Faith, we own and
reverence the authority of the Church Artic. XX.
; so as not to contest the public judgment, but to prefer it before our own
private conceits, in doubtful things. But as it ought to proceed in its
determinations by the Rule of Gods word; So we think it possible it may mistake
in the application of this Rule: and therefore we do not blindly resign our
selves to its authority, without all regard to the Holy Scriptures; unto which
the Church ought to have a respect in all its determinations. No, that is
another proud pretense of the present Roman Church, that they cannot mistake in
their definitions: and therefore we must submit unto them without examination.
From whence this intolerable mischief has insued, that it has made them both
insensible of their errors, and careless to seek any cure of them, nay utterly
incapable of a remedy. For as one of our own Divines excellently speaks Dr.
Petter's Answer to Charity mistaken, Sect. 5.
(whose words those are) this conceit of their Infallibility is to them both a
sufficient reason for that which is most unreasonable; and a sufficient answer
to that which is most unanswerable. To this they retreat upon all occasions,
when they are not able to maintain their ground: they have no other way to
defend their errors, when they are plainly set before their eyes, but to tell
us confidently they cannot err. Which is a very strange boldness; for we
demonstrate, in manay instances, that they have erred; erred most grossly:
particularly in this, that they have added new Articles to the old Creed, to be
believed under pain of Damnation; and added a new Canon of Scripture to the Old
Testament, against the clearest evidence in the Records of the Universal
Church, that the Books they have newly received, were never acknowledged for
Canonical Scripture.

If by the Church indeed, they would understand, the Church truly Catholic,
the whole Body of Christ in all times, places and ages; and if by matters of
Faith, they would understand those grand Articles which I have mentioned in the
first part of this Discourse; and if by being Infallible, they would understand
not an absolute impossibility of erring (which humane nature is not capable of)
but not actual error: there are none of us make any question, but the Church is
Infallible. That is, the whole Church has not erred, nor shall not err, in the
whole Faith, or in any necessary part thereof: for such error would cut Men off
from Christ, the head; and so leave him no Church at all; which is impossible.
It has been the very scope of first my Discourse, to show that the Church has
always kept the great fundamental truths of our Religion, and not erred in
them; but transmitted them down to us, whole and undefiled: till the Church of
Rome, in the Council of Trent, corrupted the Faith, by their errors, which they
have mixed with it.

For to a particular Church, such as that of Rome is, we cannot allow this
privilege of not erring: because we know they have erred, even in fundamental
Truths, and thereby ceased to be Churches. Witness those glorious Churches, to
which Christ himself sent his Letters, by S. John the Apostle.

These Prerogatives therefore not belonging to any Church: every one must be
content with those two Offices before mentioned; which are sufficient. First,
The Office of a Witness testifying the authority of the Holy Scriptures, unto
its members: Secondly, of Gods instrument, by whose Ministry, in opening,
expounding, and urging the Holy Scriptures, the Holy Ghost begets a divine
Faith in us. And by performing these Offices, it supports, and continues, and
propagates the Truth; and so may be called the Pillar and Ground thereof.

The meaning of which I shall now distinctly set before the Readers eyes; that
I may give a short account of the fourth and last thing propounded in the
beginning.

IV.
How the Church may appropriate to it self this Title.

1. First, Every Church, and every person in it, especially the Bishops and
Pastors, are the Pillar and Ground of Truth, officio, by Duty and Office:
whereby they are obliged to keep, maintain and uphold the Truth. This always
was, and always will be incumbent on them; which is sufficient to fill up the
sense of such attributes as these: which do not always note performance of
Duty, but only obligation to it. As when our Savior says to his Disciples, Ye
are the salt of the Earth: it does not signify that they were necessarily so
(for he supposes immediately the salt might lose its savor) but that they
ought to be so; and if they were not so, would be good for nothing, but to be
cast out and trodden under foot. Matthew. V. 13.

2. But Secondly, The first Churches of Christ, in the Apostles times, were
actu and effectu, actually and effectually the Pillar of Truth: that is, they
faithfully discharged this Office, and performed their Duty, constantly
maintaining the Truth as it is in Christ, in its purity and simplicity. For the
Apostles were a part of those Churches, whom God led into all Truth: which they
taught sincerely and entirely while they lived; and do at this day, instruct
us, in the Holy Scriptures, in the whole Truth, necessary to our Salvation.

3. But we cannot say the same of all succeeding Churches, that they did
faithfully perform this office, though in duty they also were bound so to do.
No, some of them were so far from being Pillars of the Truth, that they let it
fall to the ground. We have strange instances of it, with which I shall not
fill these Papers, in the History of the Church: which show us that if we take
not heed to our selves, and the Doctrine that is delivered to us, we have no
security, that we, or any other particular Church, shall continue firm and
steadfast supporters of the Truth. For Pillars themselves may decay; and, if
they be not well looked after, will go to ruin, and fall to the Earth.

4. Even this very Church of Ephesus, which was a Pillar and Ground of Truth,
while Timothy presided in it, afterward began, before all the Apostles were
dead, to remit its first love and zeal for the Truth (II. Rev. 4.) and now is
utterly subverted and not to be found. Which is a demonstration the Apostle did
not in these words, intend to teach that the Church cannot err, but that (as I
said) it is in duty bound, by its calling and Office, to preserve the Truth
pure and entire. For he himself foresaw this Church would be haunted with
grievous Wolves, after his departure ( Act. XX. 29, 30.) who no doubt came in
Sheeps clothing: as they also among themselves did, who he foretold would arise
speaking perverse things to draw Disciples after them. And immediately after he
had here called the Church or Timothy, the Pillar of Truth; he admonishes him
(in the beginning of the next Chapter, IV. 1, 2.) that there would be an
apostasy from the Faith, as the Spirit expressly declared. For according to
what our Savior predicted, there was scarce any Church, but the Enemy sowed
Tares among the Wheat: which very much hindered the growth thereof. So we are
informed by Hegisippus, a very ancient Christian Historian; who Fu^b. L. III.
Eccles. Hist. c. 32.
says that as soon as the sacred Quire of Apostles were dead, and that
Generation was gone, who had heard the inspired Wisdom with their own ears,
then begun (...), a Conspiracy or Combination of impious or atheistical error,
by the deceit of false teachers; who make a bare-sac't opposition to the Truth
of the Gospel.

And yet for all this, the speech of the Apostle is proper enough: For a Church
or its Pastor may be the Pillar of Truth, in regard of their duty, as I have
often said, though they prove negligent in their Office. Just as the Priest
among the Jews was called, the messenger of the Lord of Hosts, whose lips
should so preserve knowledge, that the people should seek the Law at his mouth;
because this was the end of his Office, for which he was ordained: though at
the same time, the Prophet complains, that they were departed out of the way,
and caused many to stumble at the Law: and had corrupted the Covenant of Levi,
Mal. II. 7, 8. The like we read in other places of the holy Book, that the
Prophets were not true to their trust, but declared the visions of their own
heart, not the Word of the Lord: and lead the people into error and falsehood;
feeding them with lies, instead of Truth.

5. Further I must observe, that there is no promise made to any particular
Church, that it shall always be a Pillar of Truth: no not to the Church of
Rome, which now so boldly lays claim, and that solely, to this privilege. But
quite contrary there is a terrible threatening to this very Church, included in
that admonition which this very Apostle gives them. Which is sufficient to show
that Christ gave no such privilege to this Church, as that it should never
err: but directly contrary, supposed it might err, and err even to Apostasy;
when he bids them take heed lest they were cut off by unbelief, as the Jews
were, from the fellowship of the Saints. Read XI. Romans 20, 21, 22. They
(speaking of the Jews) were broken off by unbelief: and thou (speaking to the
Roman Christians) stand by faith. Be not high minded, but fear. (hearken to
this, O ye of the present Roman Church). For if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. Behold the goodness and
severity of God: on them which fell, severity; but toward thee, goodness, if
thou continue in his goodness: OTHERWISE THOU ALSO SHALL BE CVT OF.

From whence we may thus argue; if God had granted to the Roman Church, the
privilege of being a Pillar of Truth, infallibly and immutably, unto all
Generations; all these suppositions were vain, and these exhortations utterly
needless and frivolous: for it would have been absolutely impossible, it should
be cut off, and absolutely necessary it should continue. And yet the Apostle
plainly supposes otherwise, and took it for granted it might fail. For these
two are directly opposite, to stand and to fall; to continue, and to be cut
off; to be an Everlasting Pillar, and to be broken off. For it is proper to a
Pillar to stand and support: but to be cut off, (as he supposes they might be)
is to fall to the Ground, and not to be able to support ones self, much less
others.

Now that they of that Church have gone far toward this condition (according
to the Apostles supposition) by falsifying the Truth of Christ, even part of
the Apostolical Faith (and so have not continued a firm and steadfast Pillar of
Truth, but maintained and supported dangerous Errors and Heresies) is apparent
from this alone, if there were no more: that they limit and confine the
Catholic Church to themselves alone; and exclude all other Christians from
it, who will not submit to their Bishop and Decrees. The Impiety of which is so
great, that it is not easy to be expressed: for it is in Truth, to make the
Church not Catholic but Particular. How new, false, sacrilegious, scandalous,
schismatical and heretical, this one Article of the Roman Creed is; one of our
own Bishop Morto..
Bishops has demonstrated evidently in a Book on purpose (to which I refer the
Reader) which he had reason to call the GRAND IMPOSTURE.

It would enlarge this Treatise too much beyond my intention, or else it would
be easy to show, both when they began to let Truth fall to the Ground, and how
they proceeded to fail in their duty, and to betray their trust; till they
quite altered the ancient Catholic Faith, in the Council of Trent. Which now
they cry up as the great Pillar of Truth: when it did nothing but lend a lame
support to the most notorious falsehoods; which it established as Doctrines of
Faith, when they were before but erroneous Opinions in that Church. I call it
lame, because of the numerous flaws that there were, both in the constitution,
and in the proceedings of that Council; which make it of no Authority. For in
the very beginning of it Sess. IV.
, they decreed that no Man should wrest the Scripture, to a sense contrary to
that which the holy Mother Church ( i. e. themselves) has held and holds. And
so established all the Tenants of that Church, before they examined them by the
Scripture: and engaged themselves to contradict their own Decree, by wresting
the Scriptures to their own sense, for the maintenance of what their Church
then held. All the Bishops likewise, there assembled, were sworn to support the
Papacy of the Roman Church, and the Rules of the holy Fathers: whereby they
were obliged to maintain the Usurpations of that See upon all the Bishops in
the World; (whose Authority was thrown down, and thereby the Pillars of the
Truth (as I have shown them to be) trampled under foot, when Boniface was
declared Universal Bishop) and upon Kings and Princes, whom Hildebrand trod
under foot: yea upon the whole Church; over which Pope Leo exalted himself,
when he got it declared in the Lateran Council, that he was above a General
Council, and the Universal Church Sess. XI.
: being blasphemously called, by his flatterers, the Spouse of the Church, the
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. From which very Phrase of Spouse, no less Man than
Bellarmine L. II. de Council. Auctor. c. 17.
himself labors to prove the Pope to be absolutely above the Universal Church,
and above a General Council: because it is contrary to the Apostle, and to the
order of Nature, that the Wife should be above the Husband.

This is sufficient to show what we ought to think of the present Roman Church;
which is so far from being Infallible, that it has erred more than any other
Church.

6. But though there be no promise either to that or any other particular
Church, of being preserved from Error, yet the Universal Church, in some part
or other of it, we are sure will always be a Pillar and Ground of the whole
Truth, necessary to Salvation: because our Savior has promised the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. That is, the Church shall be perpetual:
which it cannot be, unless it hold the Truth entirely it is joined to Christ
its Head. And thus one of their own Cardinals (...) de (...) L. II. c. (...) L.
III. (...).
understood the Infallibility of the Church, with which they now make so much
noise. When we say, The Church cannot err in Faith or Manners, it must be thus
taken, according to the Doctrine of the Fathers; that God does so assist his
Church to the end of the World, that the true Faith shall never fail out of the
same. For to the World's end, there shall be no time, wherein some, though all,
shall not have true Faith working by Love. Unto this exposition we heartily
submit: but that the present Church of Rome, or indeed any other particular
Church, cannot degenerate, and depart from the right Faith, we can by no means
allow; but think our selves bound by the most sacred ties, to oppose these
arrogant pretenses, that the Church is Infallible, and that they are the
Church. They are no more the Church, than any other company of Men, professing
the Christian Faith: nor so much neither, for there are truer Believers than
they. I have proved also that other Churches have erred, and therefore so may
they: nay, they have erred, and that so grossly, as to be able by no other means
to maintain their errors, but by pretending they cannot err.

And therefore let no Man be so forgetful of these things as to trust them to
be his Guides; fancying they cannot mislead him. They have misled those that
rely upon them; and have led them into a maze, or labyrinth, in which it is
impossible for them to find their way, and know what is the Truth. For if we
should grant them their Church cannot err, they are not agreed, nor ever will,
what they mean by the Church. Whether the whole body of Christian People (which
is the new Heresy among them, as some of themselves call it) or a General
Council, (which the learned and best Men among them maintain) or the Pope:
who has a great many on his side; but they cannot agree, about the manner of
his definition (whether alone, or in a General Council), nor about the time
(whether at any time, or only when he resolves to publish Doctrines, as matter
of Faith), nor about the matter (whether all things, even matters of fact, or
only matters of Faith); and after all, no body can tell, when there is a true
Pope. So that all their Faith falls to the Ground, and they cannot be certain
of any thing they believe; because they cannot be certain of the very Ground
and Foundation of their Faith: which is their Church.

These things I have only briefly touched (which are more largely handled in
other Books) that the Readers may be sensible how happy they are who are freed
from these Impostures. And that our People may know their duty, in this Church
of England, whereof by the Grace of God they are Members; I shall conclude this
Treatise with Six Considerations more: whereby the whole, I hope, will be made
more useful.

I. First, I desire every one, to consider, from what I have said, that this
Church, in which we are, is certainly as much a Pillar and Ground of Truth, as
any other: nay, more than many other Churches. For we openly profess and recite
twice a day in our own Language, that every one may understand it, the whole
Christian Faith, comprised in the Apostles Creed: with the explication of some
part of this Faith, by the Nicene Fathers, once every week or more: and a more
distinct Explication of the same Articles, by Athanasius, once a month. That
is, we hold, and assert, and maintain, all those things which have always been,
and are confessed by all Christians: the True, Ancient, Catholic and
Apostolic Faith; and the Holy Scriptures, wherein this Faith is Originally
contained. And if we knew any thing else to be the mind of God, delivered to us
from Christ and his Apostles, by the Universal Church, we are prepared to
receive it; and, did it appear, would immediately embrace and propagate it. But
the Universal Church, as I have shown, has declared this to be sufficient, nay
full and perfect: and moreover, forbidden any other Faith to be either
composed, or offered, to those who would become Christians. To all which (that
I have said in the First Part) this memorable saying of Pope Leo Epist. ad
Pulcheriam Augustam.
the Great may be added: The short and perfect Confession of the Catholic
Symbol (or Creed) it self, which is sealed in as many sentences, as there were
Apostles, ( i. e. XII. Articles) is so instructed with Caelestial munition (or
defense) that all the opinions of Heretics, with this Sword alone, may be cut
in pieces.

II. And therefore, Secondly, every one of us is bound, ^nless we will betray
our trust, and as we will answer it to our Lord Christ, the Author of our
Faith, to hold fast this Faith, to preserve it entire, and to defend it: not
suffering any of it to be lost, or any addition to be made to it, as if this
were not sufficient to Salvation. Take fast hold of instruction, (of those
great substantial, unquestionable Truths, mentioned in the beginning) let them
not go, keep them, for they are your life: as Solomon speaks of Wisdom, IV.
Prove. 13. They are the Wisdom of God our Savior; the Rule which the Apostles
preached equally among all Nations (as Venantius Fortunatus Praefat. in Symbol.
speaks) the comprehension, and perfection of our Faith (as S. Austin S^rm. CXV
de Te^p.
, or an Ancient Author under his name) the Test (as I have shown) and Mark,
whereby the Faithful are distinguished from Unbelievers and Heretics. And
having this Note of a Christian; you ought neither to seek for, nor to admit of
any other: being endued with this Wisdom, you ought to think your selves wise
unto Salvation. And not be in the least moved with the bugbear name of
Heretics, or the empty noise of Damnation, which they of the Church of Rome
thunder out against you. For they signify nothing but the wrath-of those, who
would drive you into the belief of that, by frights and terrors; into which
they cannot draw you by solid proofs and arguments. Turn away your Ears both
from the one and the other: for as the former is an insignificant sound, so the
latter (all their Arguments) are but confident Sophistry. Which has been, and
is at this day, so evidently demonstrated by our Writers: that they can have no
excuse who are deceived by them.

III. And thus every one is bound to teach his Children diligently; instructing
and confirming them in these main Points of Christianity: that so the Truth may
live, when we are gone.

Consider, I beseech you, what a necessary duty this is. How should the Truth
be preserved and supported, but by those that believe it? And how should they
believe it, who do not understand it? And how should they understand it, unless
they be taught and instructed in it? And who so much concerned to instruct
their Children, as they that brought them into the World? Their Godfathers and
Godmothers indeed are engaged to see this done; but their Parents have a
further, even a natural obligation to it. And therefore ought first of all
diligently to inform themselves; and by attending to all the means of
instruction, which they have in this Church, to increase in true Christian
knowledge: that they may be able to teach those who are committed to their
care, and prepare them to be catechized and further instructed by those whom
God has set over them.

We are not Pillars and supporters of the Truth, but the betrayers of it; if we
take no care about this. Which is one great reason why some have easily
forsaken the true Religion here taught and professed, and condemned this Church
(an horrid crime, if you seriously weigh the consequents of it) by renouncing
Communion with it, as no part of the Body of Christ. Men may be soon persuaded,
by confident talkers, to part with that, which they do not understand:
especially if they apprehend any danger in keeping it, or hope to gain by
letting it go. Why should they hazard the least hair of their Head, for they
know not what? Nay, why should they be at all concerned for it, any more than a
Man is for the seed that is scattered in the Highway, from which he expects no
Crop? To that, you know, our blessed Lord compared him that hears the word of
the Kingdom, and understands it not: for then comes the wicked one, and
catches away that which was sown in his heart, Matthew. XIII. 19.

IV. You must endeavor therefore to profit by all such instructions as these:
and to grow in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures; where God has revealed
his whole mind and will to you, and plainly published all those Truths, which
belong to the great mystery of godliness. You ought, for instance, to take
heed, how you wantonly and loosely interpret, or apply them, according to your
own sudden or careless fancies (that is a great profanation of the Sacred Books)
and yet you must not, for fear of this, be persuaded to throw them out of your
hands; but rather with the more solemn, humble and reverend awe of God, upon
your Souls, ponder and weigh what you read therein: especially those things
which are plain and evident to every understanding, that by the help of them,
and of those whom God has set over you to guide and direct your minds; you may
either inform your understanding in what appears to have difficulty in it, or
satisfy your selves that it is not necessary you should understand it.

For they that would drive you from this hold of the Holy Scriptures, intend to
deceive you; and would have you depend on that which is far more uncertain,
than the meaning of any place of Scripture can be. There is no firm ground for
us to stand upon, but only this: which all acknowledge is the very word of God,
and delivers that, which has been ever accounted the substance of Christian
Doctrines; in such words as every one may understand them.

And therefore this is, as I have said, the very foundation upon which the
Church is built. Which is the Pillar of Truth, as it defends the Truth out of
the Scriptures, and by the Scriptures, against all Heretics and other
opposers: and as it establishes and supports it, in the hearts of Men, by this
means, that it may be continued to Posterity. This must be added, for the
explication of all that has been said; that the Church, and every person in
it, great or small, are Pillars not by themselves, but by the Holy Scriptures.
For we know those things that belong to our Salvation (as Irenaeus Adv. Hereses
L. III. C. 1.
begins his Third Book) by no other persons, than those by whom the Gospel came
to us: which then truly they preached, but afterward, by the will of God
deliverd to us in the Scriptures, fundamentum and Columnam fidei nostrae
futurum, to be the FOUNDATION and PILLAR of our Faith. Upon these our Faith
rests and relys: so that they who take the Scriptures from you, take away the
Foundation and Pillar of that Truth, which is or ought to be taught in the
Church, and that alone. They contain the mind and will of our Lord Christ: who
himself being the first Foundation, and chief Pillar of all, Epiphanius Here Is.
LXIX. N^m. 35.
applies these words to him. When he says our Lord is called the door, because
by him we enter in; and the way, because by him we walk; and the Pillar,
because (...); (the very words of S. Paul in this place) the ground, or
settlement and stay of Truth. And in like manner S. Cyril L. III. de Adoral. in
Sp. and Veritate.
of Alexandria, says the Pillar of a Cloud, and the Pillar of Fire, each of
them represented Christ, because first of all, (...), he is the Pillar and
Ground of Truth; and then because he cannot be shaken or disturbed, etc. which
he repeats again upon another occasion, speaking of the pillars which supported
the Curtains of the Tabernacle; Christ is to be understood, says he, Ib. Lib.
IX.
in each Pillar, (...), etc. the prop of the Church, the Ground of Truth,
according to the words of Paul. And in the next Book L. X.
speaking of the four pillars which supported the Vail before the holy place;
he says that Vail was a figure of Christ, who was lifted up on high by the
preaching of the Evangelists: and therefore he says, the four Evangelists were
typified by those four pillars: being equally eminent and precious, more
valuable than Gold and Silver.

Which shows that the Ancient Christians looked upon the Church as the Pillar
and Ground of Truth, no other ways, but as it professes, preaches, establishes,
and keeps up, the Doctrine of Christ and of his Apostles, recorded in the Holy
Scriptures: unto all which they indifferently apply these words of S. Paul,
which are thought immediately to speak of the Church; which supports the Truth
delivered in the Holy Scriptures, from Christ and from his Apostles.

Upon which account the Creed also, which is a comprehensive breviary of the
great Scripture Doctrines, is wont to have the same attribute given to it.
Particularly by Epiphanius, In Exposit. fidei Cathol. n. 19.
who calls it, (...), the Pillar (as the Greek word signifies in good Authors)
or prop of Truth, etc. our life, our hope, and the assurance of immortality.
And by S. Austin De Symbolo ad Catechum. L. III. C. 1.
, who tells the Catechumens in his Exposition of the Creed to them, that it is
fidei Catholicae fundamentum, etc. the Foundation of the Catholic Faith, upon
which the edifice of the Church arose, built by the hands of the Apostles and
Prophets. Which has made some learned Men Jo. Camer. Jac. Capellus.
refer these words of S. Paul not to what goes before, but to the words
following: making a full stop at God; and then beginning a new sentence, in
this manner. The Pillar and Ground of the Truth, and without Controversy great
is the mystery of godliness, etc. which reading is countenanced by a Greek
Edition of the New Testament at Basil 1540. where the words are so pointed; as
if the sense were this. God incarnate, and the great Truths depending
thereupon; ought to be the very Foundation of the Doctrine thou preachest. The
Doctrines of the Creed, that is, are the very Foundation and Pillars of the
Christian Faith: as the Jews, it is known call, the great principle of their
Religion, the Foundation of the Foundation, the Pillar of Wisdom, as Maimon
speaks when he treats of this matter.

Stick close therefore to the Holy Scriptures, and to these Articles of the
Faith in the Apostles Creed, which are the fundamental truths of Christianity
(it appears by what I have now said) by which the Church maintains and defends
the Truth, and the Truth upholds the Church, and we defend both.

Hold this fast, as the ground of all; and likewise lay up the word of God in
your heart, that it may setle there, and take root, and bring forth fruit unto
Holiness, that your end may be everlasting Life.

Make the Holy Scriptures your Rule, and trust to them, according to what the
Son of Sirach says of its ancient Books, Ecclus. XXXIII. 3. A Man of
understanding trusts in the Law; and the Law is faithful to him as an Oracle,
or, as the asking of Vrim. That is, here he may enquire, and have a certain
answer which will not deceive him.

Show your selves such Men of understanding, as to enquire no where else. And
if any Church or Person would have you enquire of them only; take that for an
undoubted proof, they are not to be trusted. If they would not guide you by the
Holy Scriptures, (that is, by Christ, the way, as you have seen, who has shown
us, no where else that we know of, what we ought to believe) if they would have
you follow their ungrounded Traditions, whereby they would enlarge your Creed,
beyond the ancient bounds: know that you ought not to follow them, nor be led
by them. For such may soon cease to be the pillars and supporters of the Truth;
because they leave that whereby they should support it, and place themselves
(whom they call the Church) in the stead of it.

An evident sign they are not what they pretend: for the Church it self ought
to be demonstrated by the Scriptures. So S. Austin L. de Vnitate Ecclesiae,
cap. XVI.
tells the Donatists in those known words, which are worthy to be preserved in
remembrance. Setting aside all such things as these (which he had said they
could likewise allege) let them demonstrate their Church if they can, not in
the discourses and rumors of the Africans, not in the Councils of their
Bishops, not in the Letters of any disputers whatsoever, not in signs and
fallacious wonders (for we are prepared and rendered cautious against these by
the word of the Lord) but in the prescript of the Law, in the predictions of
the Prophets, in the Songs of the Psalms, in the words of the SHEPHERD himself,
(i. e. Christ) in the preachings and labors of the Evangelists; that is in all
the Canonical authorities of the holy Books. Let this be done so, as not to
gather and relate those things, which are obscurely, or ambiguously, or
figuratively spoken there; which every one may interpret, as he pleases,
according to his own sense. For such things cannot be rightly understood and
expounded; unless those things which are most clearly spoken, be first held by
a firm Faith.

This is the very sense of the Church of England; which teaches all her
members, first to hold by a firm Faith those things which are clearly revealed
in the Holy Scriptures; and by them to understand and expound those things that
are more obscurely delivered: believing nothing to be necessary which is not
read therein, nor may be proved thereby: nor receiving the Doctrines and
Decrees of any Church, unless it may be declared that they be taken from
thence. For haec sunt causae nostrae documenta, haec fundamenta, haec
firmamenta (as he there speaks, you heard before) These are the proofs of our
Cause, these are its foundations, these are its supports. And therefore, as he
also speaks in another Chapter of the same Book Cap. III. de Vnitate Ecclesiae.
, which he begins thus. Let us not hear such speeches as these, These things
say I, Those things say thou: but let us hear, These things says the LORD.
These are certainly Books of the Lord, to whose authority we both consent, we
both believe, we both obey. There let us seek the Church, there let us discuss
our Cause. And let us not so much as think of looking after any other Articles
of Faith, but those which were from the beginning, which our Church firmly
believes, in the three Creeds, Nice-Creed, Athanasius, and that commonly called
the Apostles Article VIII.
because they may be proved by most certain warrants of Holy Scripture. For
after the Faith confessed and sworn in Baptism (as S. Hilary Ad Constantium
August.
speaks) we ought not quicquam aliud vel ambigere, vel innovare, either to
doubt or innovate any other thing. It is absurd, that is, to doubt whether this
be sufficient; or to add any other to it, as if this were not enough. So he
interprets it a little after. Faith is still inquired after, as if there were
no Faith already: Faith is to be written, as if it were not in the heart: being
regenerated by Faith, we are now taught what to believe, as if that
Regeneration were without Faith. We learn Christ after Baptism; as if there
could be any Baptism, without the Faith of Christ. It is most safe for us (as
it follows a little after) to retain that first and only Evangelical Faith,
confessed and understood in Baptism.

V. And that a good and righteous cause may have good defenders and supporters;
let us read the Holy Scriptures wherein this Faith is contained chiefly for
this end, that we may order our steps, that is, our Lives and Conversation,
according to the rule of God's word. Let us always remember, that our Religion
is a mystery of godliness, as was shown before; in which we are not well
instructed, if it do not teach us, to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and
to live soberly, righteously and godly in the World. Which is the best way also
to continue in the Faith, (...) (as the Apostle speaks, most agreeable to these
words, which he writes to Timothy) grounded and settled, or stable and steadfast.
Colos. I. 23. For they are the good ground, in the Church, who in an bonest and
good heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience. Luke VIII. 15. As much as to say; if we would stand fast in the
Faith, and not fall away (as our Savior says, others would do in time of
trial, v. 13.) we must, first, come to hear and read the word of God, with
unprejudiced minds and upright hearts; desiring to know the Truth, and resolved
to receive it, though never so contrary to our present inclinations and
interests.

This is the honest and good heart, which (secondly) must keep and preserve in
mind and heart, what it has thus received: and not presently let it slip, or
lay it aside, as a thing never to be thought of more, after we have heard it.
And (lastly) we must, not only in a warm fit of zeal begin to put in practice
what we learn, but, bring forth fruit with patience or continuance.

This is the way both to draw others into the Church, and to continue our
selves in it, and to make us constant defenders of the Christian Faith: That
is, to do our part in this great Office, of being the Pillar and Ground of
Truth. Which is a thing incumbent upon the whole Church, and consequently upon
every one of us, who are members of it. And therefore remember, that the
Christian Religion, for which we are to be Zealous, is the acknowledgement of
the Truth after godliness, as I said before, Tit. I. 1. It is the Doctrine of
piety; to the study of which if we seriously and heartily apply our selves, it
will be our best security against all impostures: and preserve us from the
subtle and crafty insinuations of those who corrupt or pervert the Christian
Doctrine: and finally be the most powerful means to make Christianity prevail
in the World.

Remember the advice of S. Paul to this Church of Ephesus, Ephesians. IV. 14.15.
where you may find the true way to continue firm and steadfast, and not to be
tossed about, as Children, with every blast of Doctrine, etc. and that is
(...), by speaking, or rather following the Truth in love: or (according to the
Hebrew Dialect) being fixed and established, in the love of God and of one
another. For the Hebrew word Aman (to which (...) answers) signifies not only
to speak Truth, but likewise, to be firm and constant, fixed and established:
which if we be, we shall have a settled, unmovable confidence of God's Love
and Favor toward us. For he that heartily loves God and his Neighbor, will
never be startled, much less shaken, by their bold Anathemas, though all the
World should tell him, he shall be damned, if he do not believe this or that
proposition which they say is absolutely necessary to his Salvation: because
there is something within him that gives them the lie, and assures him there is
no truth in them, who say that God hates and will reject him, who believes all
the ancient Faith, which works by Love. God himself testifies the contrary, by
making the Truth efficacious in his heart, to purge him from all filthiness
both of Flesh and Spirit: and by changing him into his own likeness, in
Holiness, Love, and Goodness. And the more thoroughly any Man is renewed in the
spirit. of his mind; the more perfectly will he be assured, that they pronounce
a false judgment upon him: and consequently be the more heartily resolved
against that Religion, which makes men so liberal in pouring out Curses upon
all them that do not embrace its novel opinions.

Which brings me to the last thing I would have considered, that,

VI. We do not perform our duty, (I may safely affirm, nay, confidently aver)
we are not the Pillar and Stay of Truth, as we ought to be; unless every one of
us in our several Places and Stations, oppose, with a becoming Zeal, the
Errors, Innovations, and Encroachments of the Church of Rome: who are the Men
that are, of all other, most guilty of the, just-now named, Uncharitableness,
or rather Pride and Cruelty. For they utterly un-Church us; and, as much as in
them lies, cut us off from the Body of Christ; and bar the Gates of the Kingdom
of Heaven against us. By this alone, if there were nothing else, we are sure
they have grossly erred, and live in error; that they deny us to be a part of
Christ's Church: who believe and confess with Heart and Mouth the whole
Catholic Faith; every thing that is (...), confessedly, and by Universal
consent, the Ancient Christian Belief; in which the Apostles and Martyrs died,
by which alone Righteous Souls, for many Ages, went to Heaven; knowing nothing
of the Pope's Supremacy, of Transubstantiation, of the Propitiatory Sacrifice
of the Mass for quick and dead, and the rest of their new inventions.

We deserve not the name of Christians, no nor of Men, if we stand not up
resolutely, against such usurpations and corruptions of the Christian Doctrine,
and maintain that Faith, which we profess and wherein we stand, to be the true
Grace of God; the Faith once delivered to the Saints. Which is incumbent
chiefly upon the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, who, I have shown, are the
Principal Pillars of the Truth, (as Timothy was in the Church of Ephesus) and
therefore ought to appear, with all their might, for the support of God's true
Religion here established: instructing, teaching, exhorting, all committed to
their charge to be steadfast and immovable in it to the death. And every honest
hearted Christian ought to do the same, in his rank and condition, by following
those instructions, by fortifying himself against Romish delusions; by
endeavoring to understand the Truth, and to detect their Errors.

Which are the more earnestly to be opposed, because the new Articles of their
Creed, are not a Mystery of Godliness; but tend, many of them, to nurse Men up
securely in their sins: such as the Doctrines of Purgatory, of Indulgences, of
Penances, and (to name to more) of Infallibility: which being presumed, as an
unquestionable Principle, is apt to lead Men in the most dangerous errors, and
the foulest sins, without any remedy or possibility of recovery, whenever the
Infallible Guide shall propound them.

This pernicious Doctrine, I may add, seems also to be deeply rooted in all
their minds; that an Orthodox Belief will save them. For this they make the
great business of Christianity, to bring Men, as they think, to such a Faith:
as appears by this, that let Men be never so bad, their labor is not bestowed
to make them quit their Sins, but to bring them to their Belief; where, for any
thing I can see or hear, they may quietly enjoy them. Nay, there are a number
of little devices, to put them in hope of Heaven, without reforming their
lives; provided they Believe as the Church Believes.

And in this let me beseech all that read these Papers, to take a special care,
that they do not imitate them. Let us be watchful, that we do not put a greater
Cheat upon our selves, than they would do: by imagining our selves good
Christians, merely because we Zealously oppose the Errors of Popery. That we
ought to do; but not leave the great Thing, the amending of our Lives, undone.
For may we not destroy and pull down by a wicked life, as much as we build up
by contending for the Faith? How can others think that we are so much
concerned, as we seem to be for Truth; when we make no use of it; but let it
lie dead in our minds? What pity is it, that their hearts should not love that
which is good, whose minds are enlightened to discern that which is true? That
their understandings being convinced, their wills should not also be converted?
It is a lamentable thing, to profess that we know God, but in our Works deny
him. This makes us look as if we were of a Faction, rather than of the
Faithful: who oppose others rather as our Enemies, than as Christ's; as those
that differ from us, rather than as those that differ from the Truth.

For if it be the Truth, that we Reverence, why do we not let it Rule and
Govern us? Why do we not love to have it nearer to us, than in our Brains? even
in our Hearts and Affections. For there is no greater Truth than this, that
Ungodliness is the worst of Heresies; a wicked life the most opposite, of all
other things, to the Christian Faith.

Let us never forget therefore that Admonition of the Apostle in the First
Chapter of this Epistle to Timothy, v. 19. Hold faith and a good conscience:
which he repeats again, in the Third Chapter to the Deacons, whom he exhorts,
to hold the mystery of says in a pure conscience, v. 9. For if we put away a
good conscience, we may easily make Shipwreck, even of our faith. Which we have
just cause to think, is the reason why some have fallen from this truly
Apostolic Church of ours, Concerning which, and concerning whom, I may say, as
Epiphanius Haeres XI. (...) 8.
(putting this place, I have been expounding, and some others together) makes
the Apostle speak to Timothy: It is the Church of the living God, the pillar
and ground of truth: which many forsaking, are turned (...), to fables and
foolish bablings: neither understanding what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

FINIS.
Books lately printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By GILBERT BVRNET, D.
D. in two Volumes. Folio.

The Moderation of the Church of England, in her Reformation, in avoiding all
undue Compliances with Popery, and other sorts of Phanaticism, etc. by TIMOTHY
PVLLER, D. D. Octavo.

A Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient Church: more
particularly of the Encroachments of the Bishops of Rome upon other Sers. By
WILLIAM CAVE, D. D. Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Serjeant's [Sure Footing in Christianity] concerning the Rule
of Faith: With some other Discourses. By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D. 4o.

A Vindication of the Ordinations of the Church of England; in Answer to a
Paper written by one of the Church of Rome, to prove the Nullity of our Orders.
By GILBERT BVRNET, D. D. Octavo.

An Abridgment of the History of the Reformation of the Church of England. By
GILB. BVRNET, D. D. Octavo.

The APOLOGY of the Church of England; and an Epistle to one Signior Scipio, a
Venetian Gentleman, concerning the Council of Trent. Written both in Latin, by
the Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN JEWEL, Lord Bishop of Salisbury: Made
English by a Person of Quality. To which is added, The Life of the said Bishop:
Collected and written by the same Hand. Octavo.

A LETTER writ by the last Assembly General of the Clergy of France to the
Protestants, inviting them to return to their Communion. Together with the
Methods proposed by them for their Conviction. Translated into English, and
Examined, by GILB. BVRNET, D. D. Octavo.

The Life of WILLIAM BEDEL, D. D. Bishop of Kilmore in Ireland. Together with
Certain Letters which passed betwixt him and James Waddesworth (a late
Pensioner of the Holy Inquisition of Sevil) in Matter of Religion, concerning
the General Motives to the Roman Obedience. Octavo.

The Decree made at ROME the Second of March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of
the Jesuits, and other Casuists. Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome. Quarto. First and Second Parts.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.
Quarto.

A Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Reply to the Reflections
upon the Answer to [A Papist Misrepresented and Represented]. Quarto.

An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the several
Articles proposed by the late BISHOP of CONDOM, [in his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.] Quarto.

A Desence of the Exposition of the Doctrine of the CHVRCH of ENGLAND, against
the EXCEPTIONS of Monsieur de MEAVK, late Bishop of Condom, and his VINDICATOR.
Quarto.

An Answer to THREE PAPERS lately printed, concerning the Authority of the
Catholic Church in Matters of Faith, and the Reformation of the Church of
England. Quarto.

A Vindication of the Answer to SOME LATE PAPERS concerning the Unity and
Authority of the Catholic Church, and Reformation of the Church of England.
Quarto.

An Historical Treatise written by an AUTHOR of the Communion of the CHVRCH of
ROME, touching TRANSVBSTANTIATION. Wherein is made appear, That according to
the Principles of THAT CHVRCH, This Doctrine cannot be an Article of Faith.
Quarto.

A CATECHISM explaining the Doctrine and Practices of the Church of Rome; with
an Answer thereunto. By a Protestant of the Church of England. Octavo.

A Papist Represented and not Misrepresented: Being an Answer to the First,
Second, Firth and Sixth Sheets of the Second Part of the [Popish Representer];
and for a further Vindication of the CATECHISM, truly reprsenting the Doctrine
and Practices of the Church of Rome. Quarto. In 3. Discourses.

The Lay-Christian's Obligations to read the Holy Scriptures. Quarto.

The Plain Man's Reply to the Catholic Missionaries. 24o.

The Protestant's Companion: Or an Impartial Survey, and Comparison of the
Protestant Religion as by Law established, with the main Doctrines of Popery.
Wherein is shown, that Popery is contrary to Scripture, Primitive Fathers and
Councils; and that Proved from Holy Writ, the Writings of the Ancient Fathers,
for several hundred Years, and the Confession of the most Learned Papists
themselves. Quarto.

A Discourse of the Holy Eucharist, in the two great points of the Real
Presence and the Adoration of the Host. In Answer to the two Discourses lately
printed at Oxford on this Subject. To which is prefixed a large Historical
Preface relating to the same Argument. Quarto.

The Pillar and Ground of Truth. A Treatise showing that the Roman Church
falsely claims to be That Church, and the Pillar of That Truth, mentioned by S.
Paul in his First Epistle to Timothy, Chap. III. Verse. 15. Quarto.

A Brief Discourse concerning the Notes of the Church, with some reflections on
Cardinal Bellarmin's Fifteen Notes. Quarto.

An Examination of the Cardinal's First Note, concerning [The Name of
Catholick]. -- His Second Note, [Antiquity]. -- His Third Note, [Duration]. --
His Fourth Note, [Amplitude or Multitude, and variety of Believers]. -- His
Fifth Note, [The Succession of Bishops]. -- His Sixth Note, [Agreement in
Doctrine with the Primitive Church]. -- His Seventh Note, [Vnion of the Members
among themselves, and with the Head].


(The rest will be published Weekly in their Order).

A Defense of the Confuter of Bellarmin's Second Note of the Church [Antiquity]
against the Cavills of the Adviser. Quarto.

In the Press.
THE Peoples Right to read the Holy Scriptures asserted. In Answer to the 6th,
7th, 8th, 9th and 10th Chapters of the [Popish Representer].

Two Discourses: Of Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead. Quarto.

A Short Summary of the Principal Controversies between the Church of England,
and the Church of Rome. Being a Vindication or several Pr^testant Doctrines, in
Answer to a late Pamphlet entitled [Protestancy destitute of Scripture Proofs].

FINIS.

