CHRIST ALL and in ALL.

OR, Several significant similitudes by which the Lord Jesus Christ is
described in the holy SCRIPTURES.

Being the substance of many Sermons Preached by that faithful and useful
servant of Christ Mr. RALPH ROBINSON, late Pastor at Mary Wolnoth London.

Which were appointed by the Reverend Author on his Deathbed (if his Brethren
should think fit) to be published.

(...), Col. 3. 11.

Sufficit omnibus unus Christus. Christus omnia factus est omnibus.

Ambros. Aridus est omnis animae cibus, si non oleo isto infunditur, infipidus
est si non hoc sale conditur. Si scribas non sapit mihi, nisi legero ibi Jesum,
si disputes aut conferas, non sapit mihi, nisi son^erit ibi Jesus. Jesus mei in
ore, melos in aure in cord jubilus.

Bernard. Sermon. 15. in Cant. LONDON, Printed for John Rothwel, and are to be
sold by Thomas Johnson, at the golden Key in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1656.

TO THE Reader.
Christian Reader,
THis profitable Treatise may occasion both sorrow and joy unto our selves and
many others, who were well acquainted with the Reverend Author.

1. Grief, by minding us of our great loss in his death. As the widows were
found weeping, while they showed the coats Acts 9. 39.
and garments which Dorcas made while she was with them.

2. Gladness, in that though he be dead, he Heb. 11, 4.
yet speaks, not only by his holy life, but also by his useful labors, for
both which Psa. 112. 6.
he shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

This good man had high natural abilities, which were heightened by industry,
and brightened by his graces, but he always had a low esteem of himself and his
services. When he was on his deathbed, he said, that he judged not any of his
papers worthy publishing, but yet he looked upon these as most probably
profitable. In these Sermons we have the lively picture of the man in his
Ministerial capacity drawn up by his own pen, represented to the Readers view:
whereby is fully discovered his laborious longings after the excellency of the
Phil. 3. 8.
knowledge of Jesus Christ his Lord, to be improved for his own personal
benefit, and communicated for the edification of his Auditors. By his opening
the Scripture Metaphors, which familiarly reveile Christ, besides the many
notions which shall be beamed into the understanding, the
serious-musing-Christian will be much advantaged in occasional meditations.

If when these Sermons have been diligently perused, there could be a clear
discovery annexed of the Authors gifts for prayer (which were more then
ordinary) to gether with his pious winning conversation, cheerful readiness to
be assistant in all religious exercises (wherein he was lovely and exemplary)
Then the judicious Reader would lamentingly say, Oh how great was Londons loss
by the death of worthy Master Robinson taken away in his youth, when growing
toward greater maturity for the further service of the Church of Christ. In
Gods counsels for the managing of Isreal's wars with their adversaries, this
charge was given, that fruit-bearing trees should not be cut down, and that
Deu. 20. 19
upon this account, for the tree of the ^^^d is man's life. The application here
of may be (as we humbly conceive) seasonable for the awakening of secure
Christians who be not affected with the removal of their fruitful Ministers out
of the land of the living. For thus we argue; Might not man extirpate a
vegitative plant, growing in the field of foes, because it was a means of life,
how great divine displeasure then do those providence express against this
City and Nation, whereby most generous plants in Gods own Orchard are cut down,
and cast into the dust! How startling are such dispensations, whereby the Lord
himself by the strokes of his own hand, takes away so many Ministers, Pastors
according to his own Jer. 3. 15.
heart who were wont to feed the souls of his friends with knowledge and
understanding? But yet his Majesty has not left us without manifold means of
strong support and consolation, for ever blessed be his Name. We have just
occasion to break forth into praises, in the language of the Psalmist, The Lord
lives, and blessed be our rock, Ps. l. 18. 39
and let the God of our salvation be exalted.

For. 1. We have not only this useful Treatise with very many more excellent
books, the fruits of the heads and hearts of Gods worthies (with the
expectation of more, to be made public) for our confirmation and edification
in grace, but we enjoy the labors of many famous, orthodox, learned, rightly
constituted Ministers, both in this City and other parts of this Nation, whose
lives and liberties, with hearts to do service, are still continued through
Gods mercy, notwithstanding our all-forfeiting sins; together with the malice
of Satan, and the inveterate rage of his instruments, who act against the
Gospel under different disguises and apprehensions, of whom we may say; They
compassed us about, yea, Ps. 118. 11 12, 13, 14.
they compassed us about; They compassed us about like Bees. They thrust sore
at us that we might fall, but the Lord helped us. The Lord is our strength and
song, and is become our salvation.

2. We enjoy the sweet influential presence of his al sufficient Majesty in our
Church Assemblies though they be despised and deserted by many ignorant,
passionate, rash, self-conceited persons) in the virtue whereof we do walk and
hope to walk from strength to strength, in the ways of his truth and fear,
notwithstanding all our present and further expected difficulties in our
journey toward heaven. Somewhat through Gods grace we do experimentally know;
of that river, the streams whereof Ps. 46. 4.
will make glad the City of God; And we remember that brave speech of
magnanimous Luther, when dangers from opposers did threaten him and his
associates, Come let us sing the forty sixth Psalm, and then let them do
their worst.

3. And this especially does relieve our spirits, that the Almighty (upon whom
we do and will depend) is independent and Isa. 26. 4.
unchangeable. For, howsoever we do need Ordinances as the means appointed to
build us up yet further, till God shall be pleased Acts 20. 32
to give us the promised inheritance in glory, Acts 17. 25
yet his Highness neither needs Ministry, nor Ordinances, nor any such
things, but can easily, and will infallibly accomplish all the precious
promises of his rich grace, though more of our best gifted Ministers with the
most taking means of our spiritual advantage should be quite removed from our
reach and use. Those breathings of faith recorded by the Prophet Habakkuk, are
warming, in such cases, to believing souls. Although the fig tree shall not
blossom, Hab 3. 17, 18
neither shall fruit be in the vines, etc. yet I will rejoice in the Lord, I
will joy in the God of my salvation.

4. But hereto we may annex the encouragement of our hopes, that our eyes shall
still (according to Gods promise) see Isa. 30. 20
our Teachers, and that we shall not be left 2 Chr. 15. 3
without God through the want of a true Gospel Ministry. 1. Both because of
his abiding compassions (notwithstanding our ill deservings) from whence in
former ages his Church has been supplied with a succession of faithful,
painful Ambassadors, 2 Chr. 36. 15
though there have been therein many people of very high provocations. 2. And
also, because there is a considerable accession of young men, rich in gifts and
graces, who from time to time seek entrance into the Ministry through the
right door of Ordination, though it be an Ordinance woefully slighted by
multitudes, yea, by some who pretend much love unto the Gospel. And therefore
seeing Christ who holds the stars in his right hand, is obliged Rev. 1. 16.
Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13.
to maintain his own Officers in the Church, till his Saints arrive at
perfection; we his Ministers in reference to our calling, may boldly say, We
shall not die, but live and declare the works of the Lord. Reader, Ps. 118 15
believe it, Nothing more endangereth the loss of the Gospel, then contempt and
none proficiency. Therefore once and again we most heartily entreat thee to
prize and to improve a Gospel Ministry, and all other means of grace which the
God of thy mercies does yet vouchsafe. To him that has, (and fruitfully
tradeth what he is trusted with) shall be given, and he shall have abundance.
Mat. 23. 29
Let not this book be received in vain, which the good hand of providence does
now tender unto thee. This field is full of Gospel treasures dug out of
Scripture mines, for thine enriching in the knowledge of Christ: and what
knowledge is so necessary, excellent, or profitable? For from hence do issue
all things which pertain unto life and godliness. Hereby our love to Christ
is 2 Pet. 1. 3.
enflamed, our longings after him enlarged, our faith in him confirmed, our
joys in him raised, yea, by the knowledge of him he is possessed and improved,
both for growth in all graces, augmenting of all spiritual comforts, and
preparation for everlasting glory. Therefore commending this book, which has
by one of us been diligently and carefully compared with the Authors own
notes;) together with all thy other helps for heaven, unto thy faithful
improvement; we commend thee to the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel Romans
15. 29
through Jesus Christ, in whom we desire always to approve our selves.

May 28. 1656. The real friends and servants of thy soul Simeon Ash. Edm.
Calamy. William Tailor.

A TABLE Of the several DOCTRINES handled in this TREATISE.
1. A Prelimunary Sermon to the whole discourse that Christ is All and in All.
page 1 2. Christ a Christians life. 11 3. Christ a Christians food. 39 4.
Christ's righteousness the Christians robe. 67 5. Christ the Protector. 87 6.
Jesus Christ the Physician. 119 7. Christ the true light. 225 8. Jesus Christ
the great Shepherd. 249 9. Jesus Christ the true Vine. 282 10. Christ the horn
of salvation. 324 11. Christ the dew of heaven. 351 12. Christ the chief corner
stone. 385 13. Christ to the wicked a stone of stumbling. 432 14. Christ the
Sun of righteousness. 455 15. Christ's Name a precious ointment. 487 16.
Jesus Christ the consolation of Israel. 509 17. Christ the fountain opened for
penitent sinners. 555 Second Part of the Table.
18. CHrist the Lamb of God. 1 19. Christ a bundle of myrrh. 3 20. Christ the
way. 16 21. Christ the truth. 40 22 Christ the glory of his people. 80 23.
Christ the gift of God. 81 24. Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith. 101
25. Christ the rock. 121 26. The Word of Christ the sword of the spirit. 153
27. Jesus Christ the desire of all Nations. 1^4 28. The Covenant of grace
established in Christ. 206 29. Christ the hope of salvation. 235 30. Jesus
Christ as rivers of water in a dry land. 258 31. Christ the power of God. 288
32. Christ the wisdom of God. 306 33. Christ the true brazen Serpent. 329 34.
Christ the end of the Law. 365 35. Christ the holy one of God. 379 36. Christ
the Christians spiritual Altar. 400 37. Christ the Christians Passover. 408

COL. 3. last part of ver. 11. I. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon. May 18. 1651.
-- Christ is all, and in all.
THe Apostle in the two former Chapters persuades these Colossians to
constancy in the Faith of the Gospel, in which they had been instructed against
the practice of those false apostles who labored to draw them away to judaical
ceremonies He does in this Chapter, as his manner is, give them sundry
Exhortations to holiness of life.

And first he stirs them up to the more diligent study of heavenly things, by
many Arguments, verse 1, 2, 3, 4. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things
that are above.

Secondly, he persuades them to mortify their earthly members, those vicious
motions and affections of corrupt nature, which were still too strong in them:
he does not only urge this in general, but instances in many particulars, all
which are pressed by several Arguments, verse 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Amongst other
Arguments this is one, They have put off the old man, and put on the new man,
ver. 9, 10. This new man he describes three ways. First, it is the renewing of
the holiness of our nature, which we lost in Adam. Secondly, it consists in
the knowledge of the mystery of the Gospel. Thirdly, the example or Archetype
according to which this new man is fashioned, is the image of God our Creator.
This Argument the Apostle follows, verse 11. he sets it on two ways.

1. By removing the false opinion of some, who neglecting this new man, did
confide in their external privileges, and contemned all such as wanted them;
this in the former part of the verse, where there is neither Greek, nor Jew,
etc. that is, in this new man it matters not what Nation a person be of,
whether he be Jew or Gentile; nor does it matter what outward prerogatives a
person have, whether he be circumcised, or uncircumcised; nor does it matter
what his outward state be, whether he be bond or free, etc. none of all these
differences are looked at or considered. No man is more accepted of God for the
having of any of these things, nor is any less esteemed of him for the want of
them, There is neither Jew, nor Greek, etc.

2. By opposing the true opinion; But Christ is all, and in all. Q^d. All those
external things which are accounted so honorable without this new man, do not
avail to salvation, nor will the want of all these hinder a person of
salvation, and acceptance with God, if the great work of regeneration be
wrought, for Christ is all, and in all. We have such another expression, Gal.
3. 27, 28. Ye are all the children of God, etc. for as many of you as have been
baptized, etc. there is neither Jew, nor Greek; bond, nor free; male, nor
female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.

The words are a Proposition. In which we have,

1. The Subject, Christ; But Christ.

2. The Predicate, He is all, and in all. He is all things that are necessary
to salvation, and that in all persons, who do believe in him, who are renewed
and regenerated by his grace. I intend to go over all the comparisons by which
Jesus Christ is set out in Scripture. And I have begun with this as a Preface
or introduction to the rest. I shall handle it generally, and draw from it this
observation, viz.

Doct. The Lord Jesus Christ is all things in and to all persons that have a
true saving interest in him; Christ is all and in all. It does not exclude the
Father and Holy Ghost but all other things, as circumcision, uncircumcision,
etc. A like phrase. Act. 4. 12. Christ is all and in all to every believer.
Here are two rules to be observed. 1. We are not to understand this (as
excluding the other persons of the Trinity,) for the whole Godhead is all in
alto believers as well as Jesus Christ. But because Jesus Christ the second
person of the Trinity is the head of the mystical body, by virtue of which
union true believers are made one mystical body with Christ, Ephesians. 1. ult.
therefore is this principally appropriated to him, to be all in all to those
that are united to him by saving faith. 2. The truth of this proposition is not
from the humane nature, but from the divine: it is from the power of the divine
nature in Christ, that he is all in all to his people; because the fullness of
the Godhead dwells bodily in the humane nature as a part of the person. Now he
is all in all to them in these five respects, viz.

1. By way of merit. Jesus Christ is meritoriously all in all to believers.
Whatsoever they are, whatsoever they have, whatsoever they do, or can expect,
is only upon the score and account of his purchase and merit. They enjoy no
good thing upon any other terms, but only upon the consideration of Christ's
merits. Because he has done and suffered for them, and in their stead,
therefore do they partake of those blessings which make them happy to all
eternity. The Patriarchs in the Old Testament, Christians in the New, have
pleaded with God for all blessings only upon the account of Christ. Dan. 9. 17.
cause thy face to shine upon thy Sanctuary, that is desolate, for the Lords
sake. Of this the Apostle speaks, when he says, that Christ is made unto us of
God wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. Christ
does bestow upon us, and God is pleased to accept for us the merit of Christ's
Passion, death, obedience, and righteousness. --

2. Christ is all in all to them by way of conveyance. As he has merited all
for them: so it is from him and through him that all good things are
communicated to them, John 14. 6. As we have all propter Christum, so we
receive all we have, per Christum through Christ. He is not only the fountain,
but the Medium and conduit through whom all a believer has is conveyed to him.
Jesus Christ is a believers root, Joh. 15. 5. Now as all the sap which is in
the branches is communicated through the root, so all the good which a believer
has is derived through Christ. God has put all that good he intends to bestow
upon his Elect into Christ's hands as a Feoffee in trust, and from him as the
great Lord-steward is all communicated unto them. Of this the Apostle speaks,
Col. 2. 19. From Christ the head, the whole body by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered and ^nit together, increases with the increase of God.
Jesus Christ is as it were, the hand of God, through which all good things are
sent in to us; He is the door, John 10. 7.

3. Christ is all in all to them, by way of efficiency and causality. He it is
that works all in all in his Saints, 1 Cor. 12. 6. There are diversities of
operations, but it is the same God which works all in all. This our Savior
bears witness unto, John 15. 5. when he tells us, that without him we can do
nothing. The soul is the principle of all action in man, Jesus Christ is the
principle of all motion and spiritual action in his Saints, for he is the soul
of their soul. Not a good desire, not a good thought but what is inspired by
Jesus Christ. The Apostle does freely acknowledge this, Gal. 2. 20. I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me, etc. so Phil. 2. 12, 13. Work out your own
salvation, etc. For it is God which works in you both to will and to do of
his good pleasure.

4. Christ is all in all to them virtually; he is instead of all things to
them. Solomon says that money answers all things, Ecoles. 10. 19. it is
meat, drink, clothes, house, lands, etc. all things that are vendible may be
procured by money. Jesus Christ is virtually all things, he makes up all things
that are wanting. Hence it is that he is in Scripture compared to all things,
to food, to clothing, to physic, to gold, to health, etc. because he stands
for all these things unto the souls of his Saints. Hence is that promise, Rev.
21. 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things. Jesus Christ is for all
uses and purposes. This is in the text; he is Circumcision to the Gentile,
wisdom to the Barbarian, etc.

5. Christ is all in all to them by way of benediction, and sanctification. It
is from him that any good they enjoy becomes a blessing to them. He makes every
thing effectual for those ends for which they are appointed. No good thing
would be good to us without the benediction of Christ; yea were it not for his
blessing, every good thing would prove a snare, a cross and a curse to us, as
they do to them, who have no interest in Christ. This is that which Solomon
says, Prove. 10. 22. The blessing of the Lord, it makes rich. Thy health would
be thy greatest sickness, thy wealth would be thy ruin, thy parts and
abilities would be a snare to thee, did not Jesus Christ sanctify them by his
blessing. All the good the Saints enjoy depends upon Christ's blessings to make
them good to them.

The Application follows.
Use 1. How injurious to Jesus Christ are they who mingle other things with
Jesus Christ as the causes of their salvation. The Papists mingle their own
merits, and righteousness, indulgences, the sufferings of other men, with the
merits of Christ, as the causes of their justification and salvation. What else
i^ this but to deny the al-sufficiency of Jesus Christ? If he be all in all for
justification and salvation, he needs not have his merits eked out with such
kind of helps as these are. If Christ be all in all, then these are
superfluous, yea, the addition of these does derogate from, and destroy the
fullness and al-sufficiency of Christ. Yea Christ who is all in all to
believers, will be nothing at all to them who are not contented with him alone.
Christ is become of none effect to you, whosoever of you are justified by the
law, ye are fallen from grace, Gal. 5. 4. Consider this you that are self
justitiaries.

Use 2. If Christ be all in all, then is nothing any thing at all without Jesus
Christ. All the world, the riches, pleasures, honors of the world is but
emptiness without Christ. Vanity of vanities, all is vanity, Eccles. 1. 2.
that man has just nothing, that has not Christ who is all things; the world
is but nigrum nihil. Thy wisdom, thy parts, thy children, thy offices, thy
preferments, thy lands and revenews, all thou have, if thou want him that is
all things, can amount to nothing. They are but ciphers without a figure. O
that men would consider this!

Use 3. What rich inheritance have all those who are truly interested in Jesus
Christ! Christus meus and omnia. They possess him that is all in all, and in
possessing him they possess all. I have all things my brother, says Jacob to
Esau, Genesis 33. 11. he that has him that is all in all, cannot want any thing.
All things are yours, (says the Apostle) whether things present, or things to
come, and you are Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 22. A true believer, let him be never so
poor outwardly, is in truth the richest man in all the world; he has all in
all, and what can be added to all?

Use 4. It shows the reason why the Saints are so fearful of losing Jesus
Christ. They value all things at a low rate in comparison of him. They would
rather lose all then Christ, they are contented to part with liberty, estate,
life, rather then with Christ. Is there not cause for it? Christ is better then
all things else. Riches are something, liberty is something, life is something,
but Christ is all in all. There is nothing besides Jesus Christ that is good
for all uses. Garments are good to cover, but not for food; meat is good to
feed, but not to warm, etc. but Jesus Christ is good for every use, for all
persons, for all times, for all sexes, for all conditions. They know if they
lose Christ, they lose all things. If a man had all his estate in one jewel,
you would not blame him to be very careful of keeping that. Jesus Christ is
their all, they seek him when they are deprived of him, with greatest care;
they keep him when they have him, with the greatest diligence, Cant. 3. ult. I
sought him, I found him, and would not let him go; do not wonder at it! for he
is their all in all.

Use 5. That no soul esteems Christ aright, that does not esteem him all in
all. To esteem any thing equal to Christ, is to disesteem Christ. Thou do
never truly account him any thing, till thou do account him all things, yea,
better then all things, and all things as nothing in respect of him. If thou
can not make up all things in Christ, thou make him but a poor Christ. If
thou can not make him a friend in the want of a friend; an habitation in the
want of an habitation; if thou can not make him riches in poverty; if there
be any condition in which Christ will not suffice thee; if Christ be too little
to satisfy thee, thou do but undervalue him; he is never truly accounted any
thing, till he be accounted all things.

Use 6. Learn hence, The misery of those that want Christ. He that wants
Christ, wants all things. Lord, what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse,
says Abraham, Genesis 15. 2. he had much, and yet because he wanted a child, he
wanted every thing. The soul that wants Jesus Christ has indeed nothing. The
Apostles possessed all things when they had nothing, 2 Cor. 6 10. having Christ
they possessed all things. Those that want a saving interest in Christ,
possess nothing, though they seem to have all things; all they have is
emptiness; yea, all they have is a curse, because they have not Christ. O that
God would convince men of this truth!

Use 7. Its their duty to carry their selves toward Christ, as those that
account him all in all. How is that?

1. Love him and prize him above all. Thy love is better then wine, Cant. 1. 2.
Above wife, husband, children, life. Christ is not loved at all, till he be
loved above all, Matthew 10 37.

2. Be contented with Jesus Christ in the want of all other things. Make up all
thy wants, all thy losses in him. Encourage thy self in Christ, when thou art
discouraged in all other things. Rejoice in him, when all things fail, vid.
Hab. 3. v. 17, 18.

3. Make him thy end in all. Let him be all in all to thee finally. Refer all
to Jesus Christ as the ultimate end of all, hear, pray, meditate, do, suffer
for the glory of Christ. The Apostle referd all to Christ as the supreme end of
all, that Christ may be magnified, etc. Phil. 1. 20. if Christ be not the Alpha
and the Omega, the first motive, and the last end of all, thou do greatly
undervalue him.

4. Be sure thou go to Christ for all thou want. If comfort, if zeal, if
pardon, if strength, etc. he has it for thee, and it is for his dishonor that
thou should go any other way, 2 King. 1. 3.

5. Do all in Christ's name and strength, Ephesians. 5. 20. Col. 3. 17.

Use 8. How careful should men be to prove their interest in Jesus Christ? 2
Cor. 13. 3. you want all, if you have not an interest in him. Signs of this.
1. Have you his Spirit? Romans 8. 9. the effects of the spirit. 2. Are ye like
Christ? 2 Cor. 5. 17. 3. Are ye willing to be Christ's?

Use 9. Let the presence of Christ in others be all in all to thee. Though thou
be poor; yet if Christ be in them, though unlearned, etc. if thy children have
Christ, though they want parts, beauty, etc. yet esteem them.

COL. 3. 4. When Christ our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with
him in II. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon. May 25. 1651.
glory.
THe world, and the things of the world are great enemies to the work of grace.
They do a long time hinder the first planting of it in the soul; and when it
is planted, they do hinder the growth and progress of it. The cares of this
world, and the deceitfulness of riches choke the Word, and it becomes
unfruitful, Mat. 13. 22. The Apostle knowing this, does in the beginning of
this Chapter labor to raise the Colossians to the more diligent meditation,
and studying of heavenly things, that being above the world, the work of God
might prosper better in their hearts. If ye be rison with Christ, etc. v. 1, 2.
This he presses by two cogent Arguments. 1. They are dead to the world, v. 3.
for ye are dead. By faith they are partakers of Christ's death, and by their
profession they are under an obligation of dying more and more. 2. Their life
is hid with Christ in God, v. 3. They are appointed to a higher kind of life
then that which other men live, therefore they ought to seek after those things
which appertain to this life. Now lest any should object, if the life thou
speak of be a hidden life, what advantage will it be to be so mindful of it;
the Apostle answers, v. 4. though it be for the present an hidden life, yet it
shall be revealed, and that perfectly. When Christ who is our life shall
appear, etc. In which we have these two Propositions, viz.

1. Jesus Christ is a believers life.

2. That Christ who is a Believers life shall appear. Of these in Order.

Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ is a Believers life. For the understanding of this,
we are to know that a Believer has a twofold life, for I shall not speak here
of the life of nature, which a believer enjoys not as a believer, but as a
reasonable creature. Jesus Christ is a believers life* as he lives the life of
nature, Act. 17. 28. in him we live, move, and have our being. It Is from Christ
that we live the life of men. But to wave that, a believer as a believer, has
a double life. 1. The life of grace, which he lives after he is regenerated by
virtue of the Spirit of Christ living in him, and uniting him to God by Faith.
2. The life of glory, which he shall live in heaven to all eternity after this
life. The soul begins this life immediately upon its departure out of the body,
and the body shall enter into the possession of this life immediately after the
resurrection, and reunion of soul and body.

Both these kinds of life are a Believers, as he is a believer; and Jesus
Christ is a Believers life in reference to both these. And because both of
these are included in the Text, the one of them, the life of grace is but the
inchoation of, and a preparation to the life of glory; I shall speak of both of
them in the handling of the Doctrine.

Jesus Christ is a believers spiritual life. He is so to a believer in these
four respects.

1. He is their life originally. It is Jesus Christ that works this life in
their souls. He is the Creator and Former of life in them. The second Adam was
made a quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15. 45. As the father raises the dead, and
quickneth them, so the Son quickneth whom he will, Joh. 5. 21. Thy soul had
never fetched out spiritual breath, had not Jesus Christ breathed into it the
breath of life. The time comes and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live, Joh. 5. 25. The Ordinances
are the instrumental cause, but Jesus Christ is the efficient cause of the
animating of the soul by a spiritual life.

2. He is their life materially. He is that principle by which they live. Every
living Creature has some intrinsecal principle of that life which it lives.
Jesus Christ is the inward principle of a believers life. He is the soul of
their soul. The Apostle speaks of this, Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with
Christ: nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. It is only by
virtue of the souls union with Christ, that it comes to live the life of
grace. He is the foundation, or form, as I may say, of their life.

3. He is their life conservative. He it is that does preserve this spiritual
life in their souls; by continual communication of himself; he maintains and
upholds the life of grace from dying and perishing. When they are sleepy, he
awakeneth them; when they languish and faint, he recovers them. He strengthens
the things which remain, that are ready to die. He removes those inward
distempers which waste this spiritual life, and be blesses those Ordinances
which feed this life. When David was going down the hill, and in regard of this
spiritual life was almost at the dust of death, so weak that he could scarce
fetch his breath, Jesus Christ did restore and renew him again. He restores my
soul, Psalm. 23. 3. he cast water upon the dying plant, and made it green and
vigorous again. Of this the Apostle, Col. 3. 3. our life is hid with Christ.

4. He is their life, exemplariter. He is the example and pattern according to
which they are to live. Jesus Christ is the rule according to which they are to
walk; he is the copy according to which they are to write. One end of the
incarnation and life of Jesus in the flesh, was to set us an exact and perfect
pattern for our imitation, 1 Pet. 2. 21. And by the diligent viewing and
studying of his example, is our spiritual life carried on to perfection.

The Uses of this point are these.
Use 1. That all those that are without Jesus Christ are spiritually dead. The
Scripture accounts all unregenerate sinners as dead men; They are dead in sins,
they are dead unto God, they are dead unto grace; they are as truly without
spiritual life, as the body is without natural life, from which the soul is
departed. This thy brother was dead, and is alive again, Luke 15. 32.
conversion is called the quickening of the dead, Mat. 11. 5. because all who are
unconverted are as to all spiritual considerations in a dead condition. And it
cannot be otherwise, because they have no interest in Jesus Christ, who is the
Author and principle of spiritual life. The Apostle asserts this clearly, Ephesians.
2. 1, 12. he tells them at the first verse, That they were dead in sins and
trespasses, he gives them the reason, v. 12. because at that time they were
without Christ. And so another Apostle tells us, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the
Son has life; but he that has not the Son has not life. Till Christ be
formed, the soul is a dead thing without either life or motion. And this is a
very miserable condition; for a dead soul is far worse then a dead body, in as
much as the soul is more excellent then the body. Consider a few particulars.
1. Dead souls are loathsome. Nothing more noisome then a dead body. By this
time he stinketh, Joh. 11. 39. Let me bury my dead out of my sight, says
Abraham, even his wife, Genesis 23. 4. she that was the delight of his soul while
she was alive, became noisome to him when she was dead. The soul that is
spiritually dead, is very loathsome, both to God and man. The Scripture
compares them to stinking carrion; Psalm. 14. 3. They are altogether become
stinking. They defile all that comes near them; whatsoever they meddle with,
whatsoever touches them is defiled by them. 2. They that are spiritually dead,
have no use of any of their spiritual senses. The soul has senses as well as
the body, but he that is dead cannot use any of these. They cannot hear, they
cannot see, they cannot taste, they cannot smell, they cannot feel, they
cannot hear Christ's voice in the Gospel, they cannot see the glory of Christ,
nor of grace, they cannot feel the heavy weight of sin, they cannot taste the
sweet and delicate pleasures of Jesus Christ, they cannot smell the fragrancy
of Christ's sweet ointments. They have no pleasure in those things that are most
pleasant in themselves, and most desirable to such as are spiritually alive:
They are to all spiritual things, and all spiritual things are to them as if
they were not. 3. This spiritual death, if it be not removed, is a certain
forerunner of eternal Death. Blessed and happy is he that has part in the
first resurrection, of him the second death shall have no power, Rev. 20 6. but
he that continues still in this spiritual death, shall for ever be under the
power of the second death, the eternal death. And this is the state of all such
as want Jesus Christ.

Use 2. That that spiritual life which is in the soul of a believer, shall
never totally and finally die. It may be at deaths door, it may be ready to
die, so it was with the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3. 2. A Christian may be in
regard of his spiritual life, as a tree in the depth of winter, no difference
to all outward appearance between him and a dead plant; but it is impossible
that the spiritual life shall utterly be extinguished, because Jesus Christ who
is our spiritual life, lives for ever. Your life is hid with Christ in God,
Col. 3. 3. hid as in a root, for safety and security. Because I live, ye shall
live also, John 14. 19. while the root lives, the plant cannot die; while the
fountain runs, the streams cannot cease; while the olive trees convey
their oil through the pipes into the lamp, the lamp cannot go out. A living
Christian may grow very weak, but he cannot die. Jesus Christ must cease to
live, before the life of grace in a Saint do utterly perish; while the cause
continues, the effect will.

Use 3. That there is a true spiritual union between Jesus Christ and a
believer. This is one of the great mysteries of the Gospel, that Christ and a
believer should be made one; its set out by many examples, as of root and
branches, John 15. init. head and members, Ephesians. 5. 3. foundation-stone, and the
superstructory stones, Ephesians. 2. 20. meat and eaters, John 6, 56. husband and
wife, Ephesians. 5. 32. This very doctrine makes it good. He could not be our life,
if he were not united to us, and we to him. It Is by virtue of our union with
him, that we come to draw life from him. As the soul and body are united, so
are Christ and a believer; the whole mystical body is called by his name, 1
Cor. 12. 12. so also is Christ, speaking of the Church.

Use 4. Deadness of Spirit, want of spiritual Activity is very inexcusable in
a believer. The ground of this inference is very clear, Jesus Christ is his
life. Christ has life enough in him, and he is willing enough to communicate
more and more of this spiritual life. If the fountain of this life were a mere
creature, something might be said for thy deadness and coldness; but now
seeing Jesus Christ is thy life, thy deadness is inexcusable in thy self, and
it is also dishonorable to Christ. The life and greenness of the branches, is
an honor to the root by which they live. Spiritual greenness and
fruitfulness is in a believer an honor to Jesus Christ, who is his life. Psalm
92. 12, 13, 14, 15. The righteous shall flourish as a Palm Tree, etc. To show
that the Lord is upright, etc. The fullness of Christ is manifested by the
fruitfulness of a Christian.

Use 5. It is the duty of a Christian to live comfortably on this Doctrine. It
affords very much comfort, 1. Against the weakness of this life in our selves.
What Christian is there but finds this life very weak in him at some times?
well, when it is weakest in thee, it is then strong in Jesus Christ. And God
looks upon thy spiritual life, not only as it is in thee, but as it is in
Christ. 2. Against the fear of the wanting of the Ordinances of life. It Is a
great loss to lose the Ordinances, Lev. 26. 31. Well, though thou lose these,
yet thou do not lose thy life. These are but the pipes, Christ is the
Olive Tree. These are but the channels, Christ is the fountain. Man lives not
by bread alone, but by the word of blessing. Thy soul lives by Christ, not by
Ordinances. They are but the instrumental cause, Christ is the efficient. 3.
Against the fear of Satan's workings to destroy this spiritual life. It Is his
great design to take away this spiritual life. He labors to stifle it by
sin; he stirs up his instruments to remove the Ordinances. Well, he cannot
prevail. He must destroy Christ before he can destroy our life. He must either
wither the root, or he cannot kill the branches.

Use 6. Let believers be careful to carry themselves toward Christ as he who
is their life. 1. Acknowledge him the Author of your life. 2. Go to him when
you want life. 3. Strengthen your union with him, Ephesians. 4. 15. 4. Live to him
who is your life, Romans 14. 8.

Use 7. It should invite all to lay hold on Christ. All men are dead by nature.
There Is no other way to live a spiritual life. If Christ be not thy life of
grace, he will never be thy life of glory.

COL. 3. 4. When Christ our life shall appear, then III. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth.
Lon. June 1. 1651.
shall we also appear with him in glory.
I Have handled the first Proposition, as it relates to the life of grace; viz.
that Jesus Christ is a believers spiritual life. I shall now consider of it as
it refers to the life of glory, and so sum it up into this conclusion, viz.

Doct. Jesus Christ is the eternal life of every believer. Christ is the
everlasting life of all those that are eternally saved. As he is their life of
grace, so he is also their life of glory. He is often called in Scripture, not
only a Savior, but Salvation. The salvation of God, Luke 3. 6. An horn of
salvation, Luke 1. 69. And all because he is the salvation of all the Elect. I
must here put in that Caution which I did before, viz. That the Father and Holy
Ghost are not to be excluded; they are our life as well as Christ. The Spirit
and the Father are Saviors as well as the Son. Opera Trinitatis ad extra
sunt indivis^. Prophets, Act. 10. 43. Apostles, 1 John 5. 11. Christ himself,
Joh. 14. 16. do all bear witness to this truth, That Jesus Christ is life
eternal to every true believer. In what respect Christ is our life of glory, I
shall show in the following particulars, viz.

1. In regard of merit and acquisition. Jesus Christ is the procurer of this
life of glory. Heaven is called a purchased Redemption, or Possession, Epb.
1^4. (...), Jesus Christ is the purchaser of this possession, and his blood is
the price of the purchase. As he has by his death purchased the Elect, so has
he also by his blood purchased this life for those redeemed ones, 1 John 4. 9.
in this was manifested the love of God toward us, because he sent his only
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Had not Jesus
Christ shed his blood, no sinner had ever tasted of this life eternal. Eternal
life is the free gift of God, and yet it is merited by Christ. Christ who is
the price and meritorious cause of life, is the free gift of Gods grace, and
therefore our salvation is both free, and ye^ merited.

2. He is our life efficaciously. Though salvation be purchased for the Elect,
yet must the Elect of God be fitted and prepared for this salvation before they
can be put into the possession of it. The Apostle speaks of making the soul
meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. (...). The best of
men are unfit for salvation, as well as unworthy of salvation Though heaven be
prepared for them, yet cannot they enter into heaven till they be prepared.
This fitness or preparedness stands in the changing of our nature, by the
working of grace in the heart, and in the merciful acceptance of God covering
our infirmities, and reckoning our weak endeavors for perfect obedience.
Natura mentis humanae quantumvis perfect a naturalibus donis absque gratia non
est susceptibilis gloriae. Parisiens. lib. de v^rt. cap. 11. The Apostle tells
us that a man must be wrought for glory, 2 Cor. 5. 5. (...). The Elect of God
come into the world rough and unpolished, filthy and defiled, as well as
others, and they are not fit for this life, till they be refined and polished.
Flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 15. 50. Except a man
be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of heaven. Aquinas says well,
Gratia haec divina eo infunditur electis, ut peragant actiones ordinatas in
finem vitae aeternae. Now Jesus Christ does fit and work the Elect for this
glory. He does by his Spirit change their nature, he does by his grace renew
the spirit of their mind; he does set up his own image in their souls, and by
working grace, fit them for the enjoyment of that life of glory which he has
purchased.

3. He is our life. He is the fountain of our eternal glory, 1 John 5. 11.
This is the record, that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in
his Son. It Is in him as in the head, as in the root, as in the fountain, or
spring: All our glory is laid up in Jesus Christ, as in a public treasury.
Jesus Christ and all believers make up one mystical body, of which he is the
head, and they the members, therefore is their glory laid up in him.

4. Jesus Christ is our life in regard of preparation. As he does prepare us
for heaven, so does he prepare heaven for us. This is attributed to his
Ascension, John 14. 2, 3. I go to prepare a place for you. Not as if the place
of glory were not created till the Ascension of Christ. There were many souls
in heaven glorified before Christ did corporally ascend thither. Abel, Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, and the Prophets: the meaning of it is only thus much, that
Jesus Christ did not ascend only for himself to dwell in glory alone, but he
ascended for our sakes, in our stead and place to possess the purchased
inheritance for us, and to keep it for us till we actually come to be possessed
of it our selves. It Is by way of allusion to the practices of great Kings, who
send their harbingers before them, to make ready for them against their coming.
Jesus Christ is pleased to style himself so in reference to the Elect. And
therefore the Apostle calls him our forerunner, (...), and tells us that he is
entered into the veil for us, Heb. 6. 20. and hence it is that we are said to
sit down together with Christ in heavenly places, Ephesians. 2. 6.

5. He is our life, as the way to life. He calls himself the way, John 14. 16.
No man comes to the Father but by Christ. This is that new and living way which
the Apostle mentions, Heb. 10. 19, 20. It Is through the veil of Christ's flesh
that we enter into the Holy of Holies. Jacob in his vision at Bethel saw a
ladder which reached from heaven to earth, Genesis 28. 12. upon this ladder the
Angels of God ascended and descended. This ladder is Jesus Christ, so he tells
us himself, John 1. 51. hereafter ye shall see heaven opened, and the Angels
of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man. He has not only showed
us the way to heaven by his example, but he is the way himself in which we go
to God.

6. He is our life in regard of distribution and communication. As he has
purchased life for us, and keeps possession of it for us, so he it is that
shall put us into possession of it, when we come to enjoy it. I will come
again and receive you unto my self, John 14. 3. The Apostle speaks of this in
2 Timothy 4 8. There is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me in that day. It Is to be understood of Christ;
he that has purchased the Crown for us, will in that day visibly set it upon
our head. Come ye blessed of my Father, receive the Kingdom, etc. Matthew 25.
latter end.

7. He is our life formally. Jesus Christ is the matter of eternal life. Our
eternal life and glory stands in the full enjoyment of Jesus Christ in heaven.
The seeing of God, the enjoyment of Christ is our very glory, Rev. 22. 3, 4.
The Throne of God and of the lamb shall be in it, and his servants shall serve
him, and they shall see his Face, and his Name shall be in their foreheads. The
glory of heaven is called the eating of the tree of life, Rev. 2. 7. Jesus
Christ is the tree of life, the enjoyment of him is the souls glory. Job
therefore reckons up all his eternal glory by this very thing, I know that my
Redeemer lives, etc. I shall behold him not with another, but with these very
eyes. Full and perfect ^ immediate communion with Christ, that is the life, the
glory of the other world. Vid. Rev. 7. 17. the lamb which is in the midst of
the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters. The whole felicity of glorified Saints, is held out in those
expressions.

The Uses of this Point.
Use 1. Away then with the Doctrine of eternal life by the merit of good works.
If Jesus Christ be our life, then cannot the merit of our works be our life or
the cause of it, either in part or in whole, Christ and works are opposites as
to this business of salvation. The affirming of Christ is the denial of works,
and the affirming of works is the denial of Christ. Act. 4. 11, 12. This is the
stone which was set at naught of you builders, etc. neither is salvation in any
other: for there is no other name given under heaven, etc. And the truth is,
all the things required to make a work meritorious are wanting in the best of
our good works. A meritorious work must be,

1. Nostrum. So are none of our good works, Ephesians. 2. 10.

2. Perfectum. So are not our works. Our wine is mixed with water. We halt upon
our best legs, Isa. 64 6. Remember Lord my good deeds, and spare me, was
Nehemiahs prayer, chapter 13. 22. we never did any thing we should do, perfectly,
not any one thing. Our most sublimated thoughts are full of the dregs of
earthly mindedness, our best words are too scanty and light, etc.

3. It must be indebitum. A man cannot purchase your land by paying an old
debt. All our obedience to God is an old debt which we owe upon another score.
Remember that Parable, Luke 17. 9. Does he thank that servant because he did
that which was commended? I tell you no. That which will not deserve thanks
cannot merit heaven. We are fallen into an erroneous age, man's will is cried up
much. High Arminianisme is within a few days journey of this piece of Popery.
It Is time to give antidotes when such deadly poison is scattered, and drunk in
by many injudicious Christians. Let Papists make works their life, let
Arminians make freewill their life, but let us make Christ our life. He that
will not live by Christ solely, shall die for ever without Christ. I shall
conclude this with that of the Apostle, Gal. 5. 4. Christ is become of none
effect to you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from
grace.

Use 2. The cer^ainty of the salvation of believers. They shall so certainly be
saved, that Scripture speaks of their salvation as of a thing already done, 1
Cor. 1. 18. the Preaching of the cross is unto us that are saved the power of
God, (...). It Is reported as a thing in facto, and not in fier^, Ephesians. 2. 5. By
grace ye are saved, (...), Romans 8. 30. Whom he justified, them he also
glorified, (...). He writes as if they were already in glory. All this to show
the certainty of their salvation. This depends on many things, upon this in the
text for one, -- If Christ be their life, they shall live. He that will keep
them out of heaven, must first pluck Jesus Christ out of heaven; because I
live, ye shall live also, John 14. 19. if the Son make you free, ye shall be
free indeed: if the Son be your life, ye shall live, and that for ever, in
despite of devil, in despite of corruption: he is able to save, (...), Heb.
7. 25.

Use 3. Let this provoke all men to get an interest in Christ. There Is nothing
but eternal death without him. He that has the Son has life; he that has
not the Son has not life, but the wrath of God abides on him, 1 John 5. 12.
There Is no way to glory but by him. Deceive not your selves; cling to him, lay
fast hold on him, and on him alone: Other foundation can no man lay, then that
which is laid already, even Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11.

We hope we have an interest in Christ. Well. He that has a good assurance
that Christ is his for life, must have these three things, else he deceives
himself.

1. He must be a true believer in Christ, vid. Ioh. 3. 36. He that believes on
the Son has everlasting life; he that believes not the Son shall not see
life, etc.

2. He must be an obedient subject to Christ. Though we exclude obedience from
the cause of salvation, yet we do make it a qualification of the person that
shall be saved. Christ is the Author of eternal life unto them that obey him,
Heb. 5. 9. Christ will be King wherever he is Savior.

3. He must live the life of grace. Christ is the Author of spiritual life,
before he be the Author of life eternal. We must live in Christ before we live
with Christ. Christ must live in us, before we live with him. Christ in you the
hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. if Christ be not in you a fountain of grace, he will
never be yours for glory.

4. You that have Christ for life eternal, carry your selves as those that
believe this truth. 1. Despair not. No sin disparageth Christ so much as
despair: there is more ground of hope and confidence in Christ, then there can
be of distrust in our selves. The sacrifice is sufficient for the guilt. Christ
is (...), 1 Timothy 2. 6. a ransom, a full ransom. 2. Let salvation be so much
the more precious to you for his sake who is the Author of it. 3. Attribute
your salvation to Christ only. 4. Live to Christ. 5. The greatness of Gods
love to the Elect. He gave Christ to be their life, to die for them, Romans 5. 8.
6. Live with Christ here as much as you can. 7. The greatness of man's misery,
he could not be saved without Christ.

COL. 3. 4. When Christ our life shall appear, then IV. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth.
Lon. June 8. 1651.
shall we also appear with him in glory.
I Have handled the first Proposition, that Jesus Christ is a believers life,
both in regard of the life of grace, and of the life of glory. I proceed to the
second, viz.

Doct. Jesus Christ who is a believers life, shall certainly appear. There will
be a manifest appearance of Jesus Christ. The Scripture makes mention of a
threefold appearance of Christ.

1. A bodily appearance in the flesh. Thus Jesus Christ appeared in his
Nativity, when in the fullness of time he took our nature in the womb of the
Virgin Mary. Of this the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 3. 16. God manifested in the
flesh. Old Simeon in his song rejoices for this, Luke 2. 30. Lord, now let
thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, for mine eyes have seen
thy Venit ad homines.
salvation. Venit ad homines.

2. A spiritual appearance of Christ in the preaching of the Gospel. Thus Jesus
Christ was manifested to all that received the Gospel, and is still manifested.
The Apostle speaks of this manifestation, Gal. 3. 1, O foolish Galatians, etc.
before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently (...).
set forth crucified among you. And of this the Apostle makes mention, 1 John
1. 2. The life Venit in homines.
was manifested, and we have seen it, and 2 Timothy 1. 10. Neither of these
appearances are to be understood in this Text, for it speaks of an appearance
that is yet to be made. Therefore

3. A glorious manifestation of Christ, yet to be made at his second coming to
judgment. And this is that appearance of which the Apostle here Venict contra
homines August.
speaks: for then it shall be, and not till then, that the Saints shall appear
with Christ in glory. So the Apostle tells us, 2 Timothy 4. 8. Henceforth it laid
up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall
give me in that day; and not to me only, but to all them also that love his
appearing. It Is at this day of Christ's appearing, that the Saints shall be
perfectly glorious. Having found out what is meant by Christ's appearing, I
shall in the prosecution of the Point handle these five particulars.

1. That there shall be such an appearance of Christ. 2. Why Christ shall thus
appear, the ends of this appearance. 3. After what manner Christ shall appear.
4. When shall be the time of this appearance of Christ. 5. Why it is deferred.
I. That Jesus Christ shall appear. I shall evince this, 1. By many express
testimonies of Scripture. There is not any Article of our Faith more clearly
set down in the Book of God then this, Mat. 24. 30. Then shall appear the sign
of the Son of man in heaven, and they shall see the Son of man coming in
the clouds of heaven. Act. 1. 11. This same Jesus which was taken up from you
into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.
The Apostle Paul asserts this truth in express terms, Heb. 9. 28. Unto them
that look for him, he shall appear the second time without sin unto
salvation. 1 John 3. 2. When he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is. And as the Scripture does expressly affirm it; So 2.
God has taught his people to wait for it, and to pray for it, Cant. 8. 8. Come
away my beloved, etc. Rev. 22. 20. the last prayer of the Church is for this
very thing, Even so come Lord Jesus. And, Luke 12. 35, 36. they are commanded
to wait for this appearance. Let your loins be girded, and your lamps burning;
And you your selves like unto men, that wait for their Lord, etc. God never
commanded his people to pray and wait for a fiction or dream which shall never
come to pass. 3. From the absurdities which would follow upon the denial of
it. We may say of this, as the Apostle says of the denial of the resurrection
of the body, 1 Cor. 15. 17, 18 19. If Christ should not appear, our faith would
be in vain; The dead in Christ were perished, and we should only have hope in
Christ in this life, and of all men should be most miserable. The whole comfort
of a Christian turns upon the hinge of this Doctrine of Christ's appearing,
Ioh. 14. 18.

II. The ends of Christ's appearing are such as these. 1. To declare that sin is
abolished. This is the meaning of that, Heb 9. 28. 2. That he may be admired in
his Saints, etc. This end of his coming the Apostle sets down, 2 These. 1. 10.
he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be admired in all them that
beleev. One end of the second coming of Jesus Christ, is to communicate his
glory to his Saints that have believed in him. He shall put his glory upon
them, and so shall be glorified in them. Jesus Christ is glorified in his
Saints now, That holiness and grace which he has communicated to them already
does render them very glorious: but at his second coming his glory will shine
in them with greater splendour then now it does. He will then communicate unto
them all his glory, and make them glorious as he is glorious. Our Savior
mentions this, John 14. 3. I will come again, and receive you unto my self. He
comes to fetch all his Elect to heaven, and to reveal his glory both to their
souls and bodies. He shall then actually put soul and body into the full
possession of that glorious redemption which he has purchased for them. It Is
called the day of redemption, Luke 21. 28.

3. To execute the sentence of his wrath upon all his enemies, and the enemies
of his people. Jesus Christ has severely threatened all wicked men, that he
will visibly take vengeance on them for the dishonours they have done to him,
and the wrongs they have done to his people; And in this second manifestation
of himself, he will put all those threatenings into execution. Of this the
Apostle speaks, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, etc. And of
this, Enoch prophesied long ago, Jude 15. Behold the Lord comes with ten
thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment on all, etc. Wicked men are now
secure, they reproach God and wrong his people; but Jesus Christ will one day
visibly come from heaven to punish these contempts and injuries. The evil
Angels, and sinful men shall then be publicly adjudged to suffer that torment
which they have deserved.

4. To put an end to his Churches sufferings. Rev. 20. 10. Then shall the devil
that deceived the world be cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where the
beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented day and night for ever
and ever.

5. To gather together his Elect. This the Evangelist sets down, Mat. 24. 30.
31. They shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds. And he shall send his
Angels, and they shall gather together his Elect from the four winds, etc. The
Elect of God are scattered up and down in the several quarters of the world,
scarce two or three of them are now together in one family at the same time;
but then they shall be collected, never to part asunder to all eternity.

III. What manner of appearing this shall be. Consider for that these four
things.

1. It shall be a real and corporal appearance. Christ shall not appear
imaginarily, as some have thought, nor shall he only appear according to his
Divine nature, but he shall appear bodily and truly: the same humane nature
which was in the grave, and afterward ascended into heaven, shall descend from
heaven. Mat. 24. 30. Then shall appear the sign of the Son of man. The
humanity shall appear; so the Angels tell the Disciples at his Ascension, Act.
1. 11. This same Jesus which is taken into heaven, shall so come in like manner
as ye have seen him go into heaven. As he did really and bodily ascend, so
shall he really and corporally descend. God will honor the humane nature of
Christ in the world. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced. The same
flesh of Christ which was pierced, shall be manifested in his second coming.

2. It shall be a sudden appearing. His coming is compared to a sudden flash of
lightning, Mat. 24. 27. The appearance of Christ is compared to the lightning,
in two respects. 1. For the evidence of it. It shall be as clear to the eyes of
men as the lightning is. 2. For the suddenness of it. A flash of lightning
does suddenly break forth, and in an instant shines from one end of the heaven
to another; so shall the appearance of Christ be. And for this very cause is it
compared to the coming of a thief in the night, Luke 12. 39, 40. As it was in
the days of Noah, so shall it be when the Son of man comes, They ate, they
drank, etc. Mat. 24. 37. when men say, peace, etc.

3. It shall be a very glorious appearance. He shall come with power and great
glory, Mat. 24. 30. He was not so mean and despicable in his first coming, as
he shall be majestical, and renowned in this his second coming. His first
appearance was in the form of a servant. He came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister. A low kind of appearance was most fit for such work; but when he
appears again, he shall come as a Judge, as King of kings, and Lord of lords;
therefore Majesty is fit for him. The Scripture does set out the glory of his
coming sundry ways. 1. He shall come in the clouds of heaven. The bright cloud
shall be his chariot, Mat. 24. 30. 2. He shall come attended with an
innumerable company of glorious Angels. Those glorious spirits shall come in
full regiments attending upon his person to do him service, and to execute his
will, Mat. 25. 31. He had the beasts to attend on him at his first coming; but
he shall have Angels to wait upon him at this coming. 3. He shall come with the
voice of the Archangel, with a mighty shout, and with the trumpet of God, 1
These. 4. 16. All these expressions are used to set out the glory of it. All
outward glory which ever man beheld, is but darkness in this respect.

4. It shall be a very dreadful and terrible appearance. Full of Majesty, and
therefore full of terror. His first coming was dreadful, Mat. 4. 5. The
Scripture sets out the dreadfulnesse of it by the Antecedents, Concomitants,
Consequents of it. The Antecedents are in Matthew 24. 29. such an alteration
shall be made upon the creatures being, that Sun, Moon and Stars being
obscured by the glory of Christ, shall cease from their service, and not be
able to show their glory as before. The Concomitants, the firing of the world.
The Apostle speaks of this, 2 Pet. 3. 10. what a dreadful sight will this be to
the wicked. The consequents of it are, the raising of the dead, the setting up
of the Thrones, the summoning of all the world to judgment. Well does the
Scripture call it the terrible day of the Lord.

IV. When shall this appearing be? you cannot imagine that I should be so bold
as to say any thing of the particular day, month, or year of Christ's coming.
Our Savior has for ever silenced all curious enquirers about it, Mar. 13. 32.
The Scripture tells us thus much about the time of it, that it shall be when
the time of the Churches tribulation is ended. Matthew. 24. 29. When the number
of Gods elect is converted. In the end often days, Dan. 12. 13. It is one of
those Novissima, or last things, which is to be expected in the world.

V. Why is it deferred? 1. Because the Elect of God are not yet called. All the
Vessels of glory are not borne into the world. Christ stays till these flowers
be sprung up. The fetching of these to heaven is one end of his coming; And he
will not come till these are brought forth. As the world was made at first, so
does it stand and continue for their sakes. 2. That space and time for
repentance may be afforded unto sinful men. This reason the Apostle renders of
it, 2 Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is not slack, etc. but is long suffering to usward,
not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. He
defers his coming, that sinners may have more tenders of salvation made to
them; that so they may be inexcusable, if they do not return. 3. That the
faith, hope, patience of his own children may be exercised. The delaying of
Christ's coming is a very great help both to exercise faith, watchfulness and
patience. We may say of this, as the Prophet does of the delaying of another
day of the Lord, Hab. 2. 4. Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will
surely come, it will not tarry, And the just shall live by his faith. 4. That
all other of Gods decrees for, and about the things which must come to pass
before this day, may be accomplished. Many things God has decreed shall be
done before his appearance, which are not yet done in the world. The preaching
of the Gospel to all Nations, Mat. 24. 14. The overthrowing of Antichrist, 2
These. 2. 3, 8. The making of the Jews and Gentiles into one Church, etc.
Christ stays, because these decrees must be accomplished.

The Uses of this Point.
Use 1. Away with those Atheists, and Epicures who deny this Doctrine. In the
very days of the Apostles, there were some scoffers that did mock at this
doctrine of Christ's appearing, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. where is the promise of his
coming? we have many such scoffers in our days, that deride the Doctrine of
the resurrection of eternal life, of Christ's second coming. The Apostle tells
us the reason of this scoffing in the same place. 1. The impurity of their
hearts. They walk after their own lusts. That Is one great ground of Atheistical
and wicked opinions. Such Doctrines curb and check their lusts, and because
they cannot have their lusts by retaining such doctrines, they therefore reject
and scoff at such doctrines. 2. They walk more by sense, then by the testimony
of the Word of God. Since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they
were from the beginning of the Creation; because they cannot apprehend with
their sense any such doctrine, or any ground of it, therefore they reject it.
Such as these who will not be convinced by Scripture, we shall leave to feel
the severity of that coming, which they will not believe. They that now scoff,
will have time enough sadly to bewail their scoffing, they shall then feel
what they will not now be persuaded to believe.

Use 2. The dear love of Jesus Christ to his people. As his departure was a
rich testimony of his love; It Is expedient for you that I go away, so is his
returning; I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you, Joh. 14.
18. Never think of Christ's returning, but meditate upon the greatness of his
love.

Use 3. That Christ is not now corporally in the world. The Scripture speaks of
his corporal appearance as of a future thing. The Papists they make him
corporally present in the Sacrament. His body shall descend but once, and that
shall never be till he come to take his people into glory with himself. The
doctrine of the real corporal presence of Christ is a doctrine of real falsehood.

Use 4. This is a very sad doctrine to all ungodly sinners. Christ shall
appear. It were well for wicked men, if this Doctrine were an untruth. The very
end of his appearing is to bring you to a public trial for all your acts of
High Treason against his Crown and dignity. He will appear, and then you shall
appear before him to render an account of, and to suffer punishment for all
your hard words and cruel actings against him, and against his in the world;
when he appears you shall wish that the mountains might fall upon you to hide
you from his sight. The appearance of Christ to you, will be as the appearance
of a severe Judge to a convicted malefactor. Consider of it beforehand, that
by timely and thorough repentance, you may prevent that dreadful sentence which
will be denounced and executed upon the wicked in that day. Falix trembled when
he heard this doctrine. Acts 24. 25. (...). If the hearing of it work such
fear, how great fear will the sight of it work? be humbled and converted, that
ye may stand when the Son of Man appears. You cannot hide any wickedness
from him. You cannot bribe him to excuse your wickedness.

Use 5. Let the friends and favorites of Christ draw comfo^t from hence. Lift
up your heads, says our Savior, when he is preaching of this very Doctrine,
Luke 21. 28. (...). It Is a day of lifting up the head to you. Think of it, and
gather comfort from it. 1. Against all the shame you meet with here. That day
shall wipe off all your shame, Isa. 66. 5. 2. Against all false judgments and
accusations. In that day all shall be judged over again. Christ shall appear,
and he will judge righteous judgment. 3. Against all slanders. 4. The
appearing of Christ is a general antidote against all evils you suffer, 2 Pet.
2. 9. believe it, meditate much upon it, Mar. 13. 35. Luke 12. 42. 5. Prepare
for it.

JOHN 6. 55. My flesh is meat indeed, and my VI. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon.
December. 14. 1651.
blood is drink indeed.
IN this Chapter we have something Historical and something Doctrinal. The
Historical part relates two great miracles done by our Savior; his feeding
five thousand men with five loaves and two fishes, ver. 1. to 15. his walking
upon the water, v. 15. to 22. The Doctrinal part is from v. 22. ad finem. The
first and principal Doctrine he handles, is to prove himself to be the bread of
life. He is occasioned to preach this Doctrine from the peoples flocking after
him to be fed with miraculous bread, v. 22, 23, 24, 25. seeing a great
multitude resort after to Capernaum, he knowing their intentions tells them, v.
26. that they followed, not because they saw his Divine power in the late
miracle, but that they might satisfy their natural appetite with bread, and
thereupon, v. 27. advises them that they would mind that spiritual bread
which did excel the other, as far as the soul did the body, v. 27. And after
some debate with them, when he saw their hearts a little raised after it, he
does openly declare and profess himself to be that spiritual bread. And when
there was some contention among the Jews how he could give them himself to
eat, v. 52. he does, v. 53. show the misery of them that did not eat him, and
v. 54 the happiness of those that did feed upon him; and thereupon lays down
this assertion in the Text, For my flesh is meat indeed, etc. The wor^s [taken
absolutely, and excluding the causal particle for] contain in them a double
Proposition.

1. That Christ's flesh is meat indeed. 2. That his blood is drink indeed.
I begin with the first. My flesh, etc. in which we have, 1. The subject, My
flesh. 2. The predicate, Meat indeed.

EXPLICATION.
My flesh. Flesh, when it is spoken in relation to Christ, as here in the Text,
signifies two things. 1. Sometimes the manhood alone. So you have it, Joh. 6.
63. It is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. In this place
the flesh signifies only the humanity of Christ. So Austin expounds it, and
Calvin after him. The humanity is without advantage if it be separated from the
spirit, that is, a spiritus virtute, qua perfusa est caro. Calvin. It Is the
Divinity that gives efficacy to the humanity. It is from the Spirit that the
flesh has any feeding virtue. 2. Sometimes the whole person of Christ,
God-man. And so it is to be understood in the Text. My flesh is meat, that is,
I am meat. I, God and man in one person. Now why flesh is mentioned here,
Cameron gives the reason; because our life is in the flesh and blood of Christ.
Si enim carnem and sanguinem Christo tollas, non erit amplius cibus noster. For
that he might be food for our souls, it was necessary that he should satisfy
the justice of God, and so purchase for us remission of sins. Therefore
because by the shedding of his blood, and by the sacrificing and offering up of
his body upon the cross, he purchased this for us, Heb. 9. 22. his flesh is
said to be our meat, and his blood our drink.

Is meat, (...). This word is translated sometimes rust, Mat. 6. 19, 20. Lay
not up for your selves treasures on earth, (...), but lay up for your selves
treasures in heaven, (...). It signifies any thing that by rust or fretting
does eat into metal or other creatures, and so consumes them. It is also
translated meat, and signifies generally all kind of food which is for the
support of life, 2 Cor. 9. 10. he that ministers seed to the sower, both
minister bread to your food, (...), and multiply your seed sown, etc. And so
it is used in the Text. Indeed, (...), the flesh of Christ is called meat
indeed, in a twofold respect.

(1.) In respect of all other food. All other food in respect of this, is but
cibi tantummodo umbra and vana imago, as Cameron says. As natural life in
respect of the spiritual, is but a shadow of life; so the meat that is
appointed for the natural life, if compared with the meat of the Spiritual
life, is but a very image of meat. Christ's flesh is real meat.

(2.) In respect of that typical meat which the Jews had lately spoken of, v.
31. Our fathers did eat Manna in the desert, etc. Our Savior tells them that
that is but typical bread, but his flesh is bread indeed; it is the real
substance of which that was but a mere type and shadow. Thus for Explication.
The Observation is this.

Doct 1. That the Lord Jesus Christ is really and truly the food and meat of
believers. Flesh is here put for the whole person of Christ. Jesus Christ as he
is held out in the Scriptures, is the true, real, and very meat of believing
Christians; Christ as he is propounded in the Gospel, dead, broken, crucified.
Christ in all his perfection, compleatnesse, fullness, is meat indeed to a true
believer. It Is the very scope of this Sermon, from v. 27. to v. 59. in which
this truth is inculcated over and over again, and all objections answered,
which the carnal reason, and unbeleefe of man's heart can make against it.

I shall in the Explication of this Doctrine open these things. 1. Prove that
Christ is a believers meat. 2. Show the Analogy between Christ and other meat.
3. How this meat is eaten and received.

I. That Christ is the souls meat. This is proved two ways.

First, from the types of Christ in the Old Testament. The Ceremonial Law had
many types of Christ. Whatsoever is revealed of Christ in the New Testament,
was some way or other typified of him in the Ceremonial Law. There are four
types which did set out Jesus Christ as the souls meat.

1. The Manna in the wilderness. The History of the Manna is set down, Exodus
16. the people being in some want of provision in the Wilderness of sin
began to murmur against Moses and Aaron, v. 3. God promises, v. 4. to rain
bread from heaven for them, which accordingly was done, v. 14, 15. That this
was a type of the feeding virtue of Christ, is plainly discovered by our
Savior in this very Sermon, v. 31, 32. The Wilderness did typifie the state
of the Church in this world, and the Manna was a plain type of Christ the
Churches meat.

2. The Shewbread, The Law and manner of the Shewbread you have at large, Lev.
24. 5, 6, 7. 8, 9. There are two things represented by this Shewbread. First,
the multitude of the faithful presented unto God in his Church, as upon a pure
table, continually serving him: made by faith and holiness, as fine cakes; and
by the mediation of Christ, as by incense, made a sweet odor unto God.
Secondly, the Spiritual repast which the Church has from and before God, who
feeds them with Christ the bread of life.

3. The meat offerings. Concerning this Minchah or meat offering you may read
at large, Lev. 2. 1, etc. These meat offerings were of two sorts; some were the
meat offerings of the Congregation, some of particular persons; of these latter
there were several sorts mentioned in that Chapter. It Is said, v. 3. that Aaron
and his sons shall have the remnant of the meat offering, that is, all of it;
but that which is burned upon the Altar for a memorial, v. 2. Several things
were signified by the meat offerings. Being referred to Christ (who by the
oblation of his own body, was our meat offering, Psalm. 40. 6. Heb. 10. 5.) they
did shadow out our communion with Christ, and participation of his death, and
resurrection by faith, whereby he becomes unto us spiritual meat, of which the
whole Church are made partakers.

4. The flesh of the sacrifices of the peace offerings, and others which were
given to the Priests, of which you read, Lev. 7. 15. they were to be eaten the
same day it was killed. Now what was meant by the eating of the flesh of these
sacrifices, and of the flesh of the other sacrifices which were given to the
Priests to eat, vid. Lev. 10. 12, 13, 14. Surely Jesus Christ, who by his flesh
as by precious meat, feeds his people who are spiritual, Priests unto
everlasting life.

Secondly, from the Sacraments of nourishment both of the Old and New
Testament. There were Sacraments of implantation, or initiation, and of growth;
under the Law, Circumcision Passover; under the Gospel, Baptism, Supper of
the Lord.

1. The Sacrament of nourishment under the Old Testament, was the Paschal lamb.
The Law and rites of this are set down, Exodus 12. 3, 4, 5, etc. What did this
Paschal Lamb signify, but Jesus Christ our Passover, the Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the world? In this Sacrament was Jesus Christ set out
as a nourisher. He is that precious meat upon which all the true Israel of God
feed continually, who is therefore called our Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 7.

2. The Lords Supper. This is the Sacrament of nourishment under the New
Testament. And herein clearly Christ is exhibited as our spiritual meat. His
flesh is the bread, the wine is his blood. As the body is nourished by bread
and wine, so is the soul by his body and blood nourished and fed to life
eternal.

II. The Analogy between Christ and corporal meat, stands in these three
particulars. Three great ends of meat.

1. Corporal meat is for the preservation of the Susientation.
natural life. The natural life is maintained by meat, through the concurrence
of Gods ordinary blessing. It Is pabulum vitae. Hence bread, under which all
other provision is comprehended, is called the staff of life, Esaias 3. 1. Keep
the strongest man from meat but a few days, and the life will extinguish and
go out, 1 Samuel 30. 12. Jesus Christ is the maintainer and preserver of the
spiritual life. As he gives it at first, so he upholds it. It Is by continual
influences from him, that the life is kept from expiring. If he withdraw his
influx never so little, the soul is at the giving up of the Ghost, even half
dead.

2. Corporal meat is for growth. It Is by meat Vegetation
that the body is brought from infancy to childhood, from childhood to youth,
from youth to a perfect man. Jesus Christ is he that carries on a Christian
from infancy to perfection. All the souls growth and increase is from Christ.
So the Apostle, Col. 2. 19. From him the whole body having nourishment
ministered, etc. The branches live and increase by virtue of the sap which is
derived from the root. Christians grow by virtue of the sap which is to them
derived from Jesus Christ. Every part grows by Christ.

3. Meat is a repayer of natures decays. When Reparation
by some violent sickness the spirits are consumed, the body wasted, the
strength lost, meat fitly and seasonably taken, helps through the divine
blessing to recover all again; 1 Samuel 30. 12. his spirit came to him again.
Jesus Christ is the repairer of the souls decays. Sometimes a believer
through the neglect of his duty, through surfeiting upon sin, brings
spiritual languishings upon himself, his strength is decayed, his vigor is
abated, his pulse beats very weakly, he can scarcely creep in the ways of God.
In such a case Jesus Christ recovers him, repaires his breaches and renues his
strength, as in former times. The Psalmist speaks of this, Psalm. 23. 3. He
restores my soul, He leads me in the paths of righteousness for his Names
sake. The Saints have every day experience of this restoring virtue of Christ.

III. How this meat is eaten and received. The Scripture makes mention of three
things which concur to this act.

1. The Ordinances. These are the conduits. Jesus Christ has instituted and
appointed his Ordinances to be the means of carrying his nourishing virtue to
the soul. The Ordinances are the dishes of gold upon which this heavenly meat
is brought. Prayer, Reading, Preaching, Meditation, holy conference, the
Sacrament; in these Christ presents himself to the soul. He that forsakes
these, can expect no feeding from Christ. In this mountain will the Lord of
Hosts make a feast of fat things, etc. Esaias 25. 6. The feast is made in the
mountain of Gods house, and the Ordinances are the dishes on which this meat is
set, and the knives by which its carved out to the soul.

2. Saving lively faith. This is the instrument. What the hand, and mouth, and
stomach are in the corporal eating, that is faith in this spiritual eating.
Faith is the hand that takes this meat, the mouth that eats it, and the stomach
that digests it. Yea, faith is as the veins and Arteries that do disperse and
carry this nourishment to every power of the soul. This is abundantly cleared
in this very Chapter, v. 35. he that comes to me shall never hunger, he that
believes in me shall never thirst. Comes is expounded by believes. Eating
and drinking are here put for believing. Creed and manducasti. He that believes
eats; and he that eats not, it is because he believes not; Hic ed^re est
credere.

Doct. 2. That the blood of Jesus Christ is drink indeed. Blood is here put for
the whole person, as flesh was. And its rather his blood is drink, then that He
is drink; because the great efficacy of all Christ did, lies principally in his
blood, Heb. 9, 22. And in the same respects, as his flesh is said to be meat
indeed, his blood is said to be drink indeed. And those three things which
concur to the act of eating his flesh, concur also to this act of drinking
his blood. The mystical union, saving faith, the Ordinances. I shall therefore
only open two things, 1. Show that Christ's blood is drink. 2. The Analogy
between his blood and other drink.


I. That the blood of Christ is spiritual drink, will appear.

1. From the drink offerings under the Law. In the Law there were sundry
drink offerings appointed as well as meat offerings. The daily sacrifice which
was to be offered continually, every morning and evening, had both a
meat offering, and drink annexed to it, Exodus 29. 40, 41. The daily sacrifice
did signify three things.

(1) That Jesus Christ the true Lamb of God was available to the Church of God,
from the morning of the world, to the evening, the end of the world.

(2) To signify the continual need the Church had of reconciliation by Christ's
blood, which takes away sin.

(3) To sanctify the morning and evening prayers of the Church, by the
interceding sacrifices of Christ the Mediator. And the meat offering, and
drink offering added thereunto, did signify, that Jesus Christ by offering
himself to God, becomes not only our redemption, but also meat and drink to
the soul. The sheaf of the first fruits appointed to be offered every year, had
both the meat offering and drink offering added thereunto, Lev. 23. 10, 11, 12,
13. The like is to be observed in other sacrifices. Now as the meat offerings
Numb. 15 init.
did represent Christ as food, so the drink offerings did set him out as our
spiritual drink.

2. From the water issuing out of the rock. You read the story of that, Numb.
20. The people in the desert of Zin wanted water. In their necessity, as their
sinful custom was, they fall a murmuring, v. 3, 4, 5. God commands Moses, v. 8.
to speak unto the rock to give them water; that they and their cattle might
drink. Moses smites the rock twice (which was his sin, because God only
commanded him to speak to the rock) and it gave forth its water in abundance,
v. 11. Now what the meaning of this water was, the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 10.
4. They drank of the rock that followed them, and that rock was Christ. The
rock typisied Christ, and the water of the rock, of which they and their cattle
drank, typed out the blood of Christ our spiritual drink.

3. From the cup in the Lords Supper. Why is the cup added to the bread? Is it
not to let us know, that Jesus Christ is spiritual drink as well as our
spiritual bread?

4. From the resemblance of the vine. Our Savior, John 15. is compared to a
vine. Why to a vine?

[1.] To show the great mystery of the union of all the spiritual branches with
him the root.

[2.] To signify that he is our spiritual drink. The vine does yield wine
which is drink for the body: the Lord Jesus Christ does yield spiritual drink
for all those that are his members. He is the wine of God, as well as the bread
of God.

II. Quae Analogia? The Analogy stands in four things. There are four
properties of drink distinct from meat.

1. Drink is for refreshing and cooling. When the body is hot by labor, or by
sickness, or travel, drink does cool and refresh it. The heart pants after
the waterbrooks, Psalm. 42. 1. The chased Heart when he is heated with hunting,
makes to the river, and by drinking is refreshed. The sweating Traveller goes
to the spring and cooles himself by drinking of the streaming waters. The
blood of Jesus Christ is of a very refreshing and cooling nature. When the soul
is heated with temptations, parched with the fiery wrath of God in the
conscience, when it lies sweating and sweltring under guilt, one draught of
Christ's blood taken down by faith, yea one drop of it sensibly falling upon it,
does cool and refresh it again Hence he is also compared to the rivers of water
in dry places, Is. 23. 2. Hence is that invitation, Mat. 11. 28 I will give you
rest, (...), I will give you refreshment, so it is translated, Phil. 7. (...),
nothing indeed can cool the parched soul but Christ's blood. And this will do
it abundantly when it is quite melted with wrath, and burnt up with anguish.

2. Drink cleanses the body. The inward parts are washed and purified as well
as refreshed. As the running water cleanses the channel, and carries away
rubbish and filth, so drink seasonably and fitly taken, carries away the
defilements that are contracted within the body. The blood of Christ is of a
cleansing nature. It Is indeed the only cleanser. It does, being taken by faith,
carry away all the filthiness of the inward Man. All the Ceremonial
purifications were types of the purifying blood of Christ, Heb. 9. 13, 14.
There ye have the typical cleansings expounded. The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses us from all sin, 1 John 1. 7 Christ takes away the guilt of sin
by justification, and he cleanses us from the filthiness of sin by
sanctification. You read in Zech. 13. 1. of a fountain opened for sin, and
for uncleanness. This fountain is nothing else but the fountain of Christ's
blood. He that drinks daily of this blood, shall be cleansed daily.

3. Drink is of a reviving nature. It recovers from faintings, it opens the
eyes helps feebleness of Spirit, vid. Judge. 15. 18, 19. Samps^n being tired by
that great slaughter of the Philistines, found his spirits sink, he prays for
drink, and when he had refreshed himself with water, his spirit came again, and
he revived. Solomon, Prove. 31. 6, 7. prescribes strong drink to him that is
ready to perish, and wine to the heavy hearted, that they may forget their
poverty, and remember their misery no more. Some drink is called Aqua-vitae,
because of its usefulness and efficacy this way. The blood of Jesus Christ is
a reviving blood. When the soul is in deliquio spirituali, when it faints, and
dies, and sinks, the sprinklings of this blood will fetch it again, a drop or
two of this true Aqua-vitae taken down by faith, will open the eyes and restore
it again. This effect it had on Asaph, Ps. 73. 26. My heart and my flesh
fails, etc. but thou art the stay of my heart, and my portion for ever. This
was foretold of Christ long before his birth, by that Evangelical Prophet, Esaias
61. 1. and chap. 57. 15. To revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the
heart of the contrite ones. It is his blood, and that alone, that heals the
broken in heart.

4. Drink is of a cheering nature. It does beget and continue cheerfulness.
The Psalmist tells us that wine makes glad the heart of man, Psalm 104. 15.
The blood of Christ is a heart-chearing thing. It Is the only foundation, and
the only preserver of true joy. It will make the heart merry in adversity, it
will create laughter in heaviness. Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Lord, lift thou up the light
of thy countenance, etc. Thou have put gladness in my heart, etc. The light of
Gods countenance is lifted up only in, and through Jesus Christ. Christ's blood
is the only medicine for spiritual Melancholy. When the Church was drinking in
Christ's wine-cellar, taking down this blood, how was her heart cheared? Cant.
2. 3, 4. I sat down under his shadow, etc.

The Uses of this are,
1. For Information in these particulars.

1. Take notice of the great mystery of a believers union and oneness with
Jesus Christ. The Scripture sets this out, as by express testimonies, ^o by
natural resemblances, as of vine and branches, John 15. init. of head and
members, Ephesians. 1. ult. Ephesians. 6. 30. of husband and wife, Ephesians. 6. 32. of the
foundation, and superstructory stones, Ephesians. 3. 20, 21. and of meat and eaters,
as in the Text. As there is a union between the meat and the body of him that
eats it, so there is an intimate union between a believer and Christ his
spiritual meat. And indeed ou^ union with him is the foundation of our feeding
on him. He could not be our meat, if he were not our Head by mystical u^im.
This is the foundation of this eating; this makes Christ ours, gives us right
to eat. The Apostle, Col. 2. 19. makes our union with him the foundation of our
receiving nourishment from him. And the souls feeding on him, proves the souls
union with him. So it follows, ver. 56. He that eats my flesh, and drinks
my blood, dwells in me, and ^ in him. As the meat which we eat is turned
into the substance of our body, so are we turned into Christ, made flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone.

2. Behold here the fullness of Christ. Whence shall we have bread in the
Wilderness to satisfy so many, say the Disciples to Christ, Mar. 8. 4, 5. The
fullness of Christ appears in this, that he has enough in him to feed so many,
and to feed every one so plentifully. He has sed his people ever since that
promise, Genesis 3. 15. and he will feed all his Elect to the end of the world,
and he will feed them all abundantly every kind of way; he feeds them with
grace, feeds them with knowledge, feeds them in respect of justification, and
he feeds them in respect of sanctification, etc. and yet is there no abatement
of his fullness. Did not the fullness of the Godhead dwell bodily in him? Col.
2. 9. he could not feed so many so long every way, without any diminution of
his fullness; the children have been eating above five thousand years, and the
loaf is still whole.

III. Behold the great love of Christ, and of the Father in giving us this meat
and drink. Remember, it is his flesh that is our meat, his blood that is our
drink. He could not have been our meat and drink, if he had not been
sacrificed; the Priests were not to eat of the offerings allowed them till they
were sacrificed, had not Christ been sacrificed, he could have been no food for
us. The love of Christ and of the Father appear the more in it, that he should
sacrifice his Son to be a meat offering for us, and let out his blood to be a
drink offering for us; wonder to eternity at this love, John. 3. 16. the
Scripture expresses the great love of God to the Israelites, that he gave them
Manna from heaven, Psalm. 75. 23, 24, 25. How much greater love does he express
in giving his Son to the Elect to feed them? That Gods only Son should be
torn in pieces to be meat and drink for us. Behold what manner of love the
Father has bestowed upon us, as to feed us with the body and blood of his own
Son!

IV. Behold here the compleatnesse of Christ. The Scripture speaks much of his
compleatness and perfection. Look upon him in what respect, under what notion
you please, and you will see his compleatnesse. Behold him as a Savior, and so
he is a complete; he saves (...). Heb. 7 25. he saves the soul, the body from
all evil, unto all good, and that for ever. Consider him as a Physician, and
his compleatnesse will appear. He heales the soul, the body, heales in an
instant, heales to the bottom, etc. whatsoever he is compared to, he is
completely and perfectly so. Behold him as a Feeder, and he is complete in that
notion; He is not only meat nor only drink, but he is both meat and drink,
complete nourishment. The body cannot live with meat, if drink be wanting; nor
can it subsist by drink only without meat. Bread without drink would dry up
the blood; drink without meat would in a little time drown the body. A mixture,
and fit proportion of both keeps it in health. Jesus Christ is both these,
complete and perfect nourishment. Well may the Apostle say, that Christians are
complete in him, Col. 2. 10. (...). He is in himself every way complete, and
those that adhere to him, are perfectly complete in him.

V: Take notice of the truth of Christ humanity. Marcion, Eutiches, Saturnius,
Maniches hold that Christ was man only in appearance. The Scripture does both
assert the Godhead and Manhood of Christ. The two natures are personally
united, never to be separated. His Name shall be called Emmanuel, Mat. 1. 23.
And the truth of the Manhood is asserted in many places. The Word became
flesh, and dwelt among us, Joh. 1. 14. To us a child is born, Esaias 9. 6. As
other Scriptures, so the Text does clearly assert his humanity, for it makes
mention of his flesh and blood. The Godhead has neither flesh nor blood, but
the Manhood has both. He is perfect God, and perfect man of a reasonable
soul, and humane flesh subsisting.

VI. How injurious are the Papists to the people of God, that deny them his
blood. They take away from the Laity (as they call them) the blood of Christ in
the Sacrament. And by this means do in effect deny them nourishment. As the
body stands in need of meat as well as drink, and of drink as well as meat, so
does the soul. As they wrong Christ in transgressing his institution, who
appointed the cup as well as the bread, Matthew. 26. 26, 27. so they are very
injurious to the Church, in taking away the one half of their spiritual food.
Abhor their Doctrines, bless God, you are freed from the sacrilegious
soul-robbers. They that deprive you of Christ's blood, dep^ive you of life, for
except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you, Joh. 6. 53. yea, indeed he that takes away Christ's blood, takes
away whole Christ from the soul.

VII. The wickedness of the Socinian doctrine that makes nothing that Christ
did to be meritorious for us, but only exemplary. This is a soul-damning
doctrine. Christ is our meat and drink. He died not only to teach us to
suffer, but to be meat and drink to keep us from starving, yea to feed us up to
eternal life.

VIII. The miserable condition of those that want Christ. Nothing can keep them
from starving, who either have not, or will not use this meat and drink. The
condition of Lazarus was sad as to his outward man, when he had neither meat
nor drink, Luke 16. Hagar and her child were in a miserable condition, when
the bread was eaten and the bottle empty, Genesis 21. 15, 16. That condition of
that desolate widow of Sarepta, 1 Reg. 17. 11, 12. was very sad: far worse is
theirs who want Christ: the starving of the soul is worse then the pining of
the body.

IX. None fare so delicately as believers. That rich glutton fared deliciously
every day, Luke 16. 19. What were his delicacies to this? He had the creatures
to feed upon; believers feed on God himself. Nabal its said, when he had his
sheep-shearers, made a feast like the feast of a King, 1 Samuel 25. 36. you read
of Ahasureus his great feast, Esth. 1 4, ^. You read of Solomon's daily
provision, 1 Reg. 4. 22, 23. this was very great. But the believing beggar has
better provision then this. What is the flesh of fowls to the flesh of Christ?
What is the blood of the grape to Christ's blood? This is a believers daily
food. They have not only panem and potum Domini, but they have panem and potum
Dominum.

X. The folly of those that do either feed themselves, or persuade others to
feed upon their own works and duties. The Papists set men's works and duties
before themselves, and others as their spiritual meat and drink. They make the
righteousness of man their meat and drink.

(1) This doctrine is derogatory to Christ. To make any thing besides Christ,
the souls meat and drink, is to deny him to be meat, at least sufficient and
perfect meat. He will either be our only food, or not our food at all. Christ
is incapable of all other mixtures. As the Apostle argues about grace and
works, so may we argue in this matter about Christ and works, Romans 11. 6. If by
grace, then it is no more of works, etc. If Christ be our meat and drink, then
are not works our meat and drink, otherwise Christ is no more Christ; and if
works be our meat and drink, then is not Christ our meat and drink, otherwise
works are no more works.

(2) This doctrine is prejudicial to the soul. It is indeed a soul-starving
doctrine. Our works cannot feed us. The Prophet tells us, Esaias 44. 20. that the
Idolater feeds on ashes. Our best works and duties are not meat and drink,
but ashes. It Is as impossible that the body should live upon ashes, or other
such trash, as that the soul should live upon its own works. Our works have no
nourishing virtue in them. If a Son shall ask bread, says our Savior, of
any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone? Luke 11. 11, 12. The
Papists are unnatural fathers to their children. When they ask them bread, they
give them a stone; when they ask fish, they give them a serpent; and when they
ask an egg, they give them a scorpion. A man's best works are Stones, Serpents,
Scorpions; yea, they are poison to him that makes them his food. You read of a
severe threatening of Rabshakeh against the people of God, 2 Reg. 18. 27. He
would make them eat their own dung, etc. The Papists put this threatening into
practice upon all their followers in a spiritual sense; They make them eat
their own dung, etc. Indeed our best works and duties in the account of strict
justice are no better, Mal. 2. 3. I will spread dung upon your faces, even the
dung of your solemn feasts. A person had better never do any good works, then
make him his spiritual meat and subsistence.

XI. Behold here the excellency of Jesus Christ. He is meat and drink. He is
indeed compared to all things that are excellent; he does far excel
whatsoever he is compared unto. He is as far above all other meat and drink, as
the best meat and drink are above the coursest pulse, and the muddiest water.
See this excellency in a few particulars.

1. Christ is spiritual meat and drink. All other meat and drink is only
corporeal. It Is so in its own nature, and it is so in regard of the subject; it
nourishes not the soul, but the body only. All their delicacies do not feed
the inward man. Those that have the fattest bodies, have not always the
fattest souls. But Christ is spiritual meat and drink. He feeds the soul, the
conscience, the spiritual part. His blood purges the conscience, Heb. 9. 14.
it refreshes the conscience, it chears the conscience, his body strengthens the
soul, repaires the decays of the inward man.

2. Christ is heavenly meat and drink, Joh. 6. 32. My Father gives you the
true bread from heaven. Other meat and drink is terrene and earthly. Your bread
grows out of the bowels of the earth. Your wine is the blood of an earthly
grape. The flesh you eat is fed of the tender grasie that springs out of the
earth. If the earth should prove barren, you would soon feel a famine. The
King himself is served by the field, Eccles. 5. 9. It Is true, the blessing
comes from heaven, but all the materials of meat and drink are earthly. But
Jesus Christ is the bread of heaven, and the wine of heaven. The Manna came
from the clouds only; but Christ from the beatifical heaven, even from the
bosom of the Father.

3. Christ is incorruptible meat and drink. All earthly meat and drink is of a
fading perishing nature. The best bread grows moldy in a little time, the best
flesh in time putrifies and taints; the best wine grows eager and sour in a
little time, and becomes unfit for the body of man. The very Manna it self,
when it was kept till the morning of the next day, contrary to Gods command,
bred worms and standk, Exodus 16. 20. But Jesus Christ knows no corruption. His
flesh and blood is now as sweet and pleasant after so many Ages, as it was the
first hour it was eaten and drank, John 6. 27. And it will be as far from
corruption at the end of the world, as now it is. The Manna in the golden pot
corrupted not, though kept for many Generations. Christ is Manna in that
golden-pot, the humanity in the golden pot of the Divinity shall see no
corruption.

4. Christ is such meat and drink as preserves from death. Other meat and drink
cannot keep man from the grave. That rich man that fared deliciously every day,
was not made immortal: The rich man died and was buried, Luke 16. 22. All that
Generation that fed on Manna, and drank the water out of the rock, died, John
6. 49. But Christ preserves the soul from Death. John 6. 50. This is the bread
of God that came down from Heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die. It
immortalizes the soul that feeds on it. He that believes on me has eternal
life, ver. 51. And then,

5. Christ is soul-satisfying meat and drink. He that believes on me shall
never hunger, and he that comes to me shall never thirst, John 6. 35. There is
a hunger of desire, and a hunger and thirst of total emptiness and want. He
that has this meat and drink, shall never totally want him. It is not so with
other meat and drink. A man may have his belly filled with other meat and
drink, and may have a good quantity beforehand, and yet may at last want a
morsel and die for want of a draught of water. But he that once has this
spiritual meat and drink, though he eat but a little, shall never be utterly
destitute, Jehn 7. 37, 38. The widows handful of meal, and spoonful of oil,
was never spent till God sent rain upon the earth, 1 Reg. 17. 16. He that has
but a handful of Christ's flesh, and a spoonful of his blood shall never see
want, but shall have enough to satisfy him to all eternity.

6. Christ is such meat and drink as gives life to the Dead. Other meat and
drink cannot preserve a living body from death, much less can it give life,
and restore breath to a dead body. Put the most delicate meat, the strongest
drink into the mouth of a dead man, and they will not give him life if the soul
be quite departed. They may recover from a swoon, they cannot from death. But
the flesh and blood of Christ quicken the dead. Christ by putting his flesh and
blood into the mouth of the dead soul conveys life into it. His flesh and blood
make the lips of the dead to speak. As the Father raises the dead and
quickneth them, so the Son quickneth whom he will, John 5. 21. if thou have any
spiritual life in thee, thou did receive it from the enlivening virtue of
Christ's flesh and blood communicated to thee by the Spirit of life.

7. Christ is such meat and drink as will never surset. All other meat and
drink, if it be taken immoderately and unseasonably, tends to sickness and
su^fetting. The more lushious and delicate they are, the sooner do they surfeit
the body. Hence is Solomon's advice, Prove. 25. 16. drunkenness and surfeting
bring more to their long home, then pining famine. But the flesh and blood of
Christ never surfeit. A man cannot eat and drink too much of Christ, nor can
they eat and drink him unseasonably. There is no killing, no annoying virtue in
Jesus Christ: this meat and drink will never clog, never cloy the stomach.
Christ is an occasion of death to none but to those that refuse him.

8. Christ is such meat and drink as is suitable for all persons at all times.
Other meat and drink is not fit for all persons, nor for the same person in all
conditions. That that will nourish a man may kill a child. That that
strengthens a man in health, may kill him in sickness. There is meat for
strong men, milk for babes, etc. But Jesus Christ is meat and drink for all
persons, for all conditions. He is meat for the strong man, he is milk for the
babe. He is proper for the healthful person, and he is fit for the sickly
person. He is the laboring man's food, and he is the sick man's diet. His blood
is Physical drink to him that is sick; cooling drink to him that is parched
with heat, he is strong cordial-drink to him that faints. He is a suitable
nourishment.

9. Jesus Christ is meat and drink that is freely bestowed. He is not purchased
by our money, nor procured by our industry, but freely communicated. Other meat
and drink is procured at dear rates. Men must Till, and Plow, and Sow their
land; men must breed up cattle, men must plant vines, dig springs and
fountains, otherwise they can expect neither meat nor drink. The Egyptians in
a time of famine pawned their lands for food, they gave their cattle for bread,
and at last sold their land outright that they might have food, Genesis 47. 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20. But Christ is meat and drink, though the most costly in
himself, yet costlesse to us. Nothing is required on our part, but receiving
of him. If any should offer money, Christ would say as Peter to Simon Magus,
Act. 8. 20. Thy money perish with thee. He that will not take this meat and
drink as an Alms, shall famish for want of it.

Use 2. For Exhortation
I. To such as want Christ. My counsel to them is, that they would labor for
an interest in him: you cannot be well without him; you will famish your soul,
if you have not Christ for your meat and drink.

Quest. How may we come to have an interest in him.

1. Be thoroughly persuaded of your need of him. This is the first step to the
attainment of him. Look upon your natural guilt; upon all your sins; upon the
severity of the curse of the Law against disobedience; upon the exact justice
of God in punishing sin; and upon your own helpless*nesse either to satisfy
justice, or to stand out under the deserved wrath of God, and you will be
convinced of your need of him.

2. Wait upon Jesus Christ in that way in which he gives himself to sinners.
The public Ordinances, chiefly the preaching of the Word. In that Christ makes
the tender of himself, and by that ordinarily faith is wrought in the heart to
embrace that tender, Romans 10. 17. Zacheus obtained Christ by being in the way
of Christ, Luke 19. 4. the Ordinances are the Sycamore-tree. C^^mb up into
them, and stay and wait till Christ come. He is to pass by that way.

3. Observe his call and embrace it, Prove. 9. init. Luke 14. 16, 17, 18. Mark
the impressions of the Spirit, the knockings of Christ. Thus did Zacheus, Luke
19. 5, 6. Zacheus, Come down, etc. And he made haste and came down, etc. Beg of
Christ that he would give a heart to come down, when he says, come down. He is
the meat and drink of God. He that refuses him, sins against his own soul.
Consider seriously of it. When you find your stomach crave meat and drink;
think, O what shall I do for spiritual meat and drink?

II. To such as have an interest in Christ, who is meat and drink, let me
commend a few things to you.

1. Feed on him. Eat and drink of this flesh and blood every day. Christians
grow weak, because they let their meat and drink stand by them. It Is not the
flesh in the pot, but the flesh in the stomach that gives nourishment. It Is not
the drink in the vessel, but the drink taken down that revives. Stir up
spiritual hunger, and that will make you feed heartily on Christ. Eat and drink
Christ by Meditation, eat and drink him by Application. Let your faith draw in
Christ in every Ordinance. Keep your Spiritual meals as constantly as you do
your other meals. Your eating will help you to a stomach. Satisfaction and
hunger are mutual helps one to another. Eating and drinking other meat takes
away the appetite, but it increases the spiritual appetite. Fixed times of
spiritual feeding every day, are mavelous profitable. When you have prayed,
call your heart to account what it has taken in of Christ. When you have been
reading, ask it what nourishment it has received from the Word. When the Lords
Supper is over, enquire what refreshment is received. Put your selves forward
to frequent, constant, actual feeding. It Is pity such precious meat and drink
should stand in corners, when the soul has so much need of it.

2. Be thankful for this meat and drink. That it is provided for any; that it
is actually dealt out to you; That you have that meat and drink which others
want. There are many that have no other meat but sin. They drink iniquity
like water, Job 15. 16. Some eat the bread of violence, and drink the wine of
deceit. Some there are that drink the wine of the condemned in the house of
their God, Amos 2. 8. They eat the flesh of men, and drink their blood like new
wine, Micah 3. 3. The greatest part of men have no other meat then the pulse of
worldly comforts; no other drink then the puddle water of created things; and
thou have the flesh and blood of Jesus Christ to eat and drink: prize and value
at an high rate the exceeding riches of this grace. We are to bless God for
our corporal meat and drink. Jesus Christ gave thanks when he ate and drank,
John 6. 11: And so did the Apostles, Acts 27. 35. and so should all men do. It
is brutish to eat and drink without Thanksgiving. How much more cause have we
to bless God for our spiritual meat and drink! The corporal is common to us
with others; This is peculiar only to the Elect; no other shall taste of this
provision.

3. Let your growth be answerable to such excellent feeding. God expects that
our spiritual growth should be proportionable to our spiritual feeding.

Bos Macer pingui in arvo, is prodigious. Husbandmen expect that when they put
their cattle into pastures that are rich, where there is plenty of grass, and
abundance of water, they expect that their growth should be answerable. The
Saints of God are highly fed. They have Angels meat, should they not then do
Angels work? If you do not grow very fast, you will bring up an evil report of
Christ; as if his flesh were not nourishing meat, as if his blood were not
nourishing drink, as if it were meat in show, and not meat indeed; as if it
were drink in show, not drink indeed. Jesus Christ may repent that his body was
broken, his blood poured out to be meat and drink for you that are still lean
and ill-favored, even dwarfs in grace. It Is the Saints privilege that they
shall grow, because Christ is their feeder; and it is their duty, because they
have such food, to be carefully mindful of growing. Every limb of the new man
should thrive. We should grow lower in humility, higher in
heavenly-mindednesse; broader and thicker in spiritual affections, etc. you
cannot express your thankfulness for this royal meat and drink, any other way
so much to the contentment of Christ, as by growing abundantly. It is that
which our Savior requires as a testimony of our union with him, and of
thankfulness for that feeding virtue we receive from him, John 15. 5, 8. As he
is unworthy of meat that does not labor, so is he more unworthy that does not
grow.

4. Show pity to others that feed on other meat and drink. Endeavor to
communicate Christ to those that want him. We naturally pity famished men; lean
cheeks, and pale faces work some bowels in a miser, in an enemy. Commend Christ
to others, persuade them to embrace him. You shall feel no want of meat and
drink for your selves, by communicating Christ to others. Though a thousand eat
and drink of him, no one shall have the less.

5. Do not despair of spiritual growth and strength. It Is a dishonor to Christ
to think that he should starve you. His flesh is strengthening flesh, his blood
is strengthening blood, quickening blood. It Is full of spirits, it is full of
life. Though thy graces be weak, thy spiritual diseases violent, yet despair
not. Thou receivest more from Christ, then thou can lose or spend.

ROMANS 13. 14. Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. VII. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon.
Jan. 11. 1651.

IN this Chapter the Apostle recommends unto Christians the practice of several
excellent duties for the adorning of their holy profession in the world.

1. Subjection to civil Magistracy. This is urged by sundry Arguments from v.
1. to 8.

2. Unto that heavenly and divine grace of love. This is pressed by many
Arguments, from v. 8. to 13.

3. Unto honesty of conversation, v. 13. he would have them to abstain from
all acts of intemperance, such as rioting, drunkenness, etc. and to walk,
(...), decently and honestly.

4. It Is the putting on of Christ's righteousness. This he names to distinguish
Christian graces from moral virtues; unless Christ and his righteousness
imputed by faith be put on, that power to live holily may be derived from that
fountain, a Christians holiness shall not exceed the righteousness of moral
Philosophers, and Jewish Pharisees, They did abstain from many works of the
flesh, they did practice acts of temperance and other virtues, but they did not
draw power from this fountain Jesus Christ, being strangers to Christ and his
righteousness, al their eminent virtues gained no saving acceptance from God.
The Apostle therefore would have Christians not only to walk holily, but to
draw all power of holy walking from Christ the root of all true holiness, v.
14.

5. Not to make any superfluous and inordinate provision for the flesh, ver.
14. latter end. The text has two parts.

1. An Act, (...). It Is a Metaphor borrowed from the putting on of garments,
used by the Apostle often. In reference to the New-man, Ephesians. 4. 24. In
reference to the spiritual Armor, Ephesians. 6. 11. In reference to acts of mercy,
Col. 3. 12. And here in reference to the application of Christ. But Put ye on.

2. The object. The Lord Jesus Christ.

3. Expressions relating to one and the same person. They are many times joined
together, though used singly and apart often. Acts 16. 31. Believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved; so in those Apostolical benedictions.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. We may distinguish them
thus.

Lord is a Name of Power. Jesus a Name of Grace. Christ a Name of Authority.
The words afford a twofold lesson. The one implied, the other expressed, Viz.
1. That Jesus Christ is a spiritual garment. 2. That it is the duty of believers
to put on this garment.

Doct. 1. The Lord Jesus Christ is a spiritual garment. This is necessarily
implied under the metaphor of putting on. This (...) does imply (...). Jesus
Christ is the souls clothing. Christ is a Christians vestment. As he is
spiritual meat and drink, so he is spiritual Apparel.

Two things here to be opened.

1. To prove that Christ is a garment. 2. To show the Analogy between Christ
and other garments.
1. That Christ is a garment. This will appear two ways.

1. From express Scriptures. All those texts where mention is made of the
putting on of Christ, are testimonies of this truth, Gal. 3. 17. As many as are
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. That in Esaias 61. 10. I will rejoice
in the Lord, for he has clothed me with the robes of righteousness; he has
put upon me the garments of salvation. Jerome expounds it of Jesus Christ,
salvatorem and justificatorem nostrum; who covers us with his own
righteousness as with a precious robe of salvation. This is taught by our
Savior in that counsel which he gives to the naked Church of Laodicea, Rev. 3.
18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold, etc. and white raiment that thou may be
clothed. What are those (...) but Jesus Christ himself imputed and applied to
the soul, Isa. 52. 2? its spoken of deliverance from Babylon, and more fully
of redemption by Christ.

2. From typical or more mysterious Scriptures. There are many of this kind.

(1.) Those garments of skins wherewith God clothed our first parents after
the fall. You read of them, Genesis 3. 21. This was not without a mystery. Peter
Martyr has this note upon that place, that by these garments was shadowed out
the promised Messiah, that blessed seed of the woman, who should be sacrificed
upon the cross, and cut out (as it were) into garments for the clothing of
Gods Elect. The like is observed by Interpreters from those kid-skins which
Rebeccah put upon the hands of Jacob, and upon the smooth of his neck, when she
sent him to his Father for the blessing, Genesis 27. 16. They did decipher Christ,
with whom the soul being clothed obtaines a blessing from the hands of God.

(2.) Those garments of the High Priests. God appointed in the Law that
glorious garments should be made for Aaron. You read of them, Exodus 28. 2. What
was typified by those garments? They related to Christ. As the High Priest did
typifie Christ; so the garments did set out the pure administration of Christ,
who offered up himself without spot, Heb. 9. 14. and they did also teach the
people of God, that it is Jesus Christ that clothes their souls with choice
raiment, that fine linen which is the righteousness of Saints, Rev. 19. 18.
This type is more fully expounded in Zech. 3. 3, 4. Those filthy garments noted
Joshuab's sins, and the sins of the people. That raiment which was
afterward put upon him, did signify Christ and his righteousness, wherewith
all spiritual Priests are gloriously decked and clothed.

(3.) The wedding garment in the Gospel. You read of it, Matthew. 22. 11, 12.
What is meant by this wedding garment, but Jesus Christ, who being apprehended,
and put on by faith, works and creates the saving fruits of grace in the heart,
and in the life?

II. Wherein stands the Analogy? There are several uses of garments, in all
which respects Christ is a garment to the soul.

1. Garments are for the covering of the body. Men use garments, that the
nakedness of their bodies may not appear to the eyes of others; for this
reason did our first parents few fig leaves together to hide their nakedness.
In the state of innocence, when the body was without guilt, nakedness was the
greatest Ornament; when sin had polluted the body, then was nakedness
deformity; therefore man sought the best garments he could to cover that
nakedness. For the same reason did God afterward make man garments of skins
to cloth him, Genesis 3. 17. Jesus Christ is a covering to the soul. He is the
Lamb of God that did not only redeem us by his blood, sed etiam lanis
operuit, says Jerome.

(1.) He covers the deformity of our natural filthiness.

(2.) He covers the ugliness of our actual sins, Psalm. 32. 2.

(3.) He covers all the spots of our holy duties. The mercy-seat under the Law,
covered the two Tables of the Decalogue, vid. Exodus 25, 17, 18, 21. This
mercy-seat did typifie Christ, who is called (...), Romans 3. 25. as the
mercy-seat is, Heb. 9. 5. the Cherubims covered the mercy-seat, and the
mercy-seat covered the Ark in which were the two Tables of the Law. Jesus
Christ is that covering mercy-seat, that covers or plasters over all the
sins which believers commit against the Law of God. Hence it is that God is
said not to behold iniquity in Jacob, Numb. 23. 31. He does not see it to
impute it, because it is hidden under the covering mercy-seat, Jesus Christ.

2. Garments are for Ornament. They do set out the body -- Viro vestis magnum
decus addit honesta. Garments to the body are as rich hangings or costly
varnish over a wall of clay, they make it look better then it would do.
Garments do mend the crookedness of bodies that are bowed, and they do set out
the perfections of beautiful bodies. Jesus Christ may well be compared to a
garment in this respect he puts a beauty upon the soul, a rich, lasting,
perfect beauty. Therefore it is that he is compared to the wedding garment,
Matthew. 22. 12. and to the High Priests garments, Exodus 28. 2. which were made
for beauty and glory. Hence it is that believers that are loathsome and crooked
in themselves, are made so excellently beautiful in Christ. You read much in
Solomon's song of a believers comeliness, Vid. Chap. 4. 1 2, 3, etc. and
again, Chap. 7. 1, 2, 3. 4. etc. It Is because of the beautiful dress in which
he is attired. The comely garment puts comeliness on him that wears it. You
read of the orient beauty and rich attire of the Kings daughter, Psalm. 45 13,
14. The Kings daughter is the real Saint, the clothing of wrought gold, and
the raiment of needle work, is nothing but Christ, and the graces he brings
with him in which the soul is invested. Christ is the only Ornament indeed.
He is a crown and diadem upon the head, he is a jewel in the bosom, he is a
ring upon the finger. No soul has any true beauty (though outwardly clothed
in scarlet) that has not on it this garment. Christ is the souls Ornament, as
he is a justifier, and as he is a sanctifier, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He adorns us as he
is our justification, putting us into a state of righteousness. And he adornes
us as he is our Sanctification, by communicating unto us his own comeliness in
the seeds of holiness.

3. Garments are for the defending of the body. They are munimenta corporis.
They are as light armor upon the body. In the Winter they guard the body
against the nipping cold; in the Summer they preserve, and defend it from the
parching heat. Every blast would pinch the body, were it not for our garments,
every thorn would prick, every stone would bruise the foot if it were not
fenced by that raiment which is upon it. The garments are a little movable
Garrison in which the body marches through many inconveniences which otherwise
it could not do. The Lord Jesus Christ is the defense of the soul; he saves it
from many a knock which otherwise it would get.

1. He defends the soul from sin. Sin has not that power and dominion over
a believer that is clothed with Christ, as it has over the soul that is
uncloathed. Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have dominion over you. Christ keeps
sin from bearing that sway in a Saint which it does in other men. It is a
vanquished, wounded, crucified enemy.

2. He defends them from the rage and fury of men. Man would tear them to
pieces, if this garment did not interpose between their rage and the soul. Of
this our Savior speaks, John 16. 33. the sting cannot touch the skin till it
pierce thorough the raiment. The arrow cannot wound the body till it pierce
through the garment. Jesus Christ preserves his people from the devouring teeth
of ungodly enraged men.

3. He defends them from the fiery assaults and onsets of the devil. Simon,
Simon, Satan has desired to sift thee as wheat is sifted: but I have prayed
for thee that thy faith may not fail, Luke 22. 32. This roaring Lion would
tear them into pieces, if this impenetrable garment were not betwixt his teeth
and their souls. These fiery darts would strike to their very hearts, did not
this garment dead them and beat them back again. That the devil by his malice
and power does not destroy you, it is because you are clothed with this
garment. Could Satan either break thorough, or pluck off this garment, he would
as soon prevail over you, as he does over others.

4. He defends them from eternal wrath. God is in himself to sinful men a
consuming fire, Heb. 12. 29. This fire does not burn, nay it does not singe
the believer, because he has this garment upon him, 1 These. 1. 10. It Is a
believers comfort, that the wrath of God must burn Jesus Christ, before it can
burn him. The hottest flames cannot so much as touch the body till they have
burnt thorough the garments. The wrath of God cannot seize any more on Christ,
he has lain under it once for ever, and therefore it shall never seize upon
the believer that is incircled about with Christ, as the body is with the
garment. The fire cannot devour the man while the screen stands between him
and the flame; Jesus Christ is a believers screen, which stands continually
between him and the devouring flame of Gods anger.

5. Garments are for the warmth of the body. It Is a great piece of the
providencial care of God, that garments that have no heat in them, should give
warmth to the body, Job 37. 17. The garments receive heat from the body, and
then they keep the body warm, Job 31. 20. if he were not warmed with the fleece
of my sheep. Jesus Christ is in this respect truly a garment to the soul; he
keeps the soul in a good warmth. There is indeed no spiritual warmth till
Christ have wrought it, and when it is wrought, it is preserved by virtue of
this garment. The two Disciples were very chill, as cold as ye till Christ
wrought a holy heat in them; then they began to glow, yea, to burn; Did not
our hearts burn within u^, etc. Luke 24. 32? if you find any holy heat within
you, you are to attribute it to this heart-warming garment, as to the only
cause of it. The Ordinances would never heat you, if Christ did not first heat
them. We are by nature as cold as that child was, when his spirit was
departed, 2 Reg. 4. 34. And yet Jesus Christ by laying himself upon us, chafes
us into a lively warmth.

6. Garments are used for distinction. They difference one sex from another.
God would have the sexes distinguished visibly by their apparel, Deuteronomy. 22. 5.
The man shall not put on that which appertains to the woman, etc. And as they
distinguish sexes, so they should distinguish the conditions of men: they that
wear soft raiment are in Kings Courts, Matthew. 11. 8. The servant and Master
now cannot be distinguished by their apparel unless it be thus, that the
servant excels, the Merchant and Mechanic, the Prince and Pesant scarce
distinguished. God would have it otherwise, raiment should distinguish
conditions as well as sexes. Christ in this regard is fitly compared to a
garment. He distinguishes between the believer and the unbeleever, between the
regenerate and the unregenerate, 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ, he is a
new creature, and 2 Cor. 13. 5. know you not that Jesus Christ is in you except
you be reprobates. God has made Jesus Christ to be the distinguishing
character between him that shall be saved, and him that shall perish.

The Uses of this Point.
I. Behold Christ's excellency. He is all in all. He is compared to all things
that are both necessary and excellent. He is life, he is meat and drink, he is
a garment. Quid quaeras, says Austin, See in Joh. 19.
quod in illo non invenias? si esuris panis est, si sitis aqua, si in tenebris
lumen est, si nudus es, immortalitatis tibi vestimentum. Ministers are bound
upon all occasions to preach up Christ, that men may see their need of him,
that they may be provoked into a good opinion of him. He is as needful for the
soul, yea, more needful then garments are for the body. He is all good, he has
all good in him, and that in a transcendent manner. Quicquid velle potes and
debes est Dominus Jesus Christus. Consider how far he excels all other
garments.

1. Jesus Christ is a large garment. Other garments can cover but one at once.
One garment cannot cloth several persons, no more then one morsel can feed
several men. But Jesus Christ is a garment of such extent and dimension, that
he can cover many, though they be at never so great a distance. Should I fear
says Bernard, that Christ's righteousness will not serve for him and me? No,
Non est pallium breve, quod duos operire non potest. All the Elect of God,
though they live in several Nations, though they be a multitude which no man
can number, Rev. 7. 9. yet they are all clothed, and all sufficiently clothed
with this one garment. I saw says the Evangelist, a wonder in heaven, a woman
clothed with the Sun, Rev. 12. 1. This woman is the whole Church of God. This
Sun that covers the woman, is Christ the Sun of righteousness, as he is
called, Mal. 4. 1. His skirt is large enough to cover his whole Church, and yet
never a member can complain of want.

2. Jesus Christ is a garment for every part. Your material garments will not
serve every part. That which is proper for the head will not cover the loins;
that which fits the body will not fit the feet. Every part of the body has a
distinct clothing which is only proper for it self. But now Christ is a
garment that fits every part. He is the Diadem or Crown upon the head, he is
the robe upon the body, he is the shoes upon the feet, Luke 15. 22. Christ is
a complete suit of apparel, from head to foot the soul is perfectly clothed.

3. Jesus Christ has the uses of all garments. There is no one garment that
serves for all uses to the body. Some Garments are good for covering, but they
are not for beauty. Others serve for ornament and beauty, but they do not serve
for defense. Some garments are good in the cold, but they are not so useful and
fit in a time of heat. Persons that are of ability have several garments for
several uses, because no one garment is fit for all. But Jesus Christ is a
garment for all uses to the soul. He is for covering, and for ornament, and
for defense; as good for all uses as for any use. He is a Winter-garment, and
he is a Summer-garment; he is as good for cooling as for heating. He is the
travellors, and he is the laborers garment, and he is the soldiers garment.
He is light for walking, thick for stormy weather; He is strong for fighting,
and spiritual warring against Satan and his temptations. Christ suits all the
occasions of the soul. He is wisdom, righteousness, sanctification and
redemption, 1 Cor. 5. 30.

4. Jesus Christ is a garment fit for all sexes, for all sizes, for all
conditions. No one garment will fit all bodies. That which is decency in one
sex would be monstrousness on the other. That garment which fits a child,
would be unuseful to a grown man. That which is proper for the Subject, would
be unsuitable for the Princes wear. But now Christ is as proper for one as for
another. He is as fit for the woman, as for the man; for the child, as for the
father; for the King, as for the Subject. As the Apostle says in another case,
we may say in this. There is neither Barbarian, Scythian, Jew nor Gentile, male
nor female, bond nor free, but ye are all one in Christ, Col. 3. 11. God has
made Jesus Christ a fit garment for the souls of all sorts of men. There is no
soul too big, none too little, none too small, none too great for Jesus Christ
to array and cover.

5. Jesus Christ is a durable garment. All other garments are of a moldring
nature. The moth corrupts them; old age takes away the beauty of them; the
strongest and finest garments turn to rags by daily use. But Jesus Christ is a
lasting garment; the moth cannot fret it, old age cannot wear it thin. Christ
is now as fresh as when he was first put upon Adam in Paradise. When our bodily
garments shall be plucked off, yea, when the very garments of our bodies like
the mantle of Elijah, shall fall into dust, then will this garment abide upon
the soul as beautiful as now it is. The Lord did miraculously preserve the
garments of the Israelites from waxing old, Deuteronomy. 8. 4. Though they were worn
forty years in the wilderness, yet they were not threed-bare. Their bodies
wasted, but their garments did not waste. They were as fresh when they came to
Canaan as they were when they came out of Egypt. Jesus Christ, though he be
worn every day, yet he does not wax old. He is as fresh upon the soul on its
dying day, as upon the first moment of its regeneration.

6. Jesus Christ is a free garment. All that is required on men's part is to put
him on. He is provided without our cost, without our care. Though he be the
most costly garment in himself, yet he is the most cheap garment in the world.
Other garments cannot be had without money, Christ is obtained without money,
without price. The Scripture speaks of buying him, Rev. 3. 18. this buying is
free receiving. The Prophets expound the phrase, Esaias 55. 1. Buy milk and wine
without money, without price. Indeed this garment is so invaluably rich, that
all the treasure in the world cannot purchase one inch of it. He that dreams
of buying Christ, shall die without Christ.

II. Behold the sufficiency of Christ for spiritual life. Two things are
necessary for the bodily life, food and raiment, 1 Timothy 6. 8. Jesus Christ is
both food and raiment. He is set out as raiment in Baptism. Gal. 3. 27. and he
is held out as food in the Sacrament of the Supper. He is every way sufficient
for all the concernments of the soul; he feeds it, he clothes it, and that
with the best food, and the best raiment, with himself. His flesh is meat, his
blood is drink, his righteousness is clothing, substantial durable clothing.

III. The misery of those that are without Christ. All men are by nature
strangers to Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12. He that is without Christ, is without
spiritual raiment, he is a naked man. The Scripture calls the state of nature a
state of nakedness, Ezekiel. 16. 4, 8. and Rev. 3. 18. A naked condition is a
miserable condition. Nakedness is a very comprehensive word. A naked man is
exposed to the scorn of every eye, its a shameful object, Rev. 3. 18. A naked
man is exposed to every storm; every shower wets him, every wind pierces him. A
naked man is unfit for employment; he is neither fit to fight, nor to labor.
Such as are without Christ are unspeakably miserable. Their condition is full
of shame, their condition is full of danger; they have nothing to cover them
from Gods wrath, from the devils rage. They have nothing to warm their hearts
when they are cold with fears, terrors, despaires, and spiritual anguish. A
naked body amongst dar^s and swords, is not such a spectacle of compassion as a
naked soul exposed to the arrows of Gods wrath. They are as unfit for any
work, as the naked man is for labor and travel, Vid. Esaias 3. 6. he that is
without Christ, has neither bread nor raiment.

IV. The misery of those that reject Christ. None but mad men and barbarous men
reject clothing. It Is the character of a distracted madman to refuse raiment.
Vid. Luke 8. 27. You read a sad story of a man possessed with a Legion of
devils, and the text says, he wore no clothes; his madness is evidenced by
that that he would suffer no clothes to be put upon him; for v. 35. When
Christ had cured him, the text says, he sat at the feet of Jesus clothed,
and in his right mind. It Is a sign that that man is spiritually possessed
with a Legion of devils, that will not be clothed with this spiritual garment.
And yet the world is full of these spiritual Bedlams. They will go naked. Let
Ministers say what they will, let the spirit of God use never so much
importunity, they will not be clothed. They will have none of Christ. These
garments are hanged out every day in the public market, yea, men are entreated
to take them even without money, and yet they will not. Is it not just that
such men should be buried in hell in their own rags, that will not embrace
Christ that they may be clothed with eternal salvation.

V. None so well arrayed as Saints. Dives had purple, etc. Luke 16. 19. They
have Christ.

VI. Here is comfort for poor Christians, counsel for proud men, you that will
have the best apparel and new fashion.

VII. When you put on your garments, think of Christ. A serious Christian may
spirituallize every thing he uses or beholds.

VIII. Hinder none from Christ, Exodus 22. 27, 28. Job 24. 7. Amos 2. 8.

Doct. 2. 'Its the duty of men to put on the Lord Jesus Christ. This is often
recommended to us in Scripture. Two things I shall briefly open.

1. What it is to put on Christ, How we must put him on. 2. Why we must put him
on.

1. Christ is put on two ways. There is a double putting on of Christ.

1. A putting on of Christ for justification. When by faith we apply him unto
our selves, by faith for righteousness. The Apostle tells us that Christ is
made unto us of God justification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. He is called Jehovah, our
righteousness, Jer. 23 6. It Is by his righteousness that the believer is
constituted righteous in foro Dei; which is by an act of grace of God imputing
and reckoning this perfect righteousness of Christ unto him, as his own
righteousness. Now then does a person put on Christ, when by an act of faith,
he does apply Christ and his righteousness unto himself for justification.
This was that which the Apostle desired, Phil. 3. 9 That he might be found in
Christ, not having his own righteousness which is by the Law, but that which
is by the faith of Jesus Christ, the righteousness of God by faith. When this
righteousness is actually applied, received, relied upon, then is Christ put
on: This is one piece.

2. A putting on of Christ by imitation. When we imitate the gracious life of
Christ. This refers to Sanctification, and new obedience. To put on Christ, is
virtute Spiritus Christi undique nos munire, qua idonei ad omnes parts
sanctitatis reddamur, Calvin. And so Erasmus. In as much as ye are spiritually
ingraffed into Christ, hunc ipsum induite, eluceat in omni vita quem sitis
professi, exprimite quem imbibistis, etc. Zuinglius. When we apply his
righteousness for our justification, when we put on his example, and express
his virtues in a course of sanctification, then, and not till then do we put on
Christ as the Scripture requires.

II. Why we must put him on. There is good reason. I might be large in each,
but I shall only give general Reasons.

1. Christ is of no effect to us if we do not put him on. Garments neither
warm, nor cover, nor defend, nor adorn the body if they be not put on. Christ
is rendered invalid to such as do not apply him. His righteousness will not
justify you, if you do not by faith put it on as a garment. His holy life will
do you no good if you do not imitate it. His righteousness will perish as to
you; his virtues will be lost as to you, if you do not actually put on both.
The Apostle speaks of making Christ of no effect, Gal. 5. 4.

2. If we do not put on Christ both these ways, we can have no hopes of
salvation. If Jesus Christ be not put on for righteousness, there is no
remission of sin, All our guilt is imputed to our selves. It Is by the
imputation of his righteousness that our sins are covered, Romans 5. 20. And
where there is no remission, there can be no salvation. And if we do not put on
the virtues of Christ in a course of sanctification, we can have no
Scripture-hope of heaven. The Apostle is express for this. He that has this
hope, purifieth himself as Christ is pure, 1 John 3. 3. Our Justification is by
Christ's righteousness, and our Sanctification is an evidence of our
Justification. Ergo.

The Uses of this.
1. What shall we say of those that instead of putting on Christ, put on their
own works and duties? The Papists teach their proselytes to cover themselves
not with Christ and his righteousness, but with their own works, and their own
righteousness. They call Impu^^tive righteousness in scorn putative
righteousness. Well! let them cloth themselves with their own fleece, but let
us be clothed only with Christ's righteousness. Our own righteousness is too
thin, and too narrow, it will neither cover us, nor warm us, Esaias 28. 20. our
own righteousness is a soiled garment, a very filthy rag, Esaias 64. 6. The
Apostle Paul, was as touching the righteousness of the Law blameless, Phil.
3. 6. and yet he durst not appear before God in the day of judgment in that
garment, but in the garment of Christ's righteousness, Phil. 3. 9. Let us
therefore abhor this Doctrine; rather take Christ's counsel, then Antichrists
counsel. Antichrists advice is, buy of him, etc. but Christ's counsel is to buy
of him precious raiment, Rev. 3. 18. Let us rather be advised by the Churches
Counselor Christ, Isa. 9. 6 then by him who is next to Satan the Churches
greatest outward destroyer.

2. What shall we say of those that instead of putting on Christ by imitation
put on the devil. Instead of expressing the virtues of Jesus Christ, hold out
the vices of Satan; live inordinately, unholily, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, full of envy, malice, intemperance, covetousness, licentiousness
of every kind; instead of putting on Christ themselves, they hate, persecute
all those that do thus put him on. Let them know, they that will not put on
Christ by sanctification, shall not put him on for justification. He is made of
God to us, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
He that rejects him as to sanctification, shall be rejected by him as to
righteousness and redemption.

3. Be entreated to put on Christ. Put him on both these ways.

1. Put him on for righteousness. 1. Have you not all need of him? are you not
unrighteous? are ye not under guilt? If your righteousnesses be as filthy rags,
what are your unrighteousnesses? 2. Is there any other garment that will carry
you dry thorough the dreadful storms of Gods wrath? you must make another
Scripture if you will find another garment. Gods Scripture mentions no other
covering but Gods righteousness. Read and remember that Text, Romans 9. 30, 31,
32. 3. Undervalue not the great love, and deep design of God in providing his
Son for your raiment, He is made unto us of God wisdom, righteousness, 1 Cor.
1. 30. Therefore called the righteousness of God, Phil. 3. 9. 4. God will
accept of nothing you do till you be invested in this garment. He will own none
that come not in his own livery. You shall have no blessing, yea you shall have
his curse, if you have not the kid-skins of Christ's righteousness upon your
necks, and upon the smooth of your hands; your elder brothers garments must be
on you, else you cannot be blessed. Now that you may put on Christ, you must
(1) put off all thoughts of your own worth. These are inconsistent, Phil. 3. 7,
8, 9. 2. Beg of him that he would cloth you. Lie at his feet, as Ruth did at
the feet of Boaz, and say, Spread thy skirt over me, for thou art my near
kinsman, Ruth 3. 9. I conclude this with comparing those two Scriptures, Jer.
23. 6. with Jer. 33* 16. in the first, Christ is called the Lord our
righteousness, in the other the Church is so called. 1. Because that which is
proper to the head, is common to all the members. 2. They are as willing to
apply Christ's righteousness, as he is to communicate it.

2. Put him on by a holy imitation. Walk as Christ walked. 1. Christianity
consists chiefly in this. Christianity is imitatio divinae naturae, 1 Pet. 2.
21. 2. It Is one end of Christ's incarnation. He became man, that that might be a
perfect pattern of holiness in our nature. 3. He that does not imitate his
life, shall have no benefit by his death, 1 Pet. 2. 21.

ESAIAS 32. 2. And a man shall be as a hiding place VIII. SERMON. a^ Mary Wolnoth.
Lon. Feb. 8. 1651.
from the wind.
IN this Chapter we have a glorious prophecy of the spiritual Kingdom of
Christ. It Is written by the Prophet for the consolation of the Church in her
present afflicted condition. This Prophecy has four parts.

1. The constitution of this Kingdom, ver. 1. to 9.

2. An exhortation given unto the people, by repentance to prevent the miseries
which should happen before the constitution of this Kingdom, v. 9. to 15.

3. A description of that good which the godly should receive from this
Kingdom, v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.

4. The conclusion of all in that Epiphonema, v. 20. wherein the Prophet
compares the people of God to those happy husbandmen, who are in expectation of
a plentiful harvest, after their labors and cost in tilling and sowing.
Blessed are they that sow beside all waters, that send forth thither the feet
of the ox and the ass. In the constitution of this Kingdom two things are to
be observed.

(1.) The safe administration of it. This is in the two former verses. Behold a
King, etc. By King, we are to understand Christ the King of his Church; by
Princes we are to understand those that do under Christ administer this
Kingdom. It Is an allegory taken from humane Kingdoms, in which the King
himself, and all his officers do administer in righteousness. The safety of
this government is expressed in the second verse, And a man shall be as a
hiding place from the wind, etc.

2. The true simplicity of it in the public and private administration of all
things, and all persons, ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And the eyes of them that see
shall not be dim, etc. the administration of this Kingdom shall be with
sincerity as well as safety. God would give men eyes to see and ears to hear.
Those that before were spiritually blind and deaf, should now have spiritual
eyes to see, and ears to hear. Those that were rash and heady, should now
understand knowledge, those that stammerd in the things of Christ should now
speak plainly, v. 3, 4. yea, there should be such simplicity in the
administration of this Kingdom, that vices should not be called any more by
the names of virtues; evil should not be called good, nor good evil, but every
thing should be called by its own name, ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. The vile person shall
be no more called liberal, nor the churl said to be b^untiful, etc. Holiness
shall be called holiness, covetousness covetousness, baseness shall be
called baseness under this spiritual Kingdom of Christ.

The Text falls under the first of these; viz. the safe administration of this
Kingdom. And a man, etc. we may divide it into two parts. 1. A danger hinted,
Wind. 2. A remedy discovered, in which are,

1. The Protector. A man. It Is ille vir (...) with an Article, this man. It Is
the King mentioned in the former verse; he that is there called King, is here
called a man. It Is Christ who is a man, and more then a man, God-man. This is
the Protector.

2. The Protection. This is set down by way of comparison. Here are four
resemblances. 1. As a hiding place from the wind. 2. As a covert from the
tempest. 3. As rivers of water in a dry place. 4. As the shadow of a great
rock in a weary land. I am now to speak of the first, namely, a hiding place
from the wind. By wind we are to understand, troubles, afflictions,
tempestuous storms, whether they be outward or inward. Here are four words
which all signify one and the same thing; only they are varyed a little, that
they may be fitted to the several metaphors: wind, tempest, a dry place, a
weary land, Trials, tribulations, temptations are usually called wind in
Scripture, as Matthew. 25. 27. The rain descended, and the winds blew, and the
floods came, etc. Two Observations lie clear in the Text.

1. That godly men must expect windy days even in the times of the Gospel.

2. That Jesus Christ is a hiding place to believers in all the windy days
which they meet with in this life.

I shall begin with the first, viz.

Doct. 1. That godly men must expect to meet with windy days even under the
Kingdom of Christ: Christ's Kingdom, though it be a glorious Kingdom, yet it
is not without stormy winds and tempests. There is under the Kingdom of
Christ a great deal of inward peace, serenity and calmnesse under the Kingdom
of Christ. The Scripture foretells this, Psalm. 72. 7. In his days shall the
righteous flourish, and abundance of peace, so long as the moon endures, Esaias
32. 17, 18. The work of righteousness shall be peace, etc. And my people shall
dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure dwellings, and in quiet resting
places. And the Scripture makes mention of external peace and quietness which
shall be under the Kingdom of Christ, Esaias 11. 6, 7, 8. The wolf also shall
dwell with the lamb, etc. And, Mic. 4. 3, 4 He shall judge among many people,
and rebuke strong Nations afar off; and they shall break their swords into
plow-shares, and their spears into pruning books, etc. These and many
prophecies of this nature are yet, I suppose, to be fulfilled, and they shall
have their accomplishment before the end of this life. But yet believers are to
meet with windy days even in Gospel times.

1. Windy days of outward troubles. Outward afflictions of all sorts are to be
expected, sickness, weakness, poverty, reproach, persecution and all other
evils. These winds have blown very sharp upon the Apostles, Disciples,
Martyrs, and other servants of God in their generations; yea, upon whole
Churches, the seven Churches are overturned by them. And they do so continue to
this very day. Through many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of
heaven. This was Paul's Doctrine, Act. 14. 22. Ye shall have tribulation ten
days; this message is sent by Christ to the Church of Smyrna, Rev. 3. 10. And
our Savior himself foretold the Church before his departure, that these winds
would arise, Joh. 16. 33. In the world ye shall have tribulation. And Rev. 11.
22. the holy City is given unto the Gentiles to be trod under foot forty two
months, and ver. 3. of that Chapter, the witnesses shall for the space of one
thousand two hundred sixty days (which is the whole time of Antichrists
reign) prophecy in sackcloth; and to this very day we see they have their
sackcloth upon their loins. Till the fall of Antichrist these windy days will
not be over.

2. Windy days of inward troubles; Temptations, desertions, inward fears and
shakings in the soul. There will be these spiritual earthquakes and agonies in
the souls of Gods people even in Gospel Times. This wind did beat violently
upon the Apostles; without were sightings, within were fears, 2 Cor. 7. 5.
Paul felt these winds make a horrible noise in his bowels, in those fierce
buffettings of Satan which he speaks of, 2 Cor. 12. 7. yea, these winds blew
fiercely upon Christ himself, when he uttered those doleful words; Eli, Eli,
Lamasab achthani, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27. ^6. And
if the King of the Church met with such a windy day of temptation, as we read,
Mat. 4. init. and of desertion, as we read in this Text; the subjects must
expect to meet with them. I shall give you a treble account of this point.

1. There is a devil, an Antichrist, wicked men even under Christ's Kingdom.

2. There is sin under the Gospel. And where there is sin, there cannot but
be winds. The wind is (as the Philosopher teaches us) an exhalation arising
from the earth, drawn upwards by the power of the Sun, which meeting with the
cold of the middle region of the air, is beaten back again; it is so light
that it cannot descend, and so violently resisted that it cannot ascend,
therefore it is carried aslaunt with a mighty violence through the air. The
matter of winds is an exhalation mixed for the Magir. Phys.
most part with vapors, from whence it is that the wind is sometimes moist.
The same exhalations or vapors enclosed in the bowels of the earth, and not
finding an open passage cause an earthquake. Sin is the matter of spiritual
winds without, and spiritual earthquakes within. Now as there will be winds
and earthquakes where there is the matter of them; so there cannot but be the
winds of outward troubles, and the earthquakes of spiritual troubles where
sin is, which does engender and breed both these. Now the people of God sin
under the Gospel, and from their sins do these winds and earthquakes
proceed. Sin creates storms in Gospel-dayes.

3. These winds are for the advantage of believers even under the Gospel; ye
are in affliction if need be, through manifold temptations, 1 Pet 16. The
winds are not more necessary for the world, then these winds are for the
souls of Gods people even in Gospel times; I shall show you the usefulness of
the winds of heaven for the earth, and show you the usefulness of these
spiritual winds in the same respects to the soul. Consider the parallel in
five things.

1. The wind is useful for purification. The wind cleanses and sweetens the
air, carries away and disperses noysom and infectious vapors that are hurtful
to the bodies of men and other creatures; the wind is ventilabrum naturae,
natures fan by which all putrefying vapors are driven away, Vid. Job 37. 21.
Men see not the bright light which is in the clouds: but the wind passes and
cleanses them. These spiritual winds, both inward and outward have, when
sanctified by God, a purifying virtue. Those corrupting infectious mists and
vapors of sin which pollute the soul, are purged and driven away by the
blasts of these winds. Dan. 11. 35. Many shall fall, ^o try them, and to purge
them, and to make them white. No soul is ordinarily so full of infectious
savor as those that want these winds. Moab has been at ease from his youth,
etc, Esaias 48. 11. And no Christians have such sweet souls as those that are
frequently visited with these winds of trouble. Corruption will hardly fasten
where these winds do ordinarily blow. Saints have foggy souls in Gospeltimes.

2. The wind has a searching virtue. It Is a penetrating creature; If there be
the least chink or cranie, the wind will find it out. As the light finds out
the least hole, so does the wind. These spiritual winds are of a searching
and discovering nature. Temptations, desertions, outward troubles, will search
the very inward parts of the soul. Christians have found out those defects in
themselves, which they could never espy till God sent these winds to blow upon
them. Many holes and cranies they have seen in their own spirits; which they
could never discern till these windy days arose upon them. He opens their
years to discipline, and shows them wherein they have exceeded, Job 36. 9.
Transgressions, excesses, and spiritual defects too are found out by these
winds and tempests. Our Savior lays down this useful effect of these
tempestuous days, Mat. 7. 25, 27. the winds blew, etc. and it fell not, etc.
Great winds do discover whether your houses be made of firm timber, or of
shaking rotten wood. These spiritual winds are great discoverers, especially
if they be in extremity. A sword shall pierce through thine own soul also, that
the thoughts of many hearts may be discovered. The words of Simeon to the
Virgin-Mary, Luke 2. 35. the stony ground is not discovered till these winds
arise, but then it is fully discovered, Mat. 13. 20, 21. No Christian knows
himself so thoroughly as he that has traveled thorough these gusts of
trouble. Peter did not know his own weakness till these high winds had
searched him; then he saw the unworthy fear and Apostasy of his own heart,
Mat. 26. 70, 72, 74. Peter did not know his own distrustfulnesse till the wind
began to be boistrous, then he saw he could sink as well as another man, Mat.
14. 30. Saints need self-discovery under Christ's Kingdom.

3. The wind has a cooling virtue. When the air is heated by the scortching
beams of the Sun, the wind passes thorough it, and brings it into a cool
temper again. These spiritual winds cool the soul. Christians are sometimes
scalding-hot in the pursuit of the world, or perhaps of some sin. God stirs
up these winds and cooles that heat. Some sharp wind of distress of
conscience, some gust of temptation, some piercing blast of trouble abares
those feverish heats, removes that eagerness which was before in the soul
after things that cannot profit. That wind of God that blew in Paul's face,
coold that zeal for persecution which was in his heart, Acts 9. 1, 3, 4.

4. The wind makes men keep their garments closer about them. You have heard of
the fable of the Sun and the Wind striving for the Travelers cloak; the
issue was, the Sun got it; the more violently the Wind blew, the faster he
held it. These spiritual Winds make the soul look better to his spiritual
garments; he holds all his graces faster then, then at another time. He keeps
his faith, his hope, his patience, his integrity tackt close about him. Job
never was so careful of keeping his garments, as when he met with these winds.
Vid. Chap. 27. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. As God lives says he, who has taken away my
judgment, etc. All that while my breath is in me, etc. my righteousness I
hold fast and will not let it go, till I die I will not remove my integrity
from me. Soldiers never keep their armor so carefully as when they come to an
encounter. Christians are never so careful of their spiritual harness as when
the winds of tribulation and temptation beat upon them; And we have need to
keep our garments even under the Gospel.

5. The wind has an awakening power. When it lifts up its voice with
violence, the noise is so dreadful, that sleep is taken away from those that
hear it. The Mariner cannot sleep when the winds are up. The Ship-master
wondered that Jonah could sleep when the Winds were so high, and the Sea so
raging, Jonah 1. 6. These spiritual Winds awaken the soul out of sloth and
carnal security. When there is an earthquake of inward trouble in the
conscience; when there is a tempest of outward trouble upon the body, the soul
is made more watchful then ever it was; if these storms be sanctified it will
be so. Psalm. 78. 4. Thou hold mine eyes waking, says Asaph. That storm of
temptation which then lay upon him, kept the eyes of his soul waking, as well
as the eyes of his body. That earthquake which was at midnight, when Paul and
Silas sang praises to God, awakened the sleepy Jailer, Act. 16. 26, 27. the
natural conscience is startled by such providence, much more is the regenerate
conscience. These Winds are Gods Physic which he uses to remove spiritual
security; and God will make it effectual to accomplish his end. Jonah slept a
while, but God did awake him both in his sleepy body, and more sleepy soul,
before these winds ceased blowing, Mat. 26, 40, 41, 43. Saints under the
Gospel have need of awakening.

The Uses of this.
Use 1. Expect these windy days. Do not think that now the Gospel is come, now
Christ's Kingdom is set up, storms are at an end. God does every day confute
this folly. The end of one tempest has been the beginning of another. Hitherto
it has been so, and we can see nothing to make us think that it shall yet be
otherwise. If you believe not this truth, you will have little benefit by the
next doctrine. The winds will be very high in the Church of God. This is
evident in Scripture; however it be, this is our comfort; These Winds if we be
godly, will blow us faster to heaven; and the higher the Winds are, the nearer
is the calm. Expect outward storms. Expect inward tempests. Do not believe
your selves to be past either of these. Our former storms may perhaps prove
calm weather, if they be compared with our future tempests. Preparing for them
will be no prejudice if they never come. When you are out of one temptation,
look for another before Antichrists utter downfall.

Use 2. Get good provision against these windy days come. Take to your selves
the whole Armor of God that ye may stand when the Winds are at the highest.
Whether they be tempests without, or storms within; outward blasts, or inward
earthquakes. It Is the Apostles counsel, Ephesians. 6. 13, 14. God that foretells evil
days, has provided Armor of proof against those days. Take this Armor. 1.
No other Armor will serve, Saul's Armor will not serve Gods soldiers. 2. This
Armor will serve, it was never battered, it will never be broken. Take it
therefore and put it on. 1. Put it on wholly. 2. Put it on speedily. 3. Use it
when it is on. 4. When you have done all, hide your selves in Christ, who is
here called for their comfort, Latibulum a vento: of which comfortable point I
shall speak the next time.

ESAIAS 32. 2. And a man shall be as a hiding place IX. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth.
Lon. Feb. 15. 1651.
from the wind.
TWo things I observed in this Text.

1. A danger intimated, in this word, Wind.

2. A remedy prescribed, A man shall be as a hiding place.

The Observations were two.

1. That Christians must expect to meet with windy days, even under the
Kingdom of Christ. Of which I have spoken.

Doct 2. That Jesus Christ is the believers hiding place in all the windy days
which they meet withal in the world.

He is latibulum, or Absconsio a vento, whether they be windy days of outward
trouble, or windy days of inward trouble, temptation, desertion, discouraging
fears and terrors. Christ is a hiding place to them in all these days and in
all these cases. Here are four words used in this text, which set out this
hiding virtue that is in Christ, hiding place, covert, rivers of water, sha^ow
of a rock. Many other Scriptures bear pregnant testimony to this truth. Esaias 4.
5, 6. The Lord will creat^ upon Mount Sion, upon every dwelling place of Mount
Sion, and upon all her assemblies, a cloud, etc. This is spoken of Christ the
beautiful branch of the Lord, v. 2. This glorious and beautiful branch, the
root of the stock of Jesse shall be a cloud, and smoke, a defense, a
Tabernacle, a shadow, a place of refuge, a covert, and that not to one, but to
every dwelling place of Mount Sion, and to all her Assemblies. To this agrees
that of our Savior, Cant. 2. 14. O my dove that art in the clefts of the rock,
and in the secret place of the stairs. Jesus Christ is this cleft of the rock,
he is this secret place of the stairs. Christ is called Shiloh, Genesis 49. 10.
Shiloh is from the root (...) which signifies in quiet^ vel pace agere,
tranquille and in otio vivere, all safety is in Christ. The tunicle in which
the infant is wrapped in the mothers belly, is called by the Hebrews Shiloh,
because it lies there securely out of fear. In the prosecution of this point, I
shall open these three things.

1. What it is in Christ that is a hiding place. 2. What it is of theirs that
Christ hides. 3. Why Christ is a hiding place to them.
1. There are several things in Jesus Christ which make up this hiding place:
indeed every thing in Christ is a hiding place. I shall instance in some.

1. The providence of Christ. The Scripture tells us that the eyes of the Lord
run to and fro thoroughout the earth, 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. Jesus Christ has the
same watchful eyes of providence over his people that the Father has, Col. 3.
17. By him all things consist. It Is one Argument Divines bring to prove Christ's
divinity, because be governs the world by his providence, as the Father does,
John 5. 17. My Father works hitherto, and I work. It Is meant of his
providential working. And Heb. 1. 3. Christ is said to uphold all things by the
Word of his Power, which is an act of providence. Now as Christ by his
providence watches over all things and and creatures; so do his eyes watch
continually over his people. Esaias 27. 3. I the Lord do keep it, I will keep it
night and day. This is one great stone of this biding place.

2. The Attributes of Christ. All the Divine Attributes are ascribed to Christ
as well as to the Father. Eternity, Micah 5. 2. Almightinesse, Esa^ 9. 6.
Omniscience, Heb. 4. 13. It Is spoken of Christ our high Priest. Wisdom, Prove.
9. 1. He is called God only wise, Jude 25. All these Attributes are as so many
stones that make this hiding place. Prove. 18. 10. The Name of the Lord is a
strong Tower. Christ's name the Prophet mentions, Esaias 9. ^. Wonderful,
Counselor, etc. every one of these names is a room in this hiding place.

3. The Promises of Christ. All the promises of God are in Christ yea, and in
him Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. Christ has purchased them; they all have their
ratification and accomplishment in Christ. The Scripture is full of promises of
all sorts; of protection, provision, deliverance, salvation. Every promise is a
piece of this hiding place. Ps. 18. 30. The Word of the Lord is tried. He is a
buckler to them that trust in him. Christ's Word of Promise is the souls defense.

4. The merits of Christ. Christ has by the shedding of his blood merited for
his Elect whatsoever is necessary. These merits are a believers hiding place. O
my dove that art in the clefts of the rock, Cant. 2. 14. those foramina petrae
are vulnera Christ^. There the believer hides himself in the time of danger. As
the dove when she is pursued flies to her windows; so the believer flies to the
wounds of Christ, and there is hid.

5. The intercession of Christ. The Scripture tells us that Christ appears
continually before the Father for us, he is still moving for us at the right
hand of God. His Intercession in heaven is the believers Sanctuary on earth. So
the Apostle tells us in two places, Heb. 6. 18, 19, 20. and Heb. 7. 25. He is
able to save, etc. because he lives for ever to make Intercession for us.
Christ directs Peter to this, Luke 22. 31.

2. What it is of a believer that Christ is a hiding place unto.

1. Christ is a hiding place to the outward man. He hides that in time of
storms, Christ hides that two ways.

(1.) Sometimes he hides it from danger. He keeps his people from the rage of
them that would swallow them. Thus the Church was hid, Rev, 12. 6. The woman
fled into the Wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, that they
should feed her there one thousand two hundred sixty days. Thus David was
often hid from the fury of Saul, and his Courtiers that sought his life.

(2) Sometimes God hides it in danger. That though his people be in danger, yet
they are not destroyed. Thus the Church was hid in Egypt. The bush was burning,
and yet was not consumed, Ex. 3. 2.

2. Christ is a hiding place to the inward man. And herein he excells all other
hiding places.

(1) He hides the soul from sin. The best of his people would sin more
frequently, and more grievously, if Jesus Christ did not hide them from sin.

(2) He hides the soul from temptations. He chains up Satan from tempting
them, that he cannot bait them so furiously as he would; and when he suffers
Satan to tempt, he does not suffer them to be utterly overcome. Thus he was a
hiding place to Peter, Luke 22. 31. Thus he was a hiding place to Saint Paul, 2
Cor. 12. 7. Though he did not hide him from being buffetted, yet he hid him
from being vanquished by those buffettings.

(3) He hides their graces. Their faith, their hope, their patience, their
humility, etc. were not Christ a hiding place to their very graces; they would
wither, they would die, they would come to nothing: he hides the root of grace,
keeps that warm that it perish not, yea he so hides it, as that he makes it
fructify.

(4) He hides their joy, their peace of conscience. Our comforts have need of
Christ's protection, as well as our graces. Should not he be a hiding to our
inward peace and joy; the wind of terror and temptation would soon blow them
away. In the world ye shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace,
John 16. 33. Our peace is built upon Christ, our peace is laid up in Christ,
our peace is preserved and defended by Christ. The Devil would soon quench our
joy, if Christ were not a hiding place to it. Jesus Christ is in every place,
and in every thing a hiding place to his people.

3. Why Christ is a hiding place to them. There is a double ground of it.
Necessity. Convenience

I. It Is necessary that Christ should be their hiding place. This necessity is
grounded upon a double consideration.

1. Believers want a hiding place. They are exposed to many enemies, to many
dangers. The world, the devil, the flesh are assailing, pursuing, making
attempts upon them every day, and that several ways. Luther was wont to
compare the Church to a poor weak Virgin in a wild Wilderness, where there is
nothing but ravenous creatures that seek her life. Our Saviors comparison is
somewhat like it, Lak. 10. 3. Behold, I send you forth as sheep among wolves.
Joseph is a fruitful bough. The Archers have shot at him, etc. Genesis 49. 23, 24,
25. Believers are in this world in a strange land; they are not of the world,
and therefore the world hates them. They want a hiding place for their bodies,
for their souls, for their graces, for their comforts. The chicken does not
want the wing and the nest, more then they do a hiding place.

2. There is none other besides Jesus Christ that can be a hiding place for
them.

First, they cannot be hiding places to themselves. They are weak and foolish,
they expose themselves to danger; they know not well how to hide themselves in
Christ, much more unable are they to be protectors to themselves. Should Christ
leave the best of us to our selves, we should be our own Butchers, not
Protectours.

Secondly, no other creature can protect and hide them. Kings and Princes, they
cannot hide us, Psalm 146. 3. and if they cannot, inferior men are much more
unable. Horses and Armies, they cannot be a hiding place to us, Psalm 33. 16,
17. They are soon routed and scattered. If they could be hiding places to our
bodies, yet surely to ou^ souls they cannot. Gold and Silver cannot be a
hiding place to us. Though men say to their wedge of Gold, thou art my
confidence, Job 31. 24. yet will not mountains of Gold and silver be safe
hiding places in the day of trouble. The Holy Angels cannot be hiding places to
us. They are but subprotectors; they do but spread Christ's wings over us The
truth is, all creatures want hiding places for themselves. The best of
creatures are but as the Dyal, they cast no shadow unless the Sun shine upon
them. The best of creatures is like Jonahs Gourd, the least worm eats them
thorough and thorough in a short time.

II. There is Convenience as well as Necessity. It Is very expedient that Christ
should be a hiding place to believers.

First, he has all qualifications that may fit him for this work.

1. He has strength. A hiding place must be locus munitissimus. Paper houses
will never be good hiding places. Houses made of reeds or rotten timber will
not be fit places for men to hide themselves in. Jesus Christ is a place of
strength. He is the rock of ages. His name is the Mighty God* Esaias 9. 6.

2. He has height. A hiding place must be locus excelsissimus, Your low houses
are soon scaled. Jesus Christ is a high place; he is as high as Heaven. He is
the Jacobs ladder that reaches from earth to Heaven, Genesi^ 28. 12. He is too
high for men, too high for Devils; no creature can skale these high Walls.

3. He has secret places. A hiding place must be locus abditissimus. The more
secret, the more safe. Now Jesus Christ has many secret chambers that no
creatures can ever find, Ca^^icles 2. 14. O my Dove that art in the secret
places of the stairs! As Christ has hidden comforts which no man knows but he
that receives them; so he has hidden places of secrecy, which none can find
out but he that dwells in them. Come my people, enter into thy chambers, and
shut the doors upon thee, Esaias 26. 20.

4. Christ is faithful. He that will hide others, had need be very faithful. A
false hearted Protector is worse then an open pursuer; Will the men of Keilah
deliver me up, says David? They will deliver thee up, says the Lord; but now
Christ is faithful, Revelations 3. 14. He is the faithful witness; He cannot
be bribed to surrender up any creature that comes to hide himself with him.
Christ will die before he will betray his trust.

5. Christ i^ diligent. Diligence is as necessary in those that will hide
others, as faithfulness. A sleepy Guard may betray a Castle or Garrison, as
well as a faithless Guard. But Jesus Christ is very diligent and watchful, he
has his Intelligencers abroad; yea, his own eyes run to and fro in the
earth, to see what contrivances are made, and set on foot against those who are
hid with him, Psalm. 121. 3, 4. He that keeps Israel, neither slumbreth nor
sleeps.

2. Ground. -- Christ is fit in regard of that propriety he has in his Saints.
All his Relations make him a fit hiding place.

First, He is the Captain General of the Church. The Church is compared to an
Army with Banners; Christ is the General of this Army, Joshuah 5. 13, 14. It
was Christ the Angel of the Covenant; whom God has made a Leader and
Commander to the people, as the Prophet calls him, Esaias 55. 4. Who should
secure the Soldiers but the General?

Secondly, He is the Churches King. Psalm 2. 6. The Kings Court is the
Subjects hiding place. Nebuchadnezzars dream, Dan. 4. 12. shows that Kings
should be shelters to their Subjects.

Thirdly, He is the Churches shepherd, John 10. 11, 12. Shepherds are to secure
their flocks. David slew the Lion that tore the flock.

Fourthly, He is the Churches Father, Isaiah 9. 6. The Fathers house is the
childs Castle. The child when he is purs^ed makes straight to his Fathers
lap, and there he is hid.

Fifthly, He is the Churches Husband, Ephesians. 5, 25. The house of the husband is
the wives Garrison. There she is hid and protected, as well as nourished.

ESAIAS 32. 2. And a man shall be as a hiding place X. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth.
Lon. Feb. 22. 1651.
from the wind.
THe Doctrine was, that Jesus Christ is unto a Believer a hiding place from-the
Wind.

The Uses are three Information. Exhortation. Consolation.

1. For Information. This consists of four Branches.

1. That Believers are Christo chari, very precious in the esteem of Christ.
Believers are persons of great worth. They are called excellent ones, Psalm. 16.
3. They are more excellent then any persons in the world besides. They are
flowers, roses and lilies, the best of flowers, Cant. 2. 2. They are fine gold,
others are the dross of silver, Jer. 6. ult. They are wheat, others are Lam.
4. 2.
but chaff, Mat. 13. 30. They are precious stones, others are but common
stones; They are light, others are darkness. Their worth appears by this,
that Jesus Christ hides them in times of danger. Men do not use to hide rubbish
or lumber; but their jewels, their writings, things of value. The Saints are
the jewel^ of Christ, they are the jewels of the Crown; Christ will lose all,
rather then one of these, Mal. 3. 17. They shall be mine in that day when I
make up my jewels. They are Gods hidden ones, Psalm. 83. 3. Jesus Christ will
venture all the world to save one of his Saints. While he is able to protect
himself, he will protect them; they are his very members, a part of himself;
he keeps them with the same care he keeps himself. Wicked men look upon them as
vile and mean things, but Christ accounts them his precious ones; he keeps the
very number of their hairs, Mat. 10. 30. It was asigne that Jacob respected
Rachel and Joseph more then all the rest of his household, because he was so
careful of their preservation, Genesis 32. 2. He puts the handmaids and their
children foremost, then Leah and her children, and then Rachel and Joseph. If
there be but one place of safety to be found in the world, Jesus Christ will put
the believer there. The Scripture says, that Noah found favor in the eyes of
the Lord, Genesis 6. 8. How is this grace of God to him evidenced? When all the
world was exposed to the violence of the deluge, God takes care to make an Ark
for his preservation. It Is a sign of the precious thoughts of Christ toward
his Saints, that he makes himself a hiding place for their preservation.
Though they be never so mean in the eyes of men, they are incomparably
precious in the esteem of Christ.

2. How impossible is it that any true believer should eternally perish. The
Scripture says that they can never perish, John 10. 28. They may seem to be
lost in the judgment of men, they may be at lost in their own apprehension,
but they cannot be lost. Amongst other reasons this is one, Christ hides them.
Satan must storm and level this hiding place before he can reach a believer to
destroy him. The treasury must be broken before the treasure that is hid in it
can be carried away, the jewels cannot be taken away before the chest that
keeps them be broken. The hiding place must be entered before that which is
hidden in it be removed. Christ stands between his Elect and danger. The Devil
must pierce Christ himself, before he can touch a Saint to destroy him. The
believer is hid in Christ, and Christ must suffer before he can suffer. Jesus
Christ did once conquer the devil for the believers freedom, and the devil
must conquer Christ before he can finally overcome the believer.

3. See here the al-sufficiency of Christ. He is to his holy ones every thing
they stand in need of. He is their life, he is their food, he is their raiment,
and he is their hiding place. A hiding place is as necessary sometimes as meat
and clothing. The Saints here are militant; they could not live if they were
not hid. Though Christ were every thing else, yet if he were not an hiding
place, he were not enough; but he is a hiding place as well as food. Jesus
Christ serves all the necessities of the soul. The Saints of God are in
Scripture compared to sheep, John 10. 14. Now a fold is as necessary for sheep
as pastures; as the pasture preserves them from starving, so the fold preserves
them from worrying. Christ now is both fold and pasture. and so a sufficient
shepherd. The Church of Christ is compared to an Army, Cant. 6. 10. A place of
retreat is as needful to (...) any other provision. Christ i^ ^ (...) pl^ce to
his soldiers; he does not feed and cloth them, but he hides them too. He does
not only give them ammunition to fight when they are in the field, but he is a
hiding place to them when they are heaten out of the field. The Church of
Christ is compared to a ship, Esaias 54. 11. A haven is as necessary for a ship
as either Masts or Sails, or Anchors. Jesus Christ does not only provide
Sails and Tackling for his ship, but he provides a Haven also; yea, he himself
is the Haven; when his ship is weather-beaten by long voyages and sharp
storms, he brings her into the Haven, and there she is out of danger. ^e is fit
for all the exigencies and necessities of the soul, a complete all-sufficient
Savior.

4. The misery of those who are out of Christ. One great work of the Ministry
is to discover the misery of a Christlesse Condition. All unbeleevers are
without Christ. Though they be in Christ by outward profession, yet they are
without Christ in regard of saving union, Ephesians. 2. 12. The misery of being
uninteressed in Christ is unspeakable even in this regard, that he is without a
hiding place. No greater emblem of misery then to see a man in a sharp storm
without a shelter. He that is without Christ has neither shelter for soul nor
body. When men assault him, when devils tempt him, when sin sets upon him, he
has no place to retire to, where he can can have any security. He that is
without Christ has not one bush to defend him, either from men, devils, his
own conscience, or from the indignation of God. He lies open to all the hostile
incursions of men, devils, of the w^^^h of God which is as a consuming fire.
All his confidence is but as the shadow of a spiders web, which will neither
keep him warm, nor safe.

Use 2. Exhortation.
1. Let not believers be inordinately afraid in times of danger. Should such a
man as I fly, says Nebemiah? and who being as I, would go into the Temple to
save his life? Neh. 6. 11. A fear of providence becomes the people of God as
well as others; but fear of anxiety or distrust should be far from them;
wondrous confident have the Saints of God been in times of danger, upon this
very ground. God is our refuge and strength, says the Church, a present help
in time of trouble; therefore we will not fear though the earth be moved, etc.
Psalm. 46. 1, 2, 3. A Saint that believes this may laugh at fear, he may esteem
iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood, as the Scripture says of the
Leviathan, Job 41. 27, 28. It Is a disparagement to your hiding place, that you
should be afraid. If Christ be able to hide you, you shall not be undefended.
Let the world rage, let devils roar, let men lift up their voice, let sin be
never so furious, Christ is a hiding place; he hides you from Gods wrath, and
he will hide you from man's fury. Let unguarded sinners fear and tremble; but
let Christ's hidden ones rest in settled peace, in firm security. Your sinking
does upbraid your hiding place with weakness and insufficiency.

2. Acknowledge from whence all your safety and protection comes. That you are
hid from danger, when others are exposed to danger; that you are sheltred, when
others (...) without shelter; that your souls, bodies; graces, comforts are
secured, it is not because of your own care, but because Christ hides you. If
the Lord himself had not been on our fide, now may Israel say, they had
swallowed us up quick when their wrath was kindled against us, Psalm. 124. 1, 2.
If Christ did not prepare a place for the woman, the Church, and if he did not
give her the two wings of an Eagle to carry her to her hiding place, the Dragon
would soon devour both her and her child, Rev. 12. 14. Acknowledge the
protection of Christ, let him have the praise of all your safety. The ancient
Romans used to pay tribute for shadows: let Christ have praises for his
shadowy protection. Whosoever are the instruments, he is the principal Author
of all your hiding.

3. Take heed of making any other hiding places. Men are very apt when danger
approaches to dig created hiding places for themselves. We may read how the
Prophet reproves this practice, Esaias 22 9, 10, 11. A providential use of
outward means, is not only lawful, but necessary, but carnal trusting to any
such hiding place is sinful. To trust to creatures in time of danger is very
Atheistical. God has cursed such confidence, Jer. 17. 5, 6. But to descend to
particulars; There are sundry places which men create to themselves in time of
danger.

(1) Many make great men their hiding place. When troubles arise they have
recourse to men, that by the strength of horses and Armies they may hide them.
Alas what a vain confidence is this? Ahaz thought to have hid himself under
the wing of the King of Assyria: but what was the event? 2 Chronicles. 28. 20. The
King of Assyria came unto him, but strengthened him not. The skirt of men, the
strength of horses is weak and very vain, Prove. 21. 31. The horse is prepared
against the day of battle, but safety is of the Lord. We must say as the
Church, Lord give us help in trouble, for vain is the help of man. He that
makes a chariot his hiding place, shall not be hid. God will drive the wheels
over their own back. If men and horses could be a hiding place from men to your
bodies, they cannot be any competent shelters to your souls; they cannot hide
the inner man. I shall conclude this with Psalm. 20. 7. Some trust in chariots,
etc. They are brought down and fallen, but we are risen and stand upright. He
that makes men and horses his hiding place, shall bring down the fire of Gods
anger upon his hiding place, and upon himself, Esaias 31. 1, 3. When God shall
stretch out his hand; both he that helps shall fall, and he that is helped
shall fall down, and they all shall fall together.

(2) Others make strong Castles and desenced Cities their hiding place. When
danger approaches they sly to such places, and there think to be safe. But
alas, how insecure are all these places? The high walls of Jericho fell down
with a shout, when Jesus Christ gave commandment for their downfall. Josh. 6.
20. such hiding places are made of perishable materials. Nineveh was a strong
place, but it could not secure the inhabitants thereof. See how the Prophet
derides their confidence, Nah. 3. 12, 13, 14. Tyrus was very strong, Ezekiel. 27.
11. The Gammadims were in thy Towers. They were a people of Phenicia, called
Gammadims, as if we should say, vi^i (...), because of the gr^^t strength they
had in their (...)* (...) and lac^rtosi, says Juni^s. And not for all their
strength they could not preserve their Towers, nor their Towers them from the
rage of Nebuchadnezzar, Chap. 26. 7, 8, 9. If any defenced place could hide
you, yet it could but hide the outward man, it could be no security to the soul
either from sin or temptations. Devils can climb the highest walls; brazen
walls cannot keep out his temptations, much less can they secure you from the
wrath of God.

(3) Others make their silver and gold a hiding place. The rich man's wealth is
his strong City, and as a high wall in his conceit, Prove. 18. 11. but alas, how
unable are these things to secure us? riches sometime lay men open to danger;
poverty is a better securer then riches, even from bodily danger. Osiander
reports that in that bloody Epit. Cent. 16. l. 3. c. 69.
Parisian Massacre many rich Papists were murdered for their wealth as well as
protestants. Though their profession made them Papists, yet their wealth made
them Hugonots as well as others. However, riches cannot secure a man from a
disease, nor from death, Luke 16. nor from temptation, nor from troubles of
conscience, nor from the wrath of God, Prove. 11. 4. and Zephan. 1. 18. Neither
their silver nor gold can deliver them in the day of the Lords anger.

(4) Others make their outward privileges a hiding place. This the carnal
Jews did ever betake themselves to, when the Prophets threatened any storms.
Nothing is more frequent in Scripture then this, Jer. 7. 4. The Temple of the
Lord, etc. Mic. 3. 11. and Mat. 3. 9. Think not to say within your selves, we
have Abraham to our Father, etc. But alas, all this will not hide you. Go to my
place at Shiloh, says God, Jer. 7. 12. Go to Jerusalem, and see how it is
there; go to the seven Churches of Asia, and see how it is there. These
privileges are so far from being hiding places, that if he that enjoyes them
be not hid savingly in Christ, they will expose him to more sudden, more
certain, and more dreadful ruin. Read Mat. 11. 20, 21, 22* 23, 24. Ioab was
slain at the horns of the Altar. Gods Temple shall not be a Sanctuary except
he who is the Lord of the Temple be our hiding place. Indeed whatever hiding
place is made, besides Christ, shall not shelter when storms come. We may say
of all these hiding places, as the Prophet does of that one, Esaias 28. 15, 16,
17, 18. Every hiding place besides Christ is a hiding place of falsehood.

4. Be persuaded actually to hide your selves with Jesus Christ. To have a
hiding place, and not to use it, is as bad as to want one: fly to Christ;
run into the holes of this rock. Three things must be done by all those that
would hide themselves with Christ.

(1) You must put away sin by repentance. Jesus Christ will not be a
Sanctuary for rebels, he will not protect evildoers. Christ will never hide
the devil, nor any of his servants. Esaias 55. 6, 7. Let the ungodly forsake his
way, etc. David knew this, therefore he prays that God would teach him to do
his Will, Psalm. 143* 9, 10. Deliver me, etc. I fly unto thee to hide me. Teach
me to do they will. He that will not do the Will of Christ, shall receive no
protection from Christ. Protectio sequitur Allegiantiam, You must be his liege
people if you will have him to defend you, Jo^. 22, 23, 25.

(2) You must pray that he would hide you. The promise is made to prayer, Esaias
65. 10. Sharon shall be a fold of flocks; the valley of Achor, a place for the
flocks to lie down in, for my people that have sought me. He that prays most
fervently is like to be hid most securely. And then,

(3) You must believe in him. Faith is the key that, opens the door of this
hiding place, and locks it again. One word in the Hebrew signifies to trust,
and to make a refuge, Psalm. 57. 1. He that does not make Christ his trust shall
not have Christ for his hiding place; he will hide none but those that commit
themselves to him. I will set him on high, because he has known my name, Psalm.
91. 9, 14. Dependence on Christ is not the cause of his hiding us, but it is
the qualification of the person that shall be hid.

Use 3. Consolation.
1. It Is comfortable against the malice of all their enemies. Though devils
rage, though men roar, yet here is shelter against both. Satan is a destroyer,
but Christ is a hiding place. This made David so secure, Psalm. 4. 8. I will
both lay me down in peace and sleep, for thou Lord make me dwell in safety.

2. When other hiding places fail. Gods people often find by experience that
the places of their protection are places of destruction. Well, when all other
places fail, Christ will not fail. See how it was with David, Psalm. 142. 4,
5. and when his hiding place at Ziglak was gone, yet his Savior was not gone,
2 Samuel 30. 6. He encouraged himself in the Lord his God. It Is a mighty
encouragement to believers, that Christ is a hiding place. 1. He is a safe and
strong hiding place, Esaias 33. 16. Christ is a rock, and he that is in Christ,
is in the munitions of rocks. 2. He is a large hiding place. There Is room
enough for all his Elect. His skirt is large. 3. He is a hiding place to the
soul as well as to the body. 4. He has undertaken to hide us. God has
committed his Elect to Christ, that he should hide them. 5. Christ is a man. As
he is God and so able, so he is man also; he has not put off his humanity, he
is pitiful to his own flesh. I suppose Christ is here called a Man for the
comfort of men.

MAT. 9. 12. -- They that be whole need not a XI. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon.
March 14. 1651.
Physician, but they that are sick.
THis Text is an Apology made by our Savior in defense of his charitable
practice in conversing with Publicans and sinners, for the good of their
souls. Matthew the Publican Isa. 65. 1. Luke 19. 5
is called by Christ from the receipt of custom to be one of his followers, v.
9.

Note. Christ's preventing grace, Mar. 1. 16, 17.

Note. Jesus Christ is able to convert the worst, Luke 19. 5 Luke 8. 2. 2 Chr.
33. 3, 4, etc.
and greatest of sinners. Matthew the Publican. Zacheus the Extortioner. Mary
Magdalen that had seven devils in her. Manasseh a bloody Murderer, a great
Idolater, a sinner of the first magnitude. Paul a Persecutor. All these are
converted Act. 9. 2, 3.
and brought home to God. Gods grace is so efficacious, that it can overpower,
and bring in the worst of sinners. No sinners greater then Publicans, and yet
many of them converted by Christ. This Matthew being called, presently follows,
ver. 9. He arose and followed him.

Note. Those that savingly receive the call of Christ, do presently yield
obedience. Zacheus no sooner called down from the Sycamore tree, but presently
comes down speedily, Luke 19. 6. Elisha no sooner effectually called, but
presently leaves the plow and follows Elijah, 1 King. 19. 19, 20. Paul no
sooner effectually called, but he obeys presently, Act. 9. 6. Gal. 1. 16. Simon
and Andrew as soon as they were savingly called, left their nets and followed
Christ, Mark 1. 16, 17, 18. Christ when he calls effectually, gives out
strength with his call to submit to it. This Convert makes Christ a feast, Luke
5. 27. which is employed also, v. 10. of this chap.

Note. New Converts are full of affection and love to Christ. Ma^tthew feasts
our Savior, and so did Zacheus, Luke 19. 6. Those that before conversion would
have been glad to stone him, do now kindly and familiarly entertain him. A
true Convert thinks nothing too good, too deer for Jesus Christ. At this feast
many Publicans and sinners were present, perhaps invited by Matthew for their
souls good.

Note. Such a^ are truly brought to Christ themselves, do what they can to
bring others to Christ. We have two clear examples of it, John 1. 40, 41, etc.
Andrew being called, calls Simon. Philip being called, calls Nathanael, v. 45.
Another example in the woman of Samaria, John 4. 28, 29. The Scribes and
Pharisees observing these passages, begin to quarrel with Christ's Disciples, v.
11. Saint Luke says, they murmured against his Disciples, Chap. 5. 30.

Note. It Is a grief to wicked men to see others brought home to Christ. This
arises from envy to Christ, and hat^ed to men. And then they question with his
Disciples about this. Wh^eateth, etc.

Note. It Is the mark of a man desperately wicked, to endeavor to draw Christ's
Disciples from their obedience. The Pharisees were often scandalizing Christ,
and blasting him to his Disciples, that so they might draw them from their
allegiance. But why do they go to the Disciples, and not to Christ? They
thought the Disciples were weak, and therefore might be more easily won.

Note. It Is the property of corrupters and seducers to make their hottest
attempts on such as are weakest. Satan set first in Paradise on the weaker
vessel, Genesis 3. and so do all others that follow that trade. Young chapmen are
most likely to be deceived.

Our Savior hears this dispute, and steps in with them in his own person.
It Is likely the Disciples acquainted him with it, as they usually did in other
cases; or else by the flocking of the multitude about them, he observed it; or
by the omniscience of his Divinity he knew it; however it was the Text says,
he appeared in the controversy, v. 12.

Note. Jesus Christ will plea! for them that are quarreld with for his sake.
The Disciples are baited by the subtle Scribes and Pharisees, and see how ready
Christ is to come to their rescue. Christ will back all those that stand up for
him. Now the answer which our Savior gives to this cavil is in the Text. They
that are whole, etc. which is more plainly expounded in the next verse, I came
not, etc. Our Savior tells them, that he did in this action the office of a
good Physician; took all opportunities for the good of sinful souls. q. d. If a
Physician may visit infected persons, etc. And he does withal secretly intimate
to them their misery, that while they continued in their present
self-conceitednesse, they could expect no benefit at all by him. They that are
whole need not, etc.

They that are whole, (...). They that are of ability or strength. It Is
referred in Scripture both to the body, and to the soul; and it notes either
truth of strength, or opinion of strength; that man that is either really, or
conceitedly strong in body is, (...). and he that is spiritually stronger
conceitedly so, is a whole man, (...): here it means men that are opinionated
and conceited of their own ability. It does secretly point out the Pharisees
distemper. Though they were as other men in regard of their spiritual
condition, yet they had good thoughts of themselves; they were strong men in
their own conceit.

Need not, (...). The word signifies necessity and usefulness. Romans 12. 13.
contributing to the necessities of Saints, (...). Mat. 6. 8. Your heavenly
Father knows what things you have need of, etc. (...), The word signifies also
a necessary office, as Acts 6. 3. Look out among you seven men, etc. whom we
may appoint over this business, (...). Men that are whole as before, they can
make no use, they have no want of a Physician. A Physician, (...). The word
signifies a healer. The work of a Physician is to heal. God has given men
insight into that study, to prevent diseases, and to cure diseases.

But they that ^re sick, (...). They that are evil affected It Is referred both
to the outward and inward man. There is a sickness of the body, and of the
mind also; and the phrase expresses the nature of sickness. Health is (...)
corporis a right temperature of body. It Is malus habitus corporis. Spiritual
sickness is malus habitus Animi. When the spiritual part is disaffected, the
soul is spiritually sick. In this place it relates to both.

The words are a double Proposition, in which are,

First, the Subject, this is twofold.

Secondly, the Predicate twofold.

1. That men that Need not a Physician. are whole

2. That men that Do need a Physician. are sick

The sum of all amounts to these five Observations.

1. Sin is a spiritual sickness, a spiritual disease. 2. Jesus Christ is a
Physician for the curing of this disease. 3. Some sinners are spiritually sick,
and yet think themselves whole. 4. Christ is not a Physician to those that
think themselves spiritually whole. 5. Those that see their spiritual
sickness, shall find Jesus Christ ready to heal them.
I begin with the first, viz.

Doct. 1. Sin is a spiritual sickness. This is intimated in the text. It Is
the very foundation of this defense of Christ. He points out these Publicans,
with whom he now conversed, as so many diseased men. Every sin is a spiritual
disease, every iniquity is a real malady. Sinful men are truly sick men, sin
bath many names in Scripture, a burden, a wound, darkness, bonds, folly, etc.
and here a sickness. Two things I shall open here by way of Explication.

1. Prove that sin is a sickness. 2. Show what kind of sickness it is.
1. That sin is a sickness. This is proved two ways.

1. From clear testimonies of Scripture. The Word of God calls it a sickness,
Esaias 1. 5. The whole head is sick, etc. It has relation both to Jerusalems
miseries* and to Jerusalems sins. She was sick with misery, and sick with
sin; therefore sick with misery, because sick of sin. Ezekiel. 34. 4. The
Prophets of Israel are compared to shepherds, and they are charged with this,
that they did not strengthen the diseased, nor heal that which was sick. What
is meant by the sick and diseased, but the sinful members of that Church, whose
conversion and reformation the Prophets had not endeavored. And Eccles. 6. 2.
Solomon calls covetousness an evil disease. Hence also it is that sin is
called in Scripture by the name of diseases. It Is called the plague of the
heart, 1 King. 8. 38. There are as many diseases of the soul as there are of
the body. Drunkenness is a spiritual dropsy; Security is a spiritual
lethargy; Envy is a spiritual canker; Lust is a spiritual fever, Hos. 7. 4.
They are all adulterers, as an oven heated by the Baker. Apostasy and
backsl^ding is the spiritual falling sickness; hardness of heart is the
spiritual stone; searednesse of conscience is a spiritual Apoplexy;
unsettlednesse of judgment is a spiritual pa^fi^; pride a spiritual tumor;
vainglory a spiritual itch. There is not any sickness of the body, but there
is some distemper of the soul that might be paralleled with it, and bear the
name of it. Hence also it is in Scripture, that the pardoning of sin is
called healing, Psalm 103. 3. who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals
all thy diseases.

2. From the effects of sin. Sin does produce all those effects upon the
soul which sicknesses do upon the body.

(1) Sickness unfits the body for action. Men that are active in health, they
are in sickness indisposed for any thing. The Mariner cannot row, the soldier
cannot fight, the husbandman cannot till, the Merchant cannot trade. It does
take a man quite off from all his labors; and that both in regard of Act, and
in regard of Affection. Eccles. 12. 1. what was loved before yields no
pleasure. Sin does unfit the soul for spiritual employments; it takes men
off from prayer, from hearing from meditation, etc. And the more power it has
over the soul, the more is the soul indisposed for holy exercises. Even Gods
own children, when they have fallen into some spiritual sickness, are
exceedingly indisposed to the things of God. Their zeal, their forwardness,
their activity is much abated. David when he had fallen into that long
sickness, how unlike himself was he? he had no actual repentance, till Nathan
came to him with a message from God, and quickened him. Sin quenches the
Spirit in Godly men, as the water quenches the fire. Sin takes off the edge
of the soul, deads the appetite and affection to the things of God. It locks up
the heart that it cannot act as it was wont to do.

(2) Sickness begets torment and anguish in the body. When sickness is in
extremity in the body, how does a man cry out of pain? head, and heart, and
every part is under torment. What restless tossings are men under when
diseases are violent? hear how Job complains, Chap. 30. 16, 17, 18 Sin is a
Creator of torment and painfulnesse in the soul. Felix his sin made him
tremble, Acts 24. 25. Cains sin put his spirit into such anguish, that he
cries out, My punishment is greater then I can bear, Genesis 4. 13, 14. Judas his
sin did bring such despairing torment upon his soul, that he takes away his
life to end his misery, Matthew. 27. init. And even Gods own people, when they
fall into this spiritual disease, they are pained at the very heart, till by
pardon and remission, they have obtained a healing from God. How full of pain
was David's spirit by reason of his sin? He was as a man upon the rack for a
long time, if he did ever recover his former serenity. Vid. Psalm 6. per
totum, Psalm 38. per tot. Many of the dear children of God, do by sin fill
their hearts with such anguish, that they are never without much smart to the
day of their death.

(3) Sickness does bring uncomelinesse. The most beautiful body in the world,
if pining sicknesses continue long upon it, becomes like a garment that is
moth-eaten; the eyes sink, the color is lost; the skin is shriveld, the bones
stick out, etc. Job observes this, Chap. 16. 8. Thou have filled me with
wrinkles, which is a witness against me, and my lea^nesse rising up in me
bears witness to my face. Sickness makes straight bodies how down,
beautiful faces look ghastly, well-colored cheeks look pale, and oftentimes
the more beautiful sickness finds us, the more uncomely does it leave us.
Sickness turns youth into old age, vid. Lam. 3. 4. My flesh and my skin has
he made old. Sickness dries up the spirits, Prove. 17. 22. A merry heart does
good like a medicine; a broken spirit dries up the bones. Sin takes away the
comeliness of the soul. The first sinful sickness that ever entered into the
world has turned the souls and bodies of all mankind into deformity and
ugliness. Could we see the picture of Adams soul in the state of innocence,
and compare it with the souls that are diseased with sin, we would wonder at
the sad change. Sin is a very deformed thing; it turned Angels of light into
ugly devils. Those who were never healed by regeneration and remission of the
disease of sin, what deformed souls have they? they have not one spot of beauty
upon them, Psalm. 14. 3. They are altogether become stinking. A dead carrion, a
putrefied carcass is as beautiful, and as sweet an obj^ct as a
sinfully-diseased soul. Yea, even Gods own children, by falling into sin,
though but in one or two particular acts, do lose much of their beauty. They do
not look with that grace they did before. Every act of sin casts a dark thick
shadow upon the soul. As deep wounds leave skars upon the body, so sinful acts
leave some skarres of infamy upon the soul. A Saint does not look like the same
man he was before he fell into sin.

(4) Sickness brings death. Dorcas was sick and died, Act. 9. 37. Long
sicknesses, if they be not removed, will bring the strongest body to the dust
of death. Sickness is indeed Anteambulo mortis, the forerunner of death. The
sickbed is the direct way to the dark bed, the grave. Sin does bring death to
the soul. One disease of sin, if it be not healed by Christ's blood, will
certainly bring the soul to eternal death, Romans 6. 23. it has brought many to
hell, and it will certainly bring all others to the same condition that live
and die in it unhealed. He that dies in his sin, shall die for ever.

II. For the nature of this sickness. It Is a more dreadful sickness then any
other sickness. I shall set it out in a few particulars.

1. It seizes upon the most noble part of man. All other sicknesses do infest
the body only, but sin is a disease in the soul. Those sicknesses are most
painful and most mortal, which seize upon the vitals and inward parts. A
disease that feeds upon the spirits, does soon drink up the natural moisture,
and is not so easily cured. Sin is a disease that does immediately reach the
spirits. It Is the sickness of the heart. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from
wickedness, that thou may be saved, Jer. 4. 14. The Apostle it is true,
speaks of the filthiness of the flesh, and of the spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Some
sins are only acted by the brutish, fleshly, and sensitive part; others rest
in the spirit, as pride, vainglory, envy, etc. yet notwithstanding, even those
filthinesses of the flesh have their chief seat and residence in the heart,
according to that of our Savior, Matthew. 15. 19. Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, etc. All sin is spiritual wickedness in regard of the fountain
and root of it. As grace is seated in the heart, so also is sin, Ier. 4. 18.
This is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine
heart.

2. Sin is a sickness which God never made. All bodily diseases are the
handy work of God. He created Plagues, Fevers, Consumptions, etc. Amos 3. 6.
But sin is a sickness of which God never was the Author. It Is true, God
sometimes punishes sin by sin, not by creating sin, but by suffering a
sinful creature to fill up his sin, by withdrawing, denying his grace, which
only can preserve from sin.

3. Sin is a sickness which separates: between God and men. No other disease
can divide between God and the soul. Hezekiahs plague, Asa's gout, Jobs sores,
none of all these did make any division between God and them. Some sicknesses
do separate between the husband and the wife, the father and the child, at
least in regard of actual communion, though not in regard of affection; but no
bodily sickness divides between God and men. But sin does separate between
God and the soul. Esaias 59. 2. It makes God stand at a distance from his own
children, to hide his face from them, and to deal with them as with enemies.

4. Sin is the cause of all other sicknesses. All bodily diseases come from
this disease. Have thou not procured this thy unto self? Thine own doings shall
correct thee, etc. Jer. 2. 19. A distempered soul is the true cause of a
distempered body. Sin was the first disease that ever was in the world, and
the cause of all that ever followed.

5. Sin is a disease that cannot be cured by any natural medicine in the
world. No drug in the Apothecaries shop is able to heal this disease, Jer. 2.
22. Though thou wash thee with nitre, and make thy self never so clean, etc.
There is no bodily disease, but there is something in nature, if it could be
found out, able by Gods ordinary blessing to cure it. But there is nothing in
nature can heal sin. There is but one medicine in all the world able to cure
a diseased soul, and that is the blood of Jesus Christ.

6. Sin is the most loathsome dise^se i^ all the world, and the most infectious.
The small pox, the pestilence, the leprosy, these are delightful, pleasant
diseases in respect of sin. Sin does pollute every thing it comes near; it
pollutes the conscience, it pollutes the Ordinances, it pollutes relations, it
pollutes persons, it pollutes Nations. If it were possible that one drop of
sin could come into heaven, it would turn heaven into hell. It Is compared in
Scripture to all loathsome things. It Is compared to the plague of pestilence,
of leprosy, 1 King. 8. 38. The leprosy in the Law was a type of it. It Is
compared to poison, Psalm. 140. 3. To the vomit of a dog, Vid. 2 Pet. 2. 22. Its
called filthiness, Abomination, Lewdness. All the things that are loathsome
in the world, are used in Scripture to shadow out the loathsomeness of sin.
There is a disease called the foul disease. Sin is a fouler disease then that.

7. Sin is a propagating disease; Not only because it spreads over the whole
man, but because it spreads it self to posterity; it descends from parents to
children. Some bodily diseases, they say, are hereditary, yet not so
hereditary, but some children escape them. But this is a sickness that conveys
it self to all a man's posterity. This sickness is interwoven in the very
essence of a person, which he does together with his being communicate to all
his seed. As a man begets a man; so does he get a diseased man. Enosh.

The Uses of this.
1. Oh the multitude of sick persons that are in the world! There is not one
person living, but is less or more troubled with this sickness. The world is
nothing but a Hospital of sick persons. There is not a family in which this
plague of sin is not. In many things we offend all. The root of the matter is
in the best of us, Esaias 64 6.

2. What Is the reason that there are no more cryings out of this sickness?
Sin is a sickness, and yet few bewail it. Other sicknesses are lamented.
You cannot meet in any company, but you shall hear men cry out of their
sicknesses. One man of his Gout, another of his Stone, another of his
Consumption, etc. but little spoken of sin: The reason is, because sin is a
spiritual disease, and so not discerned but by grace. And this is indeed the
dreadfulnesse of this sickness, that it kills many before they feel it; it
sends men to hell before they know themselves to be sick. It Is with sinners as
with the drunkard in the Proverbs, Chapter 23. 35. They have stricken me, and I
was not sick.

3. They are not your enemies that are solicitous to keep you from sin.
Naturally we account them our friends which would prevent us from painful
diseases; and yet we naturally account them our enemies, who would prevent us
from falling into sin. I hate him, says Ahab of Michajah, 1 Kings 22. 8. A
wicked man hates none so much as those that would preserve him from sin.
Well, whatever you think, they are your best friends, and that you will
acknowledge another day. If you should be at the door of an infected house
ready to go in, and one should whi^per you in the ear, Sir, the plague is in
that hou^e, have a care of your self; would you reproach him? nay, would you
not thank him? Why will you think them your enemies, that would preserve you
from sin? They know the dreadfulnesse of this sickness, and they would
preserve others from falling into it: David blesses God for Abigail, and gives
her many thanks for her great care of him, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. God sets it down
for friendship, and whether you be saved or damned, you will clearly see it
another day.

4. Watch against sin as you watch against sickness. How cautious are many
men of their bodily health? They will eat and drink nothing that may prejudice
their health. If they know any thing that will disturb the quiet of their
bodies, they will not meddle with it, though their affection be never so much
inclined to it. And why will you not be as cautious of sin? Take heed to your
selves; remember, swearing is a sickness, lying is a disease, pride is a
sickness, etc Avoid all occasions of sin, all temptations to it. Pray
against it, watch against it. Sin is a sickness will keep you out of heaven:
sin is a sickness which will provoke God to hate you. Keep sin out of your
family. Let not liars, swearers, drunkards, etc. lodge a night under your roof,
Psalm. 101. 7. No sickness is so catching as sin is. All men have the root of
it, an inclination to it in their hearts. Preserve your children from this
sickness. It Is worse then the smallpox, worse then the plague. Other diseases
will kill the bodies of your children, sin will kill both body and soul.
Keep watch and ward over your hearts, over your families, that sin may not
enter thither, nor that any of yours may go where this catching sickness is.

5. What cause have they to bless God that are cured of this disease? We are
never perfectly cured of it till we come to heaven, we shall have some
grudgings of it while we live here. But when sin is pardoned, then it is
healed; Psalm 10^. 3. When grace is thoroughly wrought, then is sin healed.
It Is healed as to the guilt of it, that is done away. It Is healed as to the
damnation of it. It Is the reigning sin that is the damning sin. And it is
healed in part, as to the pollution and filthiness of it. It Is in a sure
speedy way of healing. How glad are men when they are healed of old diseases! A
man that has been troubled with the Stone, Gout, Headache for many years; how
glad, how thankful is he when he is recovered? he will be telling every one of
the man, of the medicine that cured him. Let them whose spiritual sickness God
has healed, be very thankful and bless his name.

David calls upon his soul to praise God for this kindness, Psalm. 103. init.
Though you be full of other infirmities, yet be of good cheer, the damning
sickness is healed. It Is better to have a healthy soul in a crazy body, then
to have a found body and a diseased soul. And show your thankfulness for your
healing, by being careful to prevent recidivations into sin again. Take your
counsel of Christ to that man that was lately cured of his infirmity, of which
he had smarted thirty eight years, Joh. 5. 14. Thou art made whole, sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. It Is a sleighting of your Physician,
and a vilifying of your disease, not to be as careful as you can, that you may
not relapse. And know this for the increasing of your thankfulness, that when
this disease is once cured, all your other diseases are cured. They are cured,
as to the malignity, as to the hurt of them. They cannot destroy you, though
they may disquiet you. The inhabitants shall not say, I am sick: the people
that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity, Esaias 3^. ult. The peril
and dreadfulnesse of other diseases depends upon this; and when this is
removed, the evil of all the rest is removed also.

Doct. 2. That Jesus Christ is a Physician for the healing of these spiritual
diseases. Christ is a Physician to the body as well as to the soul. He heales
the wounds and sores of the outward man, as well as of the inward man. We read
that in the days of his flesh, he cured immediately sometimes, and sometimes
by the use of means many bodily maladies. Such as were possessed with devils.
Such as had the palsy, Such as were leprous, Such as had fevers, Such as
labored under several other diseases, were brought unto him, and he healed
them, Luke 6. 17, 18, 19. And Mat. 8. 14, 15, 16. He healed many that were
incurable. When other Physicians had given them over, they were brought to
Christ, and he healed them, Luke 8. 43. Concerning the woman sick of a bloody
issue, she had spent all her living upon Physicians, and could not be healed of
any, and yet by the touch of Christ's garment her bloody issue was stanched. He
cured a man that had had an infirmity thirty eight years, Joh. 5. 5. Yea, he
healed those that brought their diseases with them into the world. One that was
borne blind was recovered to sight by him, John 9. 6, 7. The text says, he
healed all manner of diseases, Mat. 4. 23. And he does still heal bodily
diseases. In three respects he is a Physician to the body.

1. He created all those simples that are useful for cure. Every herb, every
plant, every mineral, whatsoever in rerum Natura, is Medicinal and Physical,
was created by the Lord Christ; and whatsoever was created by him, is preserved
by him, Genesis 2. 5. Nothing sprung up of it self, the roots of all healing
herbs were set by his hand, and by his Providential care they are kept from
perishing to this very day.

2. He it is that gave skill, and still does give skill unto Physicians to make
use of those materials. All Arts and Sciences are his invention. What is said
of Bezaleel and Aholiab, Exodus 31. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. is as true of all other more
noble Arts. Men by study could never have such insight into the secrets of
nature, if Jesus Christ did not instruct them. He enables them to know
diseases, and to know what is proper and suitable for those diseases. He that is
the Lord of nature, does discover the secrets of nature in men when they study
them. He teaches them how to mingle and compound several simples together to
make an apt medicine, (...), 1 Cor. 12. 9. Christ is the Father of all Arts and
Artists. If he hide skill from the Physician, the Physician can never find out
the disease, nor prescribe a fit medicine to remove it.

3. He blesses the applications that are made. The most proper and apt
medicine that ever was prescribed by man, needs the blessing of Christ to make
it effectual. As man lives not by bread, but by the word of blessing, Mat. 4.
4. So neither is man cured by Physic alone, but by the benediction of Christ
upon the using of Physic. He suspends the operation and efficacy of Med^cines
when he please^h, and when it is his will they are salutiferous and healing.
Thus is he a Physician to the outward man.

But his chief subject is the soul. He is in an especial manner a Physician to
that. He does several times in the Gospel compare himself to a Physician. In
this Text, and in Mar. 2. 17. We have the same comparison, Luke 4. 23. He was
prophesied of before his incarnation, as a Physician. Vid Esaias 61. 1. Binding
up is the work of a healer. Christ was sent into the world to be a binder up of
the broken in heart. The Prophet Malachy speaks of him as of a spiritual
Physician, Chap. 4. 2. The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in
his wings. This is that which is held out in the Gospel in that parable of the
wounded man and the Samaritan, Luke 10. 30, 31, etc. Jesus Christ is that
Samaritan who does by that Parable preach himself to be the Physician of
souls.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall open three things.

1. That Christ is a Physician. 2. How Christ heales sin-sick souls. 3. The
excellency of Christ above other Physicians.
First, that Christ is a spiritual Physician. This is manifest.

1. You may see his commission. God has authorized him with power. The Prophet
asserts this, Esaias 61. 1. He has anointed me to bind up the brokenhearted.
This Prophecy is applied to Christ, Luke 4. 18. God has given Christ his
Gratiam ad practicandum. Those that are Physicians amongst men, must receive
commission to practice before they ought to use that Art. The bodies of men are
of that worth, that in all well-ordered Kingdoms and Commonwealths, none are
permitted to profess the Art of Physic till they be tried by such as have
skill, and enabled by public Authority to exercise that faculty; hereby
professed Physicians are distinguished from illiterate, and cheating
Mountebanks. Now God has conferred on Jesus Christ under hand and seal, full
Authority to be a spiritual Physician to heal the souls of men. And therefore
it is that all are invited to come to him for cure, Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me,
etc.

2. Christ has ability as well as authority. Whatsoever is requisite for the
healing of souls, is to be found in Jesus Christ. This the Prophet expressly
affirms, Mal. 4. 2. The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in
his wings. Healing is a large word; The Geneva translation reads it, health
shall be under his wings, Now there could not be health or healing under
Christ's wings, if there were not in him whatsoever is necessary to health or
spiritual healing.

The Apostle says, That it has pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell, Col. 1. 19. Christ is a garden so well furnished, that there is
in him every root and plant that is requisite to make a spiritual medicine. He
has a purging virtue, a strengthening virtue, a comforting virtue, a cheering
virtue, a quickening virtue. There is that in him which is proper for all
diseases. The Evangelist tells us, that when sick persons resorted to Christ in
the days of his flesh, there went virtue out of him, and healed them all, Luke
6. 19. (...), no virtue could have gone out of him, if all virtue had not been
treasured up in him. Christ has eye salve for blind eyes, mollifying grace
for hard-hearts, enlivening grace for dead souls, humbling grace for proud
minds. God has given him fullness of all things necessary for sick souls, and
wisdom to apply the same for the benefit of those that repair to him.

Secondly, how Christ heales spiritual Diseases.

1. He heales by justification. Sin brings guilt, Lev. 5. 2, 3, 4, 5. Romans 3.
19. Every sin makes the creature liable to wrath. This guilt is removed by
the grace of justification. Jesus Christ applies his spotless and perfect
righteousness to the soul, and thereby actually removes the guilt of sin,
and makes the sinner as pure in the sight of God, as if he had never offended.
Of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 18, 19. This is called in Scripture the
covering of sin, Psalm. 32. 1, 2. Blessed is the man whose unrighteousness is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered. Christ draws the veil or garment of his
own merit and obedience over the spotted soul of a sinner, and thereby covers
all his guilt. In this respect a sinner is perfectly healed. Though sin abide
in him, yet the guilt is taken away, so that it shall never redound upon the
person for condemnation. Hence it is that God is said, not to behold iniquity
in his people, Numb. 23. 21. Of this healing the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 103. 3.
Who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases. Of this
healing we are to understand that in 2 Chronicles. 30. 20. The Lord hearkened to
Hezekiah, and healed the people. He did not reckon nor impute the guilt of that
sin to the people.

2. He heales the soul by sanctification. Every sin has filthiness in it
as well as guilt. It is of a defiling nature, and leaves defilement upon the
soul of the sinner, Matthew. 15. 11. Hence it is that sinners are said to be
filthy creatures, Rev. 22. 11. and Psalm. 14. 3. they are altogether become
filthy. This is called Macula* or labes peccati, the spot or stain of sin.
Corruption, pollution, etc. It does immediately follow every offense of sin,
and remains when the act of sin is over. Look as waters, when they break
their banks and overflow the earth, leave a filthy slime and sediment behind
them; so all sinful acts leave upon the soul a filthy slime of corruption.
This filthiness Jesus Christ heales by Sanctification. He does by his Spirit
plant the seeds of grace in the heart; he does make the soul partaker of the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. He does cause all old things to pass away, and all
things to become new, 2 Cor. 5. ^6. He does write his Laws in the heart of the
sinner, Jer. 31. 33. He does sprinkle clean water upon the sinner, whereby he
is cleansed from all his defilements, Ezekiel. 36. 25. And by this means the
filthiness of sin is healed This Sanct^fication has two parts; the one is
mortification, whereby the body of sin is wasted, Rom 8. 13. and Col. 3. 3,
5. The other is regeneration, or the spiritual resurrection, whereby the inward
man is strengthened and renewed from day to day: the one is the putting off the
old man, the other is the putting on the new man. Now although the sinner is
not healed perfectly, and at once of the filthiness of sin by
Sanctification, as he is of the guilt of sin, in regard of justification,
because this is a real change, and therefore it is carried on successively and
gradually, whereas justification is only a relative change, and therefore is
perfect at once; yet he is in so sure and certain a way of healing, that Jesus
Christ will never let him go out of his hands till he be fully cured. He is
perfectly healed in respect of parts already, and he shall be perfectly healed
in respect of degrees; he shall see the day when there shall not be the least
speck of sin or filth, either upon the soul or body.

Thirdly, the excellency of this Physician above all other Physicians. This
appears in many respects.

1. In regard of the Subject. Other Physicians have to deal only with the
body. All their business lies in the temper, constitution, parts of the body,
in preventing, removing diseases that annoy the outward man. Their line
reaches no farther. The soul is not the object or subject of the Physicians
Art. But now the chief part about which Christ is employed, is the soul, the
conscience, the affections, the inward man. He heales the distempers of the
heart, which other Physicians as Physicians can neither know, nor heal. Vid.
Esaias ^1. 1.

2. Jesus Christ is a Physician for all diseases. There are some diseases which
are opprobria medicorum, no Physician in the world is able to cure them. But
Jesus Christ can cure all diseases, all kinds of diseases, and every
individual disease. He knows the cause of every disease, and therefore he can
cure all. Some Physicians, though they have a general skill in all diseases,
yet their excellency lies sometimes in one or two which they have studied more
then others, and about which they have been employed more then in others. As
some Divines are better versed in some one or two Controversies then others,
so, etc. But Christ is as exact in all spiritual diseases, as he is in any
disease. He is as good for the diseases in the head, as for those that are in
the heart; and for those that are in the affections, as for those that are in
the head. He can cure ignorance, pride, unbelief, discontent, impatience,
hardness of heart, etc. and he can cure one as well as another, that is, he
can cure all. Christ never yet met with a spiritual distemper, which he was not
able to call by its right name, and to prescribe a fit medicine for. It Is said
of him in the Gospel, That he cured all manner of diseases, John 5. 4. He can
cure all manner of spiritual diseases.

3. Jesus Christ can give no hurtful medicine. The most learned Physician in
the world, being he knows but in part, may prescribe something which is not
proper for the disease; unless they had spectacles to see into the body, they
may be mistaken; but Christ cannot be mistaken. He never appointed any thing
but what was fit, yea, nothing but what was best for the patients condition.
And indeed Christ's Physic is therefore proper, because he prescribes it. Other
Physicians appoint such receipts, because they are proper, but Christ's receipts
are proper, because he prescribes them. If he will use a plaster of clay and
spettle, it is therefore right, because he will use it, John 9. 6. That which
would have made a seeing man blind, if it had been done by a man, will m^ke a
blind man see when it is done by Christ.

4. Jesus Christ heales speedily. Other Physicians are long in healing; We use
to say, diseases come on horsback, but go away on foot. No Physician can cure
in a moment. They must observe method. A cure over-hastened may be as
prejudicial to the Patient as a disease neglected. But Christ can heal in an
instant. Many a diseased sinner, who has labored for many years under many
spiritual distempers, have been cured by Jesus Christ in a trice of time. We
read in the Gospel, that Christ did immediately cure some that had labored a
long time under diseases, in a moment. Take up thy bed and walk, Vid. Mat. 8.
3. immediately his leprosy was healed, Mat. 20. 34. immediately their eyes
received sight, Mar. 1. 31. immediately the fever left her; many instances of
like nature. Immediate cures are not the Acts of creatures, though never so
learned, though never so wise. Many a dead, lame, blind, impenitent sinner
has come sick into the Church, and gone out whole. When Christ pleases, he can
heal presently.

5. Christ can bless his Physic. He can make it effectual for what he
pleases. No Physician in the world is able to do it. He applies Physic, but
he cannot say this shall cure it. He must seek a blessing from Christ. The
efficacy of that which other Physicians prescribe, does depend upon the
sutablenesse of it, and principally upon Christ's blessing; but the efficacy of
Christ's Physic depends upon his Application. Christ can say peremptorily, I
will remove such a spiritual distemper. The Leper acknowledges this, Math. 8.
2. Lord if thou will, thou can make me clean. I will, says Christ, Be thou
clean, etc. He has all spiritual diseases at his beck. The Centurion
acknowledges it, Do but speak the word, and my servant shall be healed, etc.
Mat. 8. 8. If Christ say to impenitency, to unbelief, etc. Be healed, they
will be healed; If Christ say, I will by such a Sermon heal such a sinner, the
work will be done. His Word is cure enough for any disease.

6. Christ heales the poor as well as the rich. Many Physicians do not care to
take poor patients in hand; but Jesus Christ is as willing to visit and heal
the poor as well as the rich. He is as ready to go to the beggar on the
dunghill, as to the King on the Throne. Jesus Christ in the days of his flesh,
was as ready to heal the servant as the Master, Luke ^8. 35, 36. the noble and
ignoble, the great and the small are all alike to him. Christ looks not at
outward qualities, but at spiritual distempers.

Christ heales all freely. Other Physicians take rewards. It Is their calling,
and they ought to live upon their calling. Many of them are very exacting. If
they have not a daily fee, they care not for visiting. The Gospel speaks of one
that had spent all her living on Physicians, Luke 8. 43. But now Christ takes
nothing from his Patients, whether they be rich or poor. He gives them their
Physic freely. Nay, he gives rewards to all his Patients. Other Physicians
receive from their Patients, but here the Patient receives from the Physician.
He provides meat, drink, attendance for all his Patients. Christ is a nurse as
well as a Physician. You may see this in that Parable, Luke 10. 34, 35.
Physicians are not bound to take care of their Patients in this sense, but
Christ does.

8. Christ offers himself. Other Physicians stay till they be sent for. No sick
man expects a Physician till he be called; he is glad if he can see him then;
but Christ comes without calling; indeed he should never come if he did not
come without a call. The sick soul would die before he would send for Christ.
Other Physicians are entreated to come to the sick, but here the sick are
entreated to come to the Physician, Matthew. 11. 28. The work of the Ministry is
to beseech sinners that they would be healed, Vid. 2 Cor. 5. 20. Jesus Christ
come to seek and save that which was lost, first to seek them, then to save
them.

9. Christ does not depart though he be reviled, etc. Other Physicians they
absent themselves if they be unkindly used. Who would expect a Physician should
come daily to one that reproaches and reviles him, yea, to one that shuts the
door on him when he comes, much less to one that beats him, etc? The sick
sinner uses Christ uncivilly, discourteously; he frowns on him, he shuts the
door on him, he reviles him, he beats him, and stones him, and yet the
Physician will not depart; though he seem to be angry, and to withdraw for a
time, yet returns again. Christ will put up a thousand abuses, rather then
suffer one of his Elect to die in their sins. Though Christ see that we throw
his physic into his face, that we tear and burn his bills in his presence;
that we send for Empyricks and prefer their advice before his, yet he waits
with patience, and will not be driven away by the worst usage.

10. Christ himself is the sick man's Physic. Other Physicians do not heal
their patients with their own flesh, but Christ does. Other Physicians do
sometimes take away the blood of their patients, but Christ lets himself blood
to heal his patients. By his stripes we are healed, Esaias 53. 5. Christ makes a
wound in himself to heal our wounds. The Physician dies to save the patients
life from the grave. To him that loved us, and washed away our sins with his
blood, Rev. 1. 5. Neither the guilt nor filth of one sin would have been
removed, if the Physicians blood had not been shed for it.

11. Christ is a Surgeon as well as a Physician. (...), comprehends both.

The Uses.
1. That Christ will kindly accept all endeavors of men, for the healing of
the spiritual distempers of their brethren. He is a Physician for spiritual
sores; and those are most like him that desire to heal and dress such sores
as these are.

2. Let men bring their souls to Christ, Desperet nemo. Present your selves
before Christ: he is a Physician, yea he indeed is the only Physician. All
others are mere Empiricks and Mountebanks, they will cheat you, they cannot
heal you. Those that would, send you, to works, to duties, to Angels, etc. they
are destroyers of your souls. Here is good news for a sick world, that Christ
is a Physician: lay all your diseases before him. See how men did for their
bodily diseases, Matthew. 4. 24 do so by your spiritual diseases; bring your
ignorant hearts, your proud hearts, your impatient hearts, your covetous
hearts, etc. and lay them at Christ's feet. etc. Here is Christ's pool where he
heales.

I shall lay down for the encouragement of sinners five Arguments against
despair of being healed; viz.

1. How many Christ has cured. Thousands and ten thousands are now in heaven,
that have been as si^k as thou can be.

2. Christ i^ still in a way of curing. His hand is in. Indeed his hand is
never out.

3. He has undertaken to cure all thy diseases. He has given the hand to his
Father.

4. He has healed them all (...). He has done that which will heal you. He
has shed his blood; he has poured out his Spirit, etc.

5. He is related to you. Your brother, your kinsman, your husband, your head,
a part of your self* If a sick man had a brother, or husband; a Physician which
could cure him, would he despair, etc? Why should a sick Christian despair of
cure, whose husband is such a Physician?

1. Object. But I have many diseases upon me, what hope shall I have?
Sol. Christ can cure all manner of diseases. He cured Paul a blasphemer. etc.
He cured Mary Magdalen; He cured Manasseh, etc. Let thy disease be what it
will, so Christ be thy Physician.

2. Object. But my diseases have been long upon me, what hope shall I have?
Sol. Christ can cure long diseases. He cured one that was eighteen years
diseased, Luke 13. 16. Another that had been sick thirty eight years, John 5.
5. All the diseases he cures, are old diseases. The original fountain of all
is from the fall of Adam.

3. Object. But I have relapsed, etc. what hope shall I have?
Sol. There is a peculiar promise for this disease, Hos. 14. 4. Peter relapsed,
and Christ healed him, etc. Whatever your diseases are, if you will be willing
to be cured, Christ is willing to heal you. Only you must

First, Take Christ's counsel. Follow his Direction. Never any miscarried that
took Christ's advice.

Secondly, Keep back no disease. Let him heal all, or he will heal none. Oh
that Christ might get some custom with you this day.

4. Object. But I am worse since Christ took me in hand, etc.
Sol. 1. Thou art so much the better, because thou think thy self worse, if
it be thy complaint that thou art worse.

2. Let Christ alone with the cure, he goes the safest way, yea, he goes the
nearest way, when he seems to go the farthest way.

3 Take notice of the alsufficiency of Christ. He is every thing to the soul
which it wants. The soul wants bread, Christ is that; the soul wants drink,
Christ is that; the soul wants raiment, Christ is that; the soul wants a
shadow, Christ is that; the soul wants a Physician, and Christ is a Physician;
not a Mountebank, but a learned skilful Physician. The soul that has Christ
has every thing. One Jesus Christ is enough for all the Necessities of the
soul.

4. What comfort is this for the children of God! We get new falls every day,
we breed new diseases every day. We contract new guilt, new filth. Christ is a
Physician, he has healing in his wings; he can cure your deadness, your
dullness, your hardness, your blindness, etc. He is a compassionate
Physician. He is touched with the sense of your infirmities, Heb. 4. 15. Get
nearer and nearer to Christ, get farther under his healing wings, etc.

5. Rob not Christ of the honor of this Doctrine. Christ is robbed of the
honor of a Physician, two ways.

1. When we go to other Physicians. To creatures, to duties, to carnal mirth,
etc. all which are Physicians of no value.

2. When we attribute our spiritual healing to our selves, or any creature, and
not to Christ. He that robs Christ of the honor of a Physician, shall when he
is sick, perhaps, want a Physician.

Doct. 3. That there are many sick of this spiritual disease, who think
themselves to be whole. As in regard of the body, many that are very full of
diseases judge themselves to be healthy and strong, so very many there are who
are mortally sick of spiritual maladies, and yet conceive themselves to be in
perfect health. As many that are spiritualy healed think themselves sick unto
death; so many that are spiritually sick unto death, judge themselves to be in
a healthful estate. Thus it was with the vain glorious Pharisee, Luke 18. 11.
he thought himself perfectly in health, when as he was ready to drop into his
grave; yea, to fall into hell through the abundance of his spiritual
sicknesses. Thus it was with those other Pharisees; John 9. 39 40. Our Savior
hints their sad condition to them, v. 9. They imagined themselves unconcerned
in what was spoken. Are we also blind? q. d. our eyes are as clear as the
eyes of any in the world, we are far from blindness. They thought themselves
to see as perfectly as any, v. 40. Thus was it with the Church of Laodicea,
Rev. 3. 17. she thought her condition as good as the best in the world, when
she was indeed as sad a spectacle as the earth bore. Experience shows it to be
so still, and that with the greatest part of men in the world. Come to men that
are grossly profane, tell them of their dangerous condition; ask them why they
will not think of another course, etc. What is their answer? Trouble not your
self about us, we are well, our condition is good we hope to be saved as well
as you that are so st^nct, and so zealous; heaven belongs to us as well as to
you, etc.

But whence comes this to pass? I shall reduce all to these heads or springs.

First, Ignorance. The greatest part of men are grossly ignorant of their
spiritual estate. They know not, they do not understand their inward estate.
The Scripture tells us that a carnal condition is an ignorant condition, Ephesians.
4. 18. 1 Pet. 1 14 A carnal heart is spiritually an ignorant and blind heart.
The state of nature is called a state of darkness, Acts 26. 18. And a state of
folly, Prove. 5. 23. And all such men are called spiritual fools, Psalm 14. 1.
They may know much in outward things, they may know much of the letter of the
Scripture, but as to saving knowledge, they are very ignorant, and without
understanding. And as they are ignorant of other matters, so they are ignorant
of their spiritual condition. This ignorance is to be ascribed to these four
heads.

1. They want the Spirit of God. The holy Spirit is the principle of all saving
light. It is called by the Apostle, The Spirit of wisdom and revelation, Ephesians.
1. 17. because all true wisdom and saving illumination is the work of the
Spirit; the Spirit gives us power to discern, and light whereby to see spiritual
things. Pregnancy of natural wit without the Spirit of God, can never make a
person wise unto salvation. Elihu tells Job, Chap. 32. 8. There is a spirit in
man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives him wisdom. He that wants this
spirit cannot possibly know his spiritual estate. But now many men, all
unregenerate men want this Spirit, Ergo. This the Apostle largely disputes, in
1 Cor. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

2. They do not search into their own hearts. He that would know his spiritual
condition, must carefully and conscionably dive into his own spirit by serious
examination of himself. He must turn his eyes inward. This the Apostle tells
us, 2 Cor. 13. 5. (...). We must pierce thorough our own hearts before we can
see whether they be sound or rotten. We must prove our selves as the Goldsmith
does his metal, whether it be right or not; we must cast our hearts into the
fire, and bring them to the touchstone, etc. He that is not a self-visitor, a
self-examiner, can never attain to any competent knowledge of himself. Now
there are many men, who never did spend one hour in the trial of themselves,
they are as great strangers to their own hearts, as they are to foreign
Countries, this makes them ignorant.

3. They do not consult with this spiritual Physician. Jesus Christ is the
great principal Physician. Under Christ the Ministers of the Gospel are
Physicians, ^ Cor. 6. 1. (...). It Is their office to be helpers of Gods people
in their spiritual condition, and it is the duty of the servants of God to
consult them about the state of their souls, Mal. 2. 6. It Is not only to be
understood of public preaching, but of private conference. They are to
discover their spiritual state to the Ministers of Christ, that they may help
them in knowing what they do not understand, and in healing those distempers
which they have discovered: we are not to rest upon their hare opinion; no, we
must seek the Law at his mouth: if they say any thing without the Law or beside
the Law, they are not to be heard: they must judge according to Scripture,
otherwise they are not to be heard. But yet by advising with them, some light
and knowledge of our spiritual condition may be attained from the rules of
Scripture. They are spiritual Seers in their model and measure, as the Prophets
of old were. 2 King. 1^. 13. As they help men by the direction of the Word of
God, to know what they are to do, and what they are to believe; so they may be
very beneficial by comparing the spiritual stare of men with the rule to help
them to a better, and more perfect knowledge of themselves then they had
before. But now the greatest part of men neglect this. Men generally go to the
Lawyer to be informed about their outward state, they go to the bodily
Physician to be helped in the knowledge of their corporal estate; but they
never make conscience of enquiring of the estate of their souls at the month of
the spiritual Physician. This makes them so ignorant; and because they are
ignorant* they think their condition to be good when it is bad and miserable.

4 They consult with Mountebanks, which are weak or flattering.

Secondly, Pride. Man is naturally a very proud swelling creature, willing to
see what may make him excellent, unwilling to acknowledge any thing in himself
that may render him contemptible, either in his own eyes, or in the eyes of
others. Simon Magus the Sorcerer gave out that himself was some great one, Act.
8. 9. he would be (...). All men by nature have a spice of that disease. How
comes it to pass else that men are so impatient to bear rebuke, that they are
so unwilling to be instructed, that they are so ^verse to have their spiritual
condition searched, that they are so raging under affliction? Is it not because
of that pride and conceitednesse that is in their hearts. Hence also it is,
that though they besick unto death; yet they judge themselves to be in a sound,
healthy, saving conditition, lest by acknowledging their spiritual sicknesses,
they should be laid low in the thoughts of men. See how proudly the Jews speak
to Christ, when he would convince them of their spiritual bondage, John 8. 33.
We are Abraham's children, and how say thou, ye shall be made free? They
thought it a mighty injury to a people of their quality, to be told of bondage
and subjection. It Is want of humility that makes sinful men hold such
groundless conclusions about that their spiritual welfare.

Thirdly, Love of case. Men naturally love their ease and quiet. They would not
be disturbed. Issachar law that rest was good, and therefore he coucheth down
between two burdens, Gen 49. 14, 15. Most men are for spirituals, as Issachar
was for his outward condition; they prefer an unsafe rest before a safe
unquietness. They know that if they once see, or acknowledge themselves to be
spiritually sick; they must enter into a course of spiritual Physic. They must
take down many a bitter potion which they do not like, therefore they conclude
they are whole. As it is with many foolish men in regard of their bodies;
though they be sick of many diseases, yet they had rather say, they are well,
then meddle with Physic; they willingly cast the thoughts of their diseases
behind their back, that they may not be at the trouble and cost of curing. Just
so it is with spiritual sick men. If they should say they are sick, then they
must make use of means. They must pray, they must repent, their sins must be
purged out, they must have some spiritual disturbance, etc. This they love not,
therefore they conclude they are whole, and often drop down into hell, before
they will acknowledge that they stand in need of Physic. Soul take thy ease,
says that rich fool in the Gospel, eat, drink, etc. Luke 12. 19. This love of
painful ease (for so it will prove in the end) is the bane and ruin of
thousands of souls.

Fourthly, They judge of their spiritual state by false Rules. It Is very sad to
consider what groundless, rotten foundations men build hopes of heaven upon.
Our Savior speaks of two sorts of builders in the Gospel, under which all the
Sons of men are comprehended: the one builds his house upon, a rock, the other
upon the sand, Matthew. 7, 24, 25, 26, 27. Every man is a builder, and every man
builds his salvation, either upon the rock, or upon the sand. Most men build
upon the sand, conclude themselves to be well upon such arguments as will not
hold in the day of trial. I shall both discover them, and show the rottenness
of them.

1. False Rule. Freedom from scandalous flagitious sins. Many men think they
are spiritually whole, because they are not sick of those visible desperate
diseases which other sinners have upon them. They are neither thieves, nor
whores, nor drunkards, nor oppressors, nor cheaters, nor murderers, etc. They
live soberlie, civilly, orderly amongst men, (...) them with any enormous act.
Hereupon (...) gather that they are spiritually whole, that they have no mortal
disease upon them. This was the ground of that misjudgment which the Pharisee
made of himself, Luke 18. 11. God I thank thee, that I am not as other men,
etc. It Is very like the Pharisee spoke no more then what was true, for they
were generally men very inoffensive as to all such things. For the discovering
of this false foundation, I shall lay down four things, viz.

1. It Is a very great mercy to be freed from these scandalous sins. If God
have preserved you from these visible diseases, that you have none of these
botches of Egypt upon you, it is to be acknowledged as a very great blessing.
The Pharisee did not amiss in blessing God that he was no Extortioner, if he
had done it upon a right ground; if he had not gone on to censure the Publican,
he had not been blamed, but commended for it. David blesses God for preserving
him from the sin of murder upon Abigails persuasion. Vid. 1 Samuel 25. 32,
33. And there is very great reason for it, For

(1) Hereby we are delivered from much anguish and torment of conscience. These
scandalous sins as they do in an extraordinary manner waste the conscience,
so they do lay a foundation of much horror, and trouble in the soul; every
sin creates much torment, but these great abominations create exceeding much.
What horror did David's Adultery and Murder cast into his spirit! Though God
pardoned them both to him, yet he was filled with anguish a long time after,
vid. Ps. 6. Ps. 38. Ps. 50. 1. Now it is a great mercy, when God prevents any
anguish.

(2.) Hereby we are delivered from being hurtful examples to other men. Gross
scandalous offenses are very prejudicial to others. The hearts of those that
are good are grieved, and such as are wicked are caused to stumble oftentimes
to their eternal ruin. David's sin gave great occasion of sin to others. Now
it is a great mercy when God keeps a person from being an instrument of hurt to
others, especially of hurt to their souls.

2. Such as expect salvation must keep themselves from such wickednesses. Vid.
1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Heaven is not a place of common receipt for good and bad. It Is
not like your ordinary Innes, which lodge all kind of passengers without
difference; such Lepers so living and dying, must expect to go to another
place, Rev. 22. 15. Without shall be dogs, etc.

3. It Is possible for a person to be free from these abominations, and yet to
be mortally sick of spiritual diseases. Every sick man has not the plague. A
man may die of a consumption as well as of a Fever. A person may be in a
damnable state, that never committed murder or uncleanness.

(1.) The Pharisee was free from all these impieties, and yet deadly sick in
his soul, Luke 18. 11. Paul when he was a Pharisee, says, that he was
blameless concerning all such enormities, Phil. 3. 6. and yet at that time
sick even unto death; so he in Mat. 32. 11. so the five Virgins, Mat. 25. 1.
Those in 2 Pet. 2. 18, 20. A natural conscience may keep men from such
enormities. The penalty of humane Laws may preser^^ (...) these great
wickednesses. Civil education may preserve a man from falling into these
wickednesses. A desire to keep our reputation in the world with men, with whom
we converse, may keep us from these high impieties. Mere restraint may do this.

(2.) If freedom from these offenses were enough to proclaim men to be
spiritually whole, then no hypocrite should be sick. A man must be free from
all these sins, before he be advanced into the hypocrites form. Now we know
that every hypocrite is spiritually and mortally sick. Yea, the Scripture tells
us that hell is prepared for the hypocrites, other sinners are said to have
their portion with the hypocrites, Mat. 2^. 51. The hypocrite is of all sinners
the special proprietor of Hell, and yet he is free from all these offenses.

(3.) It Is possible for one that has no saving grace in his heart, to be free
from these offenses. Though every one that has grace will abandon these sins,
yet every one that is free from these sins has not grace. The instances
mentioned before will prove this. But every one that wants saving grace, is
under the rage of spiritual sicknesses. Yea, he that is without true grace, is
not only sick in sin, but dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. and yet those that are
dead in sin may be free from these wickednesses.

(4.) Although many be free from the actual commission of these sins, yet
they have the roots of these sins in their hearts. Every sin is in that
bundle of sin which we call original. There is pride, and murder, and theft,
etc* Now the pollution of nature, if it be not healed by justifying grace, and
pardoning mercy, and sanctifying grace is enough to make the soul sick, and
that unto death. Yea, indeed the great sickness of the soul lies there. There
lies the strength of sin, and the heat of sin. David when he bewailes his
murder, goes to that as the root of it, Psalm 51. 5. All a man's actual
sins, be they never so gross, might soon be healed if that were but healed.
This is the fountain of blood. This is the law of sin, here is the devils
magazine.

(5.) Though thou art free from th^se foul sins, yet thou may have some
secret idol or other set up in thy heart. Now the least sin, a vain thought is
a mortal sickness in it self; and if it be not healed, will prove a
soul-destroying sickness. The Papists have devised a distinction, of sins
venial, and sins mortal. That there are some sins that in their own nature
do not make a man liable to eternal death, but only to temporal chastisement:
so Bellarmine teaches. The Scripture knows no such distinction, nor can we
allow it. All sins are venial to true repentance, except that one sin
against the holy Ghost; He that commits that shall never be forgiven. But there
is no sin venial in its own nature; the least is a mortal sickness, and
deserves eternal death. So says the Scripture, Gal. 3. 10. Romans 6. ult. the
Apostle speaks of all sin that is opposed to legal righteousness; and there
is no sin so small, but it is a breach of the Law of God. For of every idle
word that a man shall speak, he shall give an account at the day of judgment,
Mat. 12. 36. What is less then an idle word? and yet that does in its own
nature deserve wrath. By all these things it appears that a man may be
spiritually (...) thief, nor drunkard, etc.

4. Yet may a person gather evideners of grace from his acting against sin,
in some cases. David argues so, Ps. 18. 23. And therefore for the winding up of
this point, I shall lay down some Rules, whereby a person may know whether his
acting against sin be from a principle of saving grace, or merely from common
restraint.

1. He that forbears sin from a principle of true grace, does act from the
Authority and declaration of anaked truth. When the immediate declaration of
Gods Will in his Word, without any investiture of promise or threatening carries
a man out against sin; then is his abstaining from sin, from a principle of
true grace. Not but that he that has true grace may look both at the word of
promise and the word of threatening. God has propounded both promises and
threatenings, to be as helps to preserve his people from sinning, but the
principal ground of acting against sin, is the revelation of Gods Will
forbidding such actions. This is that which David says of himself, Psalm. 119.
161. My heart stands in awe of thy Word. He was kept from sin upon the mere
awful respect that his heart bore to the naked Word of God. So Psalm. 119. 11.
Thy Word have I hid within my heart, that I might not sin against thee. So
Joseph, Genesis 39. 9. When the heart and the Word of God are shut up alone; when
heaven and hell, promises and threatenings are laid aside, and the heart and
Gods command are alone; if then thou be restrained from sinful actions upon the
account of Gods command, then is thy forbearing of sin from a principle of
grace. Vid. Psalm 17. 4. By the words of thy lips; Bala^m shows himself an
hypocrite in this very thing. He pretends to abstain from sin upon the
Authority of Gods Word, Numb. 22, 18. yet afterward in that very act goes away
from God, out of a covetous principle.

2. He that forbeares sinful actions from a principle of grace, acts against
sin out of love to holiness. He abstaines from sin not only as it is a
deadly thing, but as it is a loathsome thing. Ps. 119. 140. Thy Word is very
pure, therefore thy servant loves it; David abstained from sin, because of his
love to the purity of Gods Law, out of his love to righteousness. This is that
which is in Jer. 32. 40. I will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall
not depart from me. When we are kept from sin because of the fear of God,
then its a right abstinence, Neh. 5. 15. Esaias 30. 22. When sin is cast away
and abstained from as a menstruous cloth, because it has filthiness in it,
and because it pollutes them that meddle with it, such forbearance of sin
argues truth of grace, Psalm. 119. 113.

3. He that abstaines from sin upon principles of grace, will abstain from
all sin. From profitable and pleasurable sins, as well as disparaging,
disgracing sins; from small sins as well as great sins; from sinful anger
as well as murder; from sinful words as well as sinful actions. He will
abstain from walking and standing, as well as from sitting with the ungodly,
Psalm. 1. 1. he will pray with David, Psalm. 139. ult. See if there be any wicked
way, Psalm. 119. 104. I hate every false way. This is clear from what goes
before; he (...) sin out of respect to Gods Law, and (...) to holiness:
therefore he cannot but desire to forbear all; because every sin is unholy,
every sin is derogatory to Gods Law.

4. He that forbears sin from a principle of grace, will act as well against
the being of sin in his nature, as the breakings out of sin in his life. He
will labor to suppress the corruption of his heart, as the excursion of his
feet, Psalm 51. 5. In iniquity was I shapen, etc. He would be delivered from a
polluted heart, as well as from a polluted hand. So it was with Paul, Romans 7.
23, 24. he that acts against sin from common restraint, will never much care
for the inhabitation of sin; but he that has grace, is most careful and
sorrowful for that: he would keep down the filthiness of the spirit as well as
of the flesh, 2 Cor. 7. 1. the sinful habit is worse to a gracious man, then
the sinful Actions.

5. He that forbears sin from a principle of grace, is as careful of doing
good, as of abstaining from evil. He prays as David did, Psalm. 119. 5. O that
my ways were directed to keep thy statutes. He that has only restraining
grace, matters not much the neglecting of good; but he that has true grace, is
very careful for this as well as for the other; he chooses the way of
obedience, as well as refuses the way of disobedience. A godly man is
described by this character, that he chooses the things that please God, Isa.
56. 4. He is every jot as careful for the Positives, as he is for the Negatives
of Religion. When these things concur, then the forbearance of sin will
witness your condition to be good; otherwise it will be no evidence.

2. The second false Rule is, Outward profession. There are many who do
conclude that they are in a good condition for their souls, merely because they
are members of the Church, especially if they hear, pray, etc. This is the
general rule whereby carnal Professors judge their condition to be good. They
have been baptized, they have come to Gods Table, they have lived in the
Church, etc. therefore surely they are in a very healthful condition. I have
four things to say for this particular.

1. It Is a great honor to be a member of the Church though it be only by
visible Profession. Theodosius accounted it a greater honor to be Membrum
Ecclesiae then Caput Imperii. It was that which advanced the people of Israel
above all other people, Romans 3. 1, 2. The Church of God is the most honorable
society upon earth, Such as are the members of the Church are nearer to God
then any others. They enjoy such privileges as none else enjoy. They have more
helps to salvation then any others. We can never be sufficiently thankful for
this favor.

2. To pray, and to hear, and to frequent the public Ordinances, etc. is that
which all that hope to be saved, are to do. That man is in a bad estate that
slights these duties. The wrath of the Lord lies upon them that do not call
upon the Name of the Lord, Jer. 10. 25. He that wilfully neglects these, can
never be saved, Psalm. 14. 14. not to call upon God, is the character of a
worker of iniquity.

3. Yes all this may be done, and (...) be in a very sick estate.

(1.) There are many instances in Scripture to prove this. Was not Ishmael
circumcised? was not he a member of the Church? Genesis 17. 16. and yet without
any saving interest in the promise. Was not Esan Jacobs brother? was not he
likewise a member of the Church? and yet lived and died a profane wretch, Heb.
12. 16. Did not Cain sacrifice as well as Abel? Genesis 4. init. and yet the
Apostle says, he was of that wicked one, 1 John 3. 11. What think you of Saul,
Ahab, and all those wicked men? did not they live in the Church? did they not
observe outwardly the worship of God? and yet the sons of Belial. In the new
Testament, did not the Publicans fast and pray, Luke 18. 12. Was not Judas a
Disciple? did not he preach as well as others? and yet a child of perdition.
Was not Simon Magus baptized? Act. 8. 13. Did not Ananias and Sapphira walk
with the Church of God a long time, Act. 5. 1. and yet they lived and died
wickedly, v. 5, 6, 10. Had not the five foolish Virgins lamps, as well as the
wise? Matthew. 25. 1, 2, 3. and yet they were excluded out of heaven, verse. 11,
12. so the three sorts of ground, Matthew. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7.

(2.) God takes men off in Scripture from resting upon this. And that both in
the Old Testament and in the New. In the Old Testament, Jer. 7. 4. In the New
Testament, Matthew. 3. 9. Now for a man to make that an Argument of a good
condition, which God says is no Argument, is to no purpose.

(3.) Our Savior, tells that many will plead this, at the day of judgment in
vain, Luke 13. 26. 27.

(4) A man cannot be a hypocrite, till he do all these things. A hypocrite may
pray, and fast, and hear as often, and as well externally, as a sincere
Christian, Esaias 58. 3. and more plainly, Esaias 48. 1, 2. lege. Therefore the
bare performance of these duties, does not argue a man to be in a good
condition.

4. And lastly, yet may a person from the performance of these duties evidence
himself to be in a good condition Godward, when he does perform them
according to those Rules which the Word of God lays down. I shall reduce them
to three Heads.

1. When holy dispositions are brought with us to duties. Several dispositions
the Word of God requires in every duty.

(1) Holy fear and reverence of God. Of this David speaks, Psalm. 5. 7. In thy
fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple. It Is meet the heart should be
possessed with an holy reverential awe of God, when it comes before him in any
duty, Heb. 12. 28. The distance that is between God and man, the consideration
of that pollution that is upon the souls of the best, should breed this
reverence: We cannot sanctify God, if this fear be not in our hearts, Esaias 8.
12. Now that man that can find such a dispisition in his heart, when he comes
to hear, or to pray, may conclude that there is a principle of grace in his
heart. Though bare hearing, and bare praying will not argue our estate to be
good; yet trembling at the hearing of the Word, and a filial awe of God upon
the heart in prayer, will evince a spiritual principle.

(2) Humility of spirit. God expect^ (...) that come to worship him should come
(...) humbly, with low, mean, vile apprehensions of themselves. So came the
Publican, Luke 18. 1^. There are many things that testify his low conceit of
himself. He stood afar off. He would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven.
He smote his breast, etc. Thus it was with Abraham, Genesis 18. 27. and thus it
was with Ezra. Chap. 9. 6. Now though bare prayer will be no Argument of a good
condition, yet praying in godly humility will, if it be from the heart, if it
be from a deep spiritual sense of our own vileness. If our souls lie in the
dust before the Lord, when we come to worship him; such worship will argue
grace.

(3) Faith in the Promise. It Is the mind of God that we should bring faith
with us to God in every duty. He that comes unto God must believe, Heb. 11. 6.
Now when in hearing we can close with God by applying what we hear, when in
prayer we are able in some measure to cast our selves upon God, to rely and
depend on him for audience, for acceptance; When we can pray as David says to
God, and look up for an answer, Psalm. 5. 3. such dispositions in duties are
Arguments of a work of grace upon the heart.

(4) Hungrings after God. God looks that we should have strong desires after
the duties of Gods worship, David fainted and longed for the courts of God,
Psalm. 63. init. Psalm. 84. 2. Psalm. 42. 1. When we do not only pray, but hunger
after prayer. When we are glad of an opportunity of hearing, as David was, Ps.
122. 2. especially if these hungrings be to private duties, as well as to
public, such prayers are evidences of grace.

2. When a man has right ends in duties. God looks much at the ends which men
propose to themselves in all their actions. And so do holy men. I shall first
negatively remove those carnal ends which Hypocrites and carnal Professors
propound in the duties of Religion.

First, The pleasing of men. Most propound no higher, no other end of their
holy services but this. The Apostle dis-owns this end, Gal. 1. 10.

Secondly, Custom. When a man prays, and hears, because it has been his
wont ^o to do. Many men have no other end, but merely a religious wont. They
and their forefathers have been used to do so, therefore they continue it.

Thirdly, To avoid penalty of the Laws. This many men make their end in
Religious duties.

Fourthly, To get honor, preferment, repute with men. When men shall pray,
hear, merely because they would be accounted Religious. And thus the
Shechemites were circumcised, Genesis 34. 23.

Fifthly, To stop the voice of conscience. Many men sometimes pray, hear, read
the Scriptures, that they may stop the mouth of conscience, accusing them for
some sin committed. This is nothing else but spiritual bribery.

Sixthly, When duties are made a mask to cover some foul sin, either done or
intended to be done. As Jezabels fasting, 1 Kings 21, 9. The Pharisees long
prayers, Matthew. 23. 14. He that makes these, or any such things. (...) end of
his duties, cannot conclude a principle of grace from the performance of them,
although they be never so frequently done. But the right ends are such as these.

(1) Obedience to the Divine command. When a person shall upon serious
examination find that his end in praying, hearing, etc. is, that he may show
his subjection to the Divine Precept. He prays not only because he wants some
mercy, but because he would honor God by performing his Commands. When a
person can say with David, Psalm. 119 4, 5. Thou have commanded, etc. He may
from the performance of such services comfortably conclude, that there is a
principle of grace in his heart. When we can appeal to God, that we wait upon
his Ordinances, because we would do that duty we owe to God; in such case, we
may argue from duties to grace.

(2) A desire to get and keep communion with God. This is one end for which
holy duties are appointed, that by them God and the soul may come together.
And this has been the end which holy men have propounded to themselves in holy
duties, Psalm. 27. 4. Thy face Lord will I seek. Thus it was with David, Psalm.
42. 2. When shall I come to appear before God? And Psalm. 63. 2. To see thy
power, and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. Now when a
person can in the uprightness of his soul say, that his end in coming to
duties, public and private, is because he would see him whom his soul loves;
and therefore he is not satisfied with a duty, if he meet not with God in it,
he may then comfortably conclude from the performing of duties, a principle of
grace in his heart.

(3.) A desire to get corruption weakened, and grace strengthened. This is one
end why God has instituted his Ordinances, that sin may be outed thereby,
and grace confirmed. 2 Cor. 10. 4. and 1 Pet. 2. 2. Now when a person can in
the integrity of his soul say, that he prays, hears, etc. that he may get
love increased, faith confirmed, grace exercised; that he may get his heart
warmed, his conscience purified; then he may comfortably conclude from such
duties, that his heart is upright with God.

3. When the deportment is fair after duties. I shall here name two things.

First, When we bless God for duties. It Is a great mercy to enjoy the
Ordinances of God, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Now when you return from prayer, hearing,
etc. if you can from your souls bless the Lord, that you have had such an
opportunity, from a sincere heart; then you may conclude that your hearts have
a principle in them above nature, when you look upon them as privileges.

Secondly, When the doing of duties make you fruitful. When you hear, and give
up your selves to be ruled by the Word you hear, Romans 6. 17. When you desire
as well to be doers of the Word, as hearers of it, Jam. 1. 22, 23, 24. When you
pray, and desire to live the prayers you make to God. When your souls are
troubled that you cannot find that fruitful efficacy of your duties upon your
hearts, and in your lives, which you would fain find. You can heartily chide
your selves that you are no better for your duties. When you go to prayer, or
to hearing, or to the Table of the Lord, your earne^^ (...) is, that he would
make you (...). When you go into your ^l^eset to (...) the Word, you send up
some ejaculation to heaven, that the Word may be effectual upon your soul^,
etc. then you may comfortably conclude, that there is a supernatural work upon
your hearts. But if these things be not in you in some degree and measure; the
bare performance of duties, though they he done never so frequently, never so
exactly as to the outward of them, will be no ground to you, for the reasons
above mentioned, that you are in a good condition. This is the second false
Rule.

3. The third false Rule; Outward Prosperity. Multitudes of men judge of their
spiritual condition by the Rule of outward Prosperity. They think their souls
are in health, because their bodies are in health; they think they are inwardly
prosperous, because they are outwardly happy. They have great revenues, a full
trading, they have a multitude of children, their flocks and their herds are
increased, they are advanced to great honors; therefore they bless themselves
and say, God loves them, and they are highly in his favor. They think they are
the heirs of heaven, because they are the possessors of the earth. Thus it was
with the ten tribes: when the Prophets threatened the judgments of God against
them for their sins, they ran to this Sanctuary to secure themselves, they
concluded Gods special favor from outward prosperity. Vid. Hos. 12. 8. It Is
the general and common refuge of worldly men. They think their hearts are full
of grace, because their purses are full of gold; because the world dandles them
upon her lap, they think God dandles them upon his knee. For the removal of
this, I shall propound four things.

First, It Is a mercy in it self to enjoy a competency of these outward things.
To have health, wealth, prosperity, plenty, is a mercy to be received with
much thankfulness from God. To be poor, sickly, weak is in it self an evil;
and to be rich, strong, healthful, is in its own nature a blessing; which I
shall prove by these two Arguments.

1. The Scripture puts outward prosperity amongst blessings. Deuteronomy. 28. 3, 4, 5,
to 15. So Lev. 26. 3, 4, etc. Now what the Scripture calls blessing, is in its
own nature a blessing. The judgment of God is according to truth.

2. Those which are rich, etc. have more opportunities of doing good, then such
as are poor. They may by their outward estates promote Religion, help to
advance the worship of God in the world, be instruments of planting the Gospel
in foreign parts. A good purse and a gracious heart meeting together, may be
very instrumental sundry ways for the glory of God, and the good of men. They
may be the means of bringing in many to God, both by their example, which is
very prevalent in the world, and by giving unto men rewards for godliness
sake. One rich man in a Parish may be a great help to make a Parish Religious,
if not in heart, yet in profession; which is a great mercy. Rich men have a
capacity of doing that good, which men of meaner condition want. They may
relieve prisoners, cloth the naked, feed the hungry, ransom captives, which
other men cannot do. Now it is a mercy to be put into a capacity of doing good
(...) a good man, when he is not capable (...) the good he would, though it be
but a temporal good. It Is a greater trouble to a good man not to be able to
give, then it is to the poor to be turned away without giving. Though in such
case the liberality of the heart is accepted instead of the liberality of the
hand. He that would give when he has not to give, is set down in Gods
Calendar, for a bountiful man, though he give nothing at all. This is the first
conclusion.

Secondly, Riches and grace do sometimes go together. Outward Prosperity and
inward do sometimes meet in the same person. It Is not impossible that rich men
should be good men. We have some instances of this in Scripture. Abraham was
very holy, Called the righteous man, Esaias 41. 2. the Father of the faithful,
The friend of God, etc. and yet Abraham was very rich, Genesis 24. 35. Job was
exceeding pious, a man whom God boasts of to Satan, Job 1. 8. and yet he was
very rich. He had plenty of children (those are first put in the inventory) and
he was rich in all other wealth, ver. 3. he had seven thousand sheep, three
thousand camels, five hundred yoke of oxen, five hundred she asses, and a very
great household, and Chap. ult. when his estate is surveyed again, you will
find it doubled, ver. 12. many other instances we have in Scripture of the
Association of grace and greatness. This God does for these six Reasons.

1. To confute the judgment of the world. Plain dealing is a jewel says the
world, but he that uses it will die a beggar. God gives these things to his
people, to cross that wicked Proverb.

2. To convince men that they are not evil things. It was Austins Observation
long since. God bestows outward things upon the worst of men, that they may
not be thought to be the only good things; and he bestows them sometimes upon
his own people, that they may not be thought to be evil things.

3. To show his Dominion and right of disposing even these outward things.
Should not some godly men enjoy these outward things, they would be apt to
think that God did not meddle with things of this nature, but now the
conferring of these things upon the godly disproves that Atheism.

4. To let men see, even sensual men, that it is not in vain to serve God
Worldly men say, what profit shall we have if we pray to him? Job 21. 15. Now
they are not capable of understanding the inward profit of holiness, but they
can understand the outward advantages. God therefore will prove the profit of
piety by such Arguments as they are able to understand.

5. To fulfill the letter of his Promise. He has promised these outward things
to godly men, Psalm. 112. 2, 3. Now men would question his faithfulness in
keeping promise, if it should not sometimes be made good in kind.

6. God makes some of his people rich to help such as are poor. Wicked men
generally hate the people of God for their very holiness. They are not willing
to relieve them, though God by his power makes them Authors of good to them.
Therefore that, the (...) flock may have some to stand by them, ^^ conscience
sake, God is pleased to make some of their number great, that the wicked of the
world may not always tread them down without opposition. Joseph was made
great, to provide for his fathers house in their poverty, Genesis 50. 20. God
makes some of his flock rich and great, that the poor of his flock may have
some to look after them for his sake. This is the second Conclusion.

Thirdly, That grace and holiness is the best and nearest way to attain to
all outward prosperity. For although God as sovereign Lord, make rich and
poor, whom he please; yet no man can expect or hope for temporal felicity but
the man that is truly godly, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the promise of the
life that now is, and of that which is to come. And Matthew. 5. 5. The froward do
often enjoy much of these outward things, but the promise of the inheritance of
them belongs only to the meek, Prove. 3. 16. Riches and honor are put into the
hand of wisdom, and none but wisdoms children can upon any good ground expect
to inherit either of them. This is the third.

Fourthly, That the enjoyment of these outward things, is no infallible
evidence of a good condition. It Is possible for a man to possess a great
portion of outward happinesses, and yet be unhappy in regard of his soul. The
purse may be full of gold, and yet the heart empty of saving grace. The body
may be fat and in good liking, and yet the soul lean and withered. A man may
have great possessions in the world, and yet have no interest in God. Our
Savior supposes this, Matthew 16. 26. There are four things required to make
up this supposition.

(1) A man that gains the whole world must enjoy all the riches, honor,
pleasure of worldly things.

(2) He must have a heart capable to take delight in all these.

(3) He must enjoy all these from the first man to the last man, from the
beginning to the end of the world.

(4) Freedom from all vexations, and troubles of Spirit. This no man ever did
enjoy. And yet our Savior supposes, that a man may enjoy all this, and yet
lose his soul. That outward prosperity cannot evidence a man to be in a state
of grace, appears by these seven Arguments.

1. They are bestowed upon the worst of men. The Scripture tells us of many
rich men, very rich, that lived and died wickedlie. What think you of him
mentioned, Luke 12. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. He was exceeding rich, his treasury was
too little, his storehouse was too small for his revenues, and yet no interest
in God at all that might entitle him to salvation; a very fool for all his
ri^hes. You read of another in Luke 16. 19. There are all expressions of
prosperity that can be imagined, and yet v. 23. that very person is in Hell
torments. You know the story of Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 2, 6. he was very wealthy,
and yet a sinful fool. As his name is, so is he, Nabal is his name, and folly
is with him. You read of some in Job, Chap. 21. 7, 8, 9, 10. that enjoyed much
prosperity, and yet desperately wicked: read v. 14. They say (...) from us,
we desire not the knowledge of (...) Sodom and Gomorrah were very rich, it was
a land fruitful as the Garden of God, Genesis 13. 10. and yet they that possessed
that fruitful land, are now suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. Jude 7.
The Scripture is full of such examples.

2. Riches and honor are but common blessings. They are the good things of the
Footstool, not the good things of the Throne. They are in the left hand of
wisdom, Prove. 3. 16. Now no common mercy can argue special love, Eccles. 9.
1. No man knows either love or hatred by any thing that is before him.

3. Outward prosperity is very often a hindrance of salvation. That of our
Savior would seriously be taken notice of. It Is easier for a camel to go
thorough the eye of a needle, then for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
God, Mat. 19. 24. Riches too often draw the heart from God, they cool zeal,
quench devotion. We see by experience many men that were hot for Religion when
they were poor, are grown dead, cold, now they have got estates. Our Savior
tells us, that the deceitfulness of riches choaks the Word, and makes the
heart unfruitful, Vid. Mat. 13. 22. Now that which hinders men from salvation,
can be no argument of a state of salvation.

4. Men may transmit riches to their posterity. Now that which a man may have
by descent and natural generation, can be no evidence of a state of grace. No
man is born in a state of grace, Ephesians. 2. 2. A man must be borne again before
he can see the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3. 3. Many men are borne rich and
honorable, etc. therefore none of these things can entitle a man to heaven.

5. If outward prosperity were an Argument of grace, then Covetousness would
be no sin. It Is no sin but duty, for a man to labor for, and to covet
evidences of grace. We are commanded to do so in Scripture; Make your calling
and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. but covetousness is not a duty, but a sin,
a sin of a high nature, The root of all evil, so the Apostle calls it, 1 Timothy
6. 10. It Is idolatry, one of the worst kinds of idolatry.

6. Outward prosperity may be quite lost. Therefore it can be no evidence of a
state of grace. Evidences of true grace can never totally be lost where once
they are; the knowledge of the evidence may be lost, but the ground of the
evidence cannot be lost; but all outward prosperity may be lost. Riches are not
for ever, Prove. 27. 24. Honors die before he that had them die. Haman will be
an example of that; our own age has given us fresh precedents in abundance, of
the perishingnesse of these things. Do not many that were clothed in skarlet
embrace the dung-hil? Are not rich men made poor, and poor rich?

7. Outward prosperity is sometimes given in wrath. He gave them a King in his
anger, and took him away in his wrath, Hos. 13. 11. God gave quails to the
Israelites, but his wrath came along with them, Psalm. 78. 30, 31. It Is true of
all outward things. The prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Prove. 1. 32.
Prosperity kills more then adversity. But now, that which is an evidence of
salvation, is never given in wrath. I shall answer one question, and then I
shall shut up this Rule, viz.

How shall I know whether (...) are given in mercy?

1. When they make the heart* (...). Riches when they are given in anger, (...)
heart sensual, stubborn. When they are given in love, they do spirituallize,
enlarge the heart Godward: we may see it in Hannah, 1 Samuel 2. 2. My heart is
enlarged: outward mercies naturally make the heart carnal, but when they are
given in mercy they make it spiritual. See it in David, Psalm. 23. 5, 6. I will
dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. When health, riches, etc. raise the
heart nearer heaven, then it is a sign they are bestowed in mercy.

2. When they make the heart more humble. Naturally outward prosperity swells
the heart. That Caution, 1 Timothy 6. 17. notes the distemper. A full purse
ordinarily makes a big heart. If therefore you find your spirits humble under
your outward enjoyments, you may conclude they are given you in mercy. See it
in Jacob; How humble was he? Genesis 32. 10. His spirit was as low when he marched
with his two bands, as when he traveled with his scrip and staff from his
Fathers house. So it was with David, 2 Samuel 7. 12, 13. There is a promise of
great prosperity to David and to his house. See how humble this made David's
spirit? v. 18, 19. Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house that thou have
brought me hitherto?

3. When we are as ready to lay them out for God, as to receive them from God.
When God gives thee an estate, and thou growest covetous, art loath to part
with it, to promote either the service of God, or the good of his people; When
God gives thee a healthful body, and thou carest not to serve him with thy
health, etc. This is a sign that these things are given in anger. But when
thou can freely part with thy substance, when thou studiest, how thou may
honor God with thy estate, as the Wiseman enjoynes, Prove. 3. 9. When thou art
willing to feed Gods hungry, and cloth his naked, and lodge his houslesse
ones, etc. This is an Argument that God gives thee thy estate in mercy. But
now if thou squandrest it away in the service of thy lusts, or if thou can
not find in thy heart to lay it out for God; thou may suspect that God gave
thee what thou have in great anger. Thus much for the third false Rule.

4. The fourth false Rule. The judgment of others. There are very many in the
world, who conclude themselves to be in a good condition, because others have a
good opinion of them. They think they are perfectly well, because others tell
them they are well. Especially if they be such as are godly and religious. The
Apostle hints at this, Gal. 6. 4. I shall lay down two things.

1. It Is a very great mercy to be well reputed of by such as are godly. The
good opinion of one godly man is better then the acclamations of many wicked.
It Is an honor to any man to have a good report amongst them that fear the
Lord in sincerity. It Is recorded concerning Timothy, that he was well reported
of by the brethren that were at Lystra, and Iconium, Acts 16. 2. (...). They
that are godly are more knowing then others, as having the Spirit of God, and
so better able to discern of men then others are. And then they are more
faithful then others; They dare not willing^y call evil (...) The testimony of
one godly (...) and valued before the testimony of (...). It is a great comfort
and strengthening* to a godly man, when such as are of a discerning spirit,
approve of his condition.

2. It Is possible for a man to be in a very sickestate, and yet to be well
reputed of by godly men, the wisest, the faithfullest. I shall give three
Arguments to clear out this, viz.

(1) We have several instances of it in Scripture. What think you of Judas? he
was a very wretched man, our Savior calls him a devil, John 6. 70. And yet all
the eleven had a very good opinion of him. If Judas had desired it, he might
have had a Testimony under the hands of all the Disciples, that they judged him
to be a very godly man. When our Savior told them, that one of them should
betray him; every one of them was more ready to suspect himself then Judas,
Mat. 26. 21, 22. They were exceeding sorrowful, and began to say unto him one
by one, Mr. Is it I? Ananias and Sapphira were (without doubt) well reputed of
by the people of God, and yet you know, Act. 5. 1, 2. how great hypocrites they
were: they both agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord. Was not Demas
once highly approved of by the Apostle Paul? and yet a very painted
rotten-hearted hypocrite, one that forsook the Apostle to embrace the present
world, 2 Timothy 4. 10. What, should I tell you of Jehu, Hymeneu^ and Alexander,
and many others who were highly esteemed of by the servants of God in that
generation? Our present Age will furnish us with too many precedents of this
nature; many, very many have turned fearful Apostates, of whom the servants of
God judged far better then ever they durst of their own hearts.

(2) No man does infallibly know the state of another man's heart. It Is made by
some a question, whether a man can know the state of his own heart infallibly?
Though I do not question that, yet I believe,

1. That no man can do it at all times.

2. That no man can do it without the extraordinary assistance of the Spirit of
God bearing witness with his Spirit, Romans 8. 16. Sure it is, no man can
infallibly know the state of his brothers heart. All the knowledge we have of
other men is but conjectural. A faithful Brother, as I suppose, says the
Apostle concerning Sylvanus, 1 Pet. 5. 12. It Is Gods Prerogative infallibly to
know the hearts of men. You cannot infallibly know a man's temporal estate
unless it be discovered, much less his spiritual estate.

(3) That that will be a good ground to another man to judge well of us, will
not be a sufficient ground for us to judge well of our selves. Others are bound
to judge well of us, if they see no evil in us. Charity believes all things,
hops all things, thinks no evil, Vid. 1 Cor. 13. 5, 6, 7. A fair outward
deportment free from offense, is a sufficient ground for another man to judge
charitably of me, and for me to judge charitably of another. But now more then
this is required to give me a ground of judging well of my self. I must see
some inward saving work of grace in my heart before I can judge, before I ought
to judge my own condition to be good. That that will evince me to be a censurer
of another, if I do not judge well of him, will (...) flatterer; if I do judge
well of my self upon such grounds, because I must know, possitively my
condition to be good, before I conclude it to be good. Thus much for this Rule.

5. The fifth false Rule; Some outward reformation. Many men conclude
themselves to be in a very healthful condition, because they are better then
they were. They have left some sins which formerly they walked in, etc.
Therefore they hope their condition is good in the sight of God. They were wont
to swear at every word, but now they swear not at all; if they do, it is but
very seldom, etc. Vid. 2 Cor. 16. 12. I have four things to say about this
Rule.

1. It Is a very great mercy when men are on the mending hand. When they grow
better any manner of way, in any degree, they have cause to bless God
exceedingly. When he that was a common swearer, can now speak without an oath.
When he that was a cheater, does now deal honestly with men. When he that was
a drunkard, does now live soberly. There is some better hopes of this man, then
there is of another who goes on still in his old ways. When a man can say, I
was an extortioner, an oppressor, a liar, etc. but now I have left these sins.
He has very great cause to bless God that has made him better; to leave one
sin is a greater mercy then to gain the world.

2. No man can have hopes of heaven, that does not mend his life. He that does
not outwardly reform, shall not go to heaven, Job 22. 23. Col. 3. 4, 5.

3. It Is possible that a man may outwardly reform some things, and yet he in ^
very sick condition still. A man may be better then he was, and yet far short
of a good condition. A man may be less wicked then he was, and yet not at all
truly good in the sight of God. Consider four things to clear this.

(1) A man may part with some one sin to make more sea-roome for some other
sin. Though all lusts are from the devil, and all lead to the devil, and all
are contrary to Holiness, yet there is some opposition between one lust and
another, so that one cannot act vigorously, unless another which opposes it be
brought under. Prodigality is contrary to covetousness, etc. Now it is possible
for a man to leave some sin out of love to another sin; to part with
covetousness out of love to prodigality. A man may put out some of his
children to make more room for the firstborn, and yet he accounts them all his
children. A man's heart may be so much addicted to one sin, that he may seem
to neglect all the rest, to make the better provision for that which is most
dearly beloved.

(2) A man may leave some sins, because he has not ability or opportunity to
commit them as before. The Prodigal man has so far wasted his estate* that
he has not ability to be so wastful as before. The adulterer has so empaired
his health and strength, that he is not able to act his sin as he did before. A
thief may have reformed his the every, because he has not that opportunity to
purloine as he had before. He is better watched then he was.

(3) A man may part with some sins merely to please men with whom (...)
because he hates the sin; but (...) displease others whom he would (...). A
man may forbear some dish of meat which h^ loves, because his friend whom he
has invited does not affect it.

(4.) A man may part with some sin, because he has found some outward smart
by it. He has empaired his health by immoderate drinking, and therefore he
will now be sober. He loves the sin as well as ever he did, but he cannot
without the hazarding of his life or health frequent it. Many a man abstaines
from some meats, not because he hates the meat, but because the meat does not
love him. So it is in respect of sin. It has been a chargable sin to him,
and will be so still if he use it, therefore he puts it away. By all these
things it appears that some outward reformation may be attained unto, and yet
the soul still in a sick condition. This is the third thing.

4. How may a man know then whether his Reformation be such as will e^ince his
condition to be good. These things will evidence this.

1. If it proceed from a true displicency and hatred of it. When loathing of
sin goes along with leaving of sin. When the heart is disaffected with it.
When the filthiness of sin is apprehended as well as the destructivenesse of
sin. Esaias 30. 22. True grace does have sin more for its filthiness, then
for its damnablenesse; more because of its opposition to God, then for its
hurtfulness to himself. He that can find this, may conclude his reformation to
be an argument of grace.

2. If care be taken as well to suppress the root as ^^ reform the outward
act. Every sinful act does proceed from a sinful habit. Out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, murders, fornications, etc. Mat. 15. 19. Now if you can
find that the outward reformation, and the inward reformation go together, you
may conclude the presence of grace from such acts of reformation. This is that
which the Apostle speaks of, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Now if as great care be used to be
freed from the filthiness of the spirit, as from the filthiness of the flesh,
it is a sign the fear of God is there. Put away your iniquities from before
mine eyes, says the Lord, Esaias 1. 16. What is it to put away our iniquities
from before the eyes of God, but to take care that they may be blotted out of
the heart, as well as put away from the hand?

3. If the Reformation be general. If we mend in one thing as well as another,
we may conclude grace is in the heart. Hypocrites always reform with a
reservation; they leave a nest-egge for Satan to sit on. In this thing, the
Lord be merciful to thy servant, says Naaman, 2 King. 5. 18. But where there
is true grace, the reformation is universal. Abuses against the first table are
reformed, as well as abuses against the second Table; and abuses against the
second table, as well as such as are against the first. Through thy
Commandments, says David, I get understanding, therefore I hate every false
way.

4. When it is a Reformation to all good, as well as from all evil. When the
heart is carried out as strongly after the reforming of good things omitted, as
of evil things committed, then it is a sign that there is grace in the heart.
When a man shall not only reform of oppression and in j^stice, but reform to
liberality and open heartedness. God puts these together (...) essential
branches of all true (...) Esaias 1. 17. Cease to do evil, le^^ to do (...) a man
shall not only leave swearing, but conscionably take up the work of praying,
etc. Such reformation will evidence grace to be in the soul.

5. When it is a settled and fixed Reformation, Two things are comprehended in
this.

First, resolution never to return to these evils which we have put away, never
to forsake those holy courses which we have taken up; when a man thorough the
grace of God does purpose that his Reformation shall last as long as life
lasts. He may fall into the same Acts again, but it is against his intention,
against his prayer, against his endeavor.

Secondly, a resolution to carry on his reformation from day to day in regard
of degrees, never to leave mending and mending till he have mended every thing
that is amiss either in excess or defect. This I call fixed Reformation.

6. The sixth false Rule; Quietness of conscience. Many persons judge
themselves to be in a whole condition, because they find no troubles in their
spirit. They have not those Tormina and gripings in their consciences which
other sinners have had, therefore they gather that they are in a good
condition. They think they are well, because they do not find those pains
which others have found. I have these three things to say about this rule.

1. Holiness is the only way to true quietness of conscience. See Jam. 3.
17. Esaias 32. 17. disturbance is threatened to the wicked, Job 15. 21, 24, Job
20. 20. Esaias 57.

2. All quietness of conscience is not an argument of a good condition. This I
shall make out by three Arguments, viz.

(1) A man may be in a very good condition, and yet want peace of conscience. A
good conscience, and an unquiet conscience, sometimes meet in one man. Though
purity of conscience be the way to peaceablenesse of conscience; yet the
conscience may be pure, and for the present unpeaceable. We have many instances
of this in Scripture. That of Heman is very remarkable, Psalm. 88. 15, 16. a
very good man, as will appear by many instances in that Psalm, yet had a very
stormy conscience. That instance in Isaiah 50. 10. is another proof of this.
Yea, Jesus Christ himself had always a good conscience, but he sometimes
wanted a peaceable conscience; when he uttered those words, Mat. 27. 46. he
wanted serenity and peace. David a holy man, does often complain of
unquietness, and of great troublednesse in his conscience. In the beginning of
the new birth, when the pangs are not well over; upon the hiding of Gods face,
upon the stepping aside into sin, upon want of evidence of grace, upon some
great assault of Satan; in such cases consciences that are very good, may be
very unquiet.

(2) A man may be in a very bad condition, and yet find some quietness in his
conscience. See that clear tex^ to prove this, Luke 11. 21. While the strong
man armed keeps the palace, all is in peace. The devil may be in full
possession of the soul, and yet the soul may be sensible of no unquietness at
all. That rich man in the Gospel sings a Requiem to his soul, Luke 12. 19. The
Apostle speaks of some that are past feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19. (...). They sin, and
yet do not feel sin.

(3) Some quietness of (...) Some peace of conscience arises from (...) of a
man's condition It Is not peace, but secu^ity, sleepiness, deadness, yea it is
one of the g^eatest judgments God inflicts in this life, to afford men
quietness of conscience in a sinful condition. When God lets a man be as
Jonah* was, ready to be drowned, and yet fast asleep in the sides of the Ship.

3. All that are truly godly, shall at last find peaceablenesse of conscience.
Though they may be full of tossings and unquietnesses in their consciences, yet
they shall at last find peace; though not perhaps so much peace as shall free
them from doubting, yet so much peace as will free them from distrust. Peace is
promised to them often in Scripture. Esaias 26. 3. Thou shall keep him in peace,
Psalm 85. 8. Psalm 37. 37. Christ has purchased peace for them. The Spirit
is a Spirit of peace as well as a Spirit of grace. Joy is a fruit of the Spirit
as well as Love, etc. True peace of conscience is an evidence of true Grace.

Quest. How shall a man know true peace of conscience from carnal security?
They may be distinguished three ways.

1. From the rise of them. True peace proceeds from true spiritual roots, viz.

1. Acquaintance with God, Job 22. 21. False peace arises rather from
ignorance of God, forgetfulness of God; but true peace arises from
acquaintance and communion with him.

2. The knowledge of our justification. Of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 1.
When a person does upon good grounds know that his person is put into a state
of justification, and thereupon finds peace and quietness in his spirit, this
is a night born peace.

3. The sense of our walking according to the rule of the Word. The Apostle
mentions this, Gal. 6. 16. He that can derive his peace from such foundations,
may conclude the work of grace from the work of peace, as truly as he may
conclude light from the Sun.

II. From the manner of the working of his peace. True sound peace has usually
followed great conflicts of conscience. True quietness ordinarily grows out of
disquietnesse. Storms usually go before calmes. As it was with that natural
outward calm, Mar. 4. 39. so it is generally with spiritual calmes. Though
spiritual storms are not of the same violence, or of the same continuance in
all, yet some tempestuous blasts go before these serenities.

III. From the properties of it. I shall name these three properties of true
peace.

1. It will allow no peace with sin. Carnal security is at amity with sin,
at least with some sin; but gracious peace is at enmity with all sin. The
Prophet mentions this fruit of it, Psalm. 85. 8.

2. It raises the heart to enjoy more full communion with God. The heart is
made more active in all holiness; whereas carnal security deads the heart. Its
a heart-ruling peace, Col. 3. 15. A heart-keeping peace, Phil. 4. 7.

3. True peace continues even in outward trouble. Outward troubles dash carnal
security, not true peace, unless God hide his face in trouble, Joh. 16. 33.
This is the sixth Rule.

7. The seventh false Rule; Comparing a man's self with others. Very many do
build much upon this foundation. They judge (...) be in a healthful estate,
because they (...) sick as other men. They see abundance (...) then they are,
and therefore they conclude* all is well with themselves. This was the
Pharisees case, God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, Luke 18. 11.
This is a general common case. I have two things to say about this Head.

First, It Is a great mercy that thou do in any degree or measure exceed any
of the sons of men. As we are bound to bless God that others do go beyond
us, so it is our duty heartily to bless God, that he has made us in any degree
better then the vilest of men. And we have great reason so to do in four
respects.

1. Because our nature is as bad as the nature of the worst man. Original
corruption, as it does abide in all, so it is equal in all. No man is better
then another by nature. The image of the old Adam is by nature as deep, and as
black, and broad in every one of our souls, as it was in the soul of Judas,
Cain, Saul, or any of those that are at this day in the place of torment, Psalm.
14. 3. They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy. The Apostle
citing this place, Romans 3. 9, 10, etc. refers it to the natural estate of all
the sons of Adam, both Jews and Gentiles. And therefore it is that he
pronounces the Elect, and regenerate, as well as others, to be by nature the
children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. This being true, it appears to be a mercy, that
we are in any thing better then the vilest of men. Though we be not so good as
many, yet it is some happiness that we be not as vile as any.

2. In a^ much as a person is less evil thin others, his punishment will ^e
less then the punishment of others. There are certainly degrees of torment in
hell. Though extensive in regard of duration there is no difference (the
torment of every damned creature is an eternal torment;) yet intensive in
regard of degree and quantity, there is lesser and greater. Those that question
whether there be degrees of glory in heaven, do hold without question that
there are degrees of punishment in Hell. The justice of God distributes
punishment for sin as the wages of it, and therefore according to the
quantity of sin shall be the measure of punishment. And the Scripture is
express to this purpose, Matthew. 11. 22, 24. Tire and Sidon shall not undergo
so much torment as Chorazin and Bethsaida, Sodom and Gomorrah shall be
inferior in punishment to Capernaum. Capernaum out-sinn'd Sodom and Gomorrah,
and therefore shall exceed them in degrees of punishment. Now 't^s a mercy to
have any abatement of torments. Though a man be shut out of Heaven; yet if he
have a milder punishment in hell then others, it is a great mercy.

3. He that is less evil then others, dishonours God less then others. The
great evil of sin consists in this, that it casts dishonor and contempt upon
God. Sin is worse as it is a Godprovoking thing, then as it is a
creature-damning thing. Every act of sin greatly dishonours God; and the more
acts of sin a man commits, the more does he dishonor God. Now it is a great
mercy that we do not dishonor God so much as others. Though it be a great
unhappiness that we do not glorify God as much as any, yet it is some
happin^^^^ (...) dishonor him as much as any* (...) from dishonouring God by
any one sinful action, is in it self a greater mercy then to enjoy the greatest
outward advantage in the world; the dishonouring of God, (though it be but by
one act, the least that is imaginable) is a greater misery, then to lose all
the world, because the Name of God is better then all the world; so to be
delivered from dishonouring, though but in one act, is a far greater happiness
then to acquire the best outward advantage, which the world has to bestow.

4. He that is less evil then others, is delivered from some filthiness.
Sin is a great defiler. It Is the only soul-defiler in the world. The
Scripture resembles it to the most filthy things; To the vomit of a dog, to a
miry puddle. You have both these in one place, 2 Pet. 2. 22. To a menstruous
cloth, Esaias 64. 6. It Is often called filthiness in the abstract, Lam. 3. 9.
Now it is a mercy, though a man be not clean, yet it is some mercy, that he is
not altogether so filthy as he might be. To be preserved from any one spot of
this filthiness, is a very great kindness, a kindness to be acknowledged
with the greatest thankfulness. This is the first conclusion.

Secondly; It Is possible for a man to be better then others, and yet to be in a
very bad condition. A man may be sick unto death, and yet not so far spent in
his body as some others are. A man may have a greater estate then many
hundreds, and yet be no very rich man for all that. So it is for spirituals.
Thou may peradventure be nearer heaven then many hundreds are, and yet ^e ^^
the highway to Hell, and destruction. That young man in the Gospel that came
to Christ, had out-stript thousands of his Neighbors. When Christ told him,
Thou shall not commit adultery, thou shall not kill, thou shall not bear false
witness, honor thy father and thy mother; Thou shall love thy neighbor as
thy self: What answer did he make? All these things have I kept from my youth
up, Mat. 19. 20. There were millions in the world at that time, that were
inferior to him, and yet he was under the power of mortal diseases. The
greatest part of the world are in a very bad estate. Our Savior tells us, that
many are called, but few are chosen, Mat. 22. 14. The greatest part of men in
the world walk in the broad way. Judas, Saul, Jehu, were better in many
respects, then multitudes that then lived in the world; and yet every one of
them sick unto death. God has no where in Scripture said that that man is in a
good condition, that is better then others, unless those others whom he excels
be in a saving regenerate condition.

8. The eighth false Rule; Knowledge of spiritual things. Many men think
themselves in a saving condition, because they have attained to a good measure
of knowledge in the things of God. They understand the Doctrine of the Bible,
they are well versed in the principles of Religion, they can answer almost any
question in Divinity; and therefore they judge their estate to be very good. I
have three things to say concerning this head, viz.

1. It Is a very great mercy to have the knowledge of saving and spiritual
things. It Is a happiness to have a deep knowledge in natural things. Humane
knowle^^^ (...) could be seen, i^ far bright^^ (...) star. Knowledge never had
never (...) any enemy but ignorance. What (...) Solomon? Eccl. 2. 13. He tells
us, that wisdo^^ excels (...) as far as light excels darkness. But especially
the knowledge of Divine things: This is a rar^ jewel indeed. Knowledge is one
of the excellencies of God, He is a God of knowledge, 1 Samuel 2. 3. Knowledge
was one of the perfections of man in the state of Innocence. A knowing man
finds more content in knowledge, even in the knowledge of natural things, then
ever they could find in gold, or silver, or any such things. You have heard of
some that have cast away their outward estate, that they might not be taken off
from searching after knowledge. But of all knowledge, the knowledge of heavenly
things is most excellent. The price of this knowledge is better then wisdom,
and the merchandi^e of it then fine gold, Prove. 3. 14, 15. No outward gain in
the world is comparable to the gain of this knowledge. By knowledge we come to
know what is to be done, what is not to be done; what is to be believed, what
is to be rejected* Hereby we are enabled to guide others to regulate our own
action. By knowledge the most principal and highest faculty of the soul, the
understanding, comes to be enriched. Knowledge makes a man's face to shine. Many
high commendations are given in Scripture to this precious pearl of knowledge.
To know spiritual things is a greater mercy by far, then to be made Ruler over
the whole world, and to want knowledge. He that wants knowledge is brutish, he
is under the curse of Nebuchadnezzar, Dan 4. 16. Let a beasts heart be given
him. An ignorant man is more truly a beast then a man.

2. It Is the duty of all that expect to be saved, to labor after this
knowledge. God commands it often in Scripture, Prove. 4. 5, 6, 7. Get wisdom,
get understanding. Search the Scriptures, John 5. 39. Let the Word of Christ
dwell richly in you, in all wisdom, Col. 3. 16. An ignorant heart is a bad
heart; I mean, a heart totally ignorant of the things of God, for without
knowledge the mind is not good. Knowledge is as necessary unto practice as
light is to action. A man must know the Will of God before he can do it.
Ignorance is the mother of Popish Devotion, but knowledge is the mother of true
Devotion. A Christian can do nothing acceptably without knowledge. Want of
knowledge is a destructive thing, especially if it be where God affords the
means of knowledge, Esaias 27. 11. Hos. 4. 6. want of knowledge does stir up
Controversies between God and men, Hos. 4. 1. A man may go to hell for want of
knowledge, as well as for want of faith or other graces. God puts such a high
esteem upon knowledge, that he says, It is life eternal to know him, and
Jesus Christ whom he has sent, John 17 3. It Is the character of the worst of
wicked men, that they desire not the knowledge of Gods ways, Job 21. 14.
Knowledge in its kind and degree is necessary to salvation, as well as
holiness. Why is piety in Scripture so often set out by the name of wisdom,
knowledge, understanding, but to let us see how necessary it is to the
attainment of true Piety?

3. It Is possible to be very knowing in spiritual things, and yet to be in a
sick conditi^^ (...) ^^^sician may know the nature of all diseases, and yet be
sick of the worst of them. A person may be well versed in the History of the
Scriptures, in the System of Divinity, and yet for all that be in a bad
condition as to his eternal state. This I shall make good by these four
Arguments.

1. From the Apostles supposition, 1 Cor. 13. 1, 2. The Apostle supposes a
great measure of knowledge. Very few men attain to that height of knowledge
which is there supposed. See the expressions. To speak with the tongue of men
and Angels. To have the gift of prophecy, which God bestowed upon many in the
Primitive times, to understaad all mysteries and all knowledge; yet its
possible that all this may be without one spark of true grace. Though a man
could say all the Bible memoriter, could resolve all the difficult cases in
Divinity; yet its possible that such a man may be destitute of all saving grace.

2. From experience. There are at present, there have been in former ages, many
knowing and learned men, who had not the least measure of true holiness. Judas
was (without doubt) a man of great knowledge. We do not find any thing in
Scripture, that he was inferior to any of the Apostles in notional knowledge.
He could (for ought we find to the contrary) preach as well as any of the
Apostles, and yet a very wicked man. What need we instance in men, when as the
very devils are so great intelligent creatures; their name carries knowledge in
it, (...) quasi (...) gnarus, peritus. The devil understands Scripture as to
the letter of i^, far more exactly then the best of men. Now that which the
worst of men, and the worst of de^ils may attain unto, can be no infallible
argument of a good estate. We see by experience many drunkards, swearers and
debaucht men, do in all manner of literal knowledge excel those that desire to
fear God in uprightness. The Pharisees were very knowing Romans 2 18, 19, 20.

3. Natural abilities and education may help men to notional knowledge. All
this kind of knowledge is attained by industry and education, by the
concurrence of Gods ordinary blessing. But now grace and holiness is not by
education, or industry, or from natural abilities, but from the special grace
of God. Knowledge is but a common gift, which is bestowed promiscuously upon
the good and bad. Now no common gift can entitle a man to Heaven.

4. The Scripture does not make knowledge simply, but saving sanctified
knowledge an evidence of salvation. National knowledge may be without
sanctifying knowledge. Sanctified knowledge will evidence a man's condition to
be good, but notionall knowledge will not.

How shall a man know whether that knowledge he has be a sanctified saving
knowledge, or merely a notional knowledge? I shall lay down these evidences of
it, and so shut up this point.

(1) Sanctified and saving knowledge is an humbling knowledge. Mere literal
knowledge swells and puffs up the heart, 1 Cor. 8. 1. makes men conceited and
proud, and to despise others; but holy knowledge makes the (...) self-denying.
See it in Asaph, Psalm. (...). He was one of the Wise men of his time, and ye^
how vilifying does he speak of himself? So foolish was I and ignorant, I was as
a beast before thee. Agur a very intelligent good man, and yet how humble is
he? Prove. 30. 2, 3. The reason of this humbling property of knowledge is,
because it helps men to see their own vileness: as their knowledge increases,
so the knowledge and sense of their own unworthiness increases.

(2) Saving sanctified knowledge does not abide in the head only, but in the
heart. Notional knowledge lies only in the head and in the brain, it has no
influence upon the heart to purify it and purge it, only it swims in the
brain; But saving knowledge, it does distill, and descend upon the heart, it
has its chief residence in the inward man, it purifies and cleanses the soul,
makes it more holy then ever it was. The Apostle makes purification one effect
of true wisdom, James 3. 17. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure.
Notional knowledge is often a heart-corrupting knowledge, but saving knowledge
is ever a heart-purifying knowledge.

3. Saving knowledge is a life-reforming knowledge. Notional knowledge is often
a life-disordering knowledge, it makes men loose, licentious; we have two much
experience of this; but saving knowledge regulates the conversation. He that
knows spiritual things savingly, desires as well to practice as to know. H^s
knowledge does not please him, unless his practice be conformable to his
knowledge. Very excellent is that prayer of David, Psalm. 25. 4, 5. Saving
knowledge would not only see Gods ways, but would be led in Gods ways; It Is
ever practical. You have such another prayer of David, Psalm. 143. 10. Teach me
to do thy will, lead me into the land of uprightness. He that can find these
properties, may from his knowledge, whether it be much or little, argue grace;
otherwise mere knowledge though it be never so exact, will not infallibly argue
a good condition.

The Uses of this Point.
1. How necessary is it for the Ministers of the Gospel to be frequent in the
Doctrine of conviction. They are under Jesus Christ spiritual Physicians, whose
office it is, ministerially to cure the spiritual maladies of the soul. One
effectual means to do this, is to endeavor to set sin upon the conscience.
To discover men's spiritual estate unto their consciences, that so they may be
delivered from those gross mistakes about their condition under which they are
held. It Is a very hard thing to persuade men that they are sick. Men are
naturally apt to run away with a conceit that all is well with them, therefore
it is needful to bring sin to sight. The cure is as good as done when this is
done. Conviction of sin is the first work of the Spirit of God, John 16. 8.
He is a convincing Spirit before he be a comforting Spirit. You must give the
Ministers of Christ leave to set sin upon the conscience. The fallow ground
must be broken up before the seed of comfort be cast in. A sin-convincing
Ministry is most likely to be a soul-converting Ministry. They (...) discover
to men their righteousness, (...). until they have convinced them of their
unrighteousness.

2. Do not wonder that spiritual Physic is so generally contemned. It Is at
first sight a very great wonder that the offers of grace and salvation should
be so despised; That the Word of salvation should do so little good in the
world. Christ is tendered, life is held out in the preaching of the Gospel from
day to day. Wisdom cries without, and lifts up her voice in the concourse of
the City, and yet men do not come in. Ministers may complain as the Prophet
Esaias 49. 4. What is the reason? It Is because men run away with an opinion
that they are well, that their condition is good, and therefore are the
precious tenders of salvation so generally slighted.

3. See the reason why there is so little complaining of sin. Never more
sin, never less spiritual complaining of sin. It Is a great rarity to hear
any soul crying out, What shall I do to be saved? You may hear in every
corner complainings of bodily diseases, one of his Gout, a second of his Head,
a third of his Stone, but very few crying out of sin. How comes this about?
It is because men think they have no sin, they see not their diseases. They
think they are sound men, and therefore they are quiet, and make no complaints
either to God or men.

4. It Is a mavelous great mercy to have a true discovery of our spiritual
diseases. It Is not a happiness to be spiritually diseased, no, no; sin is a
misery, but it is a mercy that those that are diseased, are convinced of their
condition. Many ^^en think they are well, when they are indeed going down to
the chambers of death; if therefore God have so far opened your eyes as to
let you see your disease, you have cause to bless his Name. Such conviction
though it be not the cure of sin, yet it is the ready way to the cure of
sin. It may be, your sorrow after conviction is greater then it was before:
you are now full of fea^s and horrors, which before you were free from; but
certainly your condition is far safer. Bless God for the work of conviction,
and he will bring it on to the work of conversion.

Doct. 4. Jesus Christ is not a Physician to any Mat 9. 12.
that think themselves spiritually whole. It was the misery of the Pharisees,
that they dreamed themselves to be in a very healthful estate. They looked upon
all others as men mortally sick, and upon themselves as sound men. Our Savior
therefore declines them as Patients unfit for him to meddle with and applies
himself to the poor Publicans and sinners, who did see and acknowledge
themselves to be sick of sin and ready to perish. Jesus Christ does not
immediately heal sinners as they are sinners; but his constant general method
is first to take them off that conceit that is naturally in their hearts, that
they are in a good estate; and when he has showed them their sickness, then
he goes in hand with the cure. The making of the heart sensible of sin is the
work of Christ, as well as the healing of sin. Did not Christ give the sinner
a sight of his misery, he would never be able to see his misery. Conviction of
sin is as truly the work of Christ, ^s (...) sin. John 16. 8. Nature is a^
(...) sin, as it is to heal sin when it i^ d^^^vered. All that is meant in
the doctrine is (...), that Jesus Christ does not ordinarily heal any soul til
he have first delivered from the misc^no^^t of their condition and given them
eyes to see, that it is otherwise with them then they did before imagine. This
is the full scope of this Doctrine, and of this Text, as is clear from v. 13.
where our Savior does in plain and express terms set down, what is here
more covertly propounded, saying, I am not come to cast the righteous, but
sinners to repentance.

In the handling of this doctrine, I shall open these four things.

1. Show that this is Christ's usual method. 2. How this work of discovery is
wrought. 3. Why Christ takes this course in the healing of sinners. 4. Whether
this work be wrought alike in all.
1. That this is Christ's usual method, appears two ways.

1. By our Saviors own declaration. We shall find him in Scripture expressing
this two ways.

(1) By declaring the end of his coming. He came from heaven to save and
convert such kind of persons, Luke. 19. 10. The Son of man came to seek, and
to save that which was lost. Not simply all such as are lost (for there are
abundance of lost sinners which he neither came to seek or to save
intentionally) but such as see themselves to be in a lost condition, such as
are first made sensible of that lost undone condition they are in without
Christ. So Esaias 6^. 1, 2. He does there fully declare, both for what sinners he
came into the world, and how he heales those sinners. They are such sinners as
are brokenhearted; such sinners as mourn; they are meekned sinners. Christ
first breaks their hearts, causes them to mourn out of the sense of their
sins; meekens their spirits by a work of conviction; and then heales them by
the Application of the Promises of grace.

(2) By the form of invitation he uses to sinners. This is fully expressed by
the Evangelist, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. The words are very significant, (...). Christ
does not call sinners as sinners, but as laboring sinners, as burdened
sinners, such as are even overwhelmed and born down with the heavy weight of
sin. Such as see sin, and upon the sight of it are so overwhelmed, that
they cannot look up, but are ready to sink and die under it.

2. From the order of this working upon such as he has healed. You can hardly
find any one that ever was healed but in this way; but multitudes that have
been wrought upon after this manner. Those three thousand who were converted by
Peter's Ministry, were first brought to the sight of their sick estate, and
then were converted, Acts 2. 37. What is the meaning else of those words (...);
There was not the least part or point of the heart, but it was wounded; it was
with them as if the sharp points of daggers, or stings of Scorpions had been
stuck and fastened in their hearts. So it was with the Jailer, Acts 16. ^7*
(...) those expressions and gestures of his show, that he was first convinced
of his sick estate before he was cured. The same method is observable in Paul's
conversion, Acts 9. 4, 5, 6, 9. his falling to the earth, his trembling and
astonishment, the words uttered by him, the continuance of his blindness for
the space of three days, What are these, but evidences of the work of
conviction which Christ wrought upon his heart? The same course and method in
some degree or other, does Christ observe in all those whom he heales of their
spiritual diseases, especially if they be such as are adulti, grown men, when
this work is wrought upon them. This is the first particular.

2. How Christ makes this discovery?

Answ. This is wrought ordinarily by the preaching of the Law. The Ministry of
the Law is the most certain and expeditious way to make the sinner sensible of
his sick estate. The Law has a threefold effect upon the soul, as to the
accomplishing of this work, viz.

1. The Law sets before the eye of the sinner the miserable estate which man is
in by sin, with the wrath of God due to him for the same. All knowledge of
sin is by the Law thorough the convincing power of the Spirit of God, Romans 3.
20. By this means the Apostle came to see his sin, Romans 7. 7, 9. He thought
inward concupiscence to be no sin, till God by his Law had better informed
his judgment. He thought his condition while he was a Pharisee, to be as good
as the condition of the best: but when God had tutored him a while by the Law,
then he looked upon himself as a dead man; when the commandment ^ame, sin
revived (says he) and I died, v. 9.

2. It does convince the conscience of the sinner, that he is the guilty person
whom the Law threatens with all that misery. The Law of God does point him
out, as Nathan did David, and tells him that he is the man against whom all
that wrath is denounced. The Apostle mentions this work of the Law, 1 Cor. 14.
24, 25. The sinner being smitten with the edge of the Law, falls down on his
face, confessing that he is the very man that is guilty of such sin, and
liable to the miseries due to such sin. The condition discovered is his
condition.

3. The Law awakens the sinner out of his security, lets him see the
impossiblity of his personal satisfying the Law, and so works horror and
astonishment in the soul. This effect it had on the Jailer, Acts 16. 29. his
heart was set on a trembling frame, upon the apprehension of that sad guilt and
misery under which he lay, from which he was not able to deliver himself. This
is that which the Apostle calls, the Spirit of bondage, Romans 8. 15. which is
opposed to the Spirit of Adoption. This is the second thing.

3. Why Christ takes this course in the healing of sin? why will he not heal
the sinner, till he have him sensible that he is not in a sound condition?

1. That sin may be imbittered. Sin is in it self and evil and bitter
thing. It Is compared unto gall and wormwood, and it is far more bitter then
either of these. Now it is the mind of God, that the sinner should taste the
bitterness of sin before he be healed, Jer. 2. 19. Therefore is he pleased
to (...) course.

2. That the sinner may be brought to a (...) shame for his sin. Sin is a
very sha^eful thing. It Is called shame in Scripture; and it is the mind of
Christ, that all sinners that are recovered shall bear the shame of their
sins, Ezekiel. 16. 52. Now if the sinner should be healed before his sin be
discovered, this design of God would be frustrated.

3. That the sinner may be willing to come up to his terms. When Christ begins
at first to deal with a soul about the work of Conversion, he keeps a huge
bogling, he does exceedingly dodge with Jesus Christ to bring him to low
terms. Christ therefore shows him his naked condition, what he is, and what
he must expect if he close not with him, and by this means he is brought to a
ready and willing compliance with him. We see it in those three thousand which
Peter converted, when their condition was discovered, when anguish and horror
was upon their spirits, then they were contented to do any thing, Acts 2. 37.
What shall we do to be saved? Thus also it was with Saul, Acts 9. 6. When
Christ had created those tremblings and astonishments in his spirit, then he
comes off fully to Christ, Lord, what will thou have me to do? So it was with
the Jailer: when he had a true representation of his estate, then he cries out,
Acts 16. 30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? A man that is in extremity will
do any thing to save his life. When he sees that he must perish if he do not
presently consent to what is proposed, then he lingers not: if he must throw
all his goods overboard, he is contented to cast them out presently, because
death is before him.

4. That the mercy of the cure may be more highly valued. Salvation from hell
is a very great work which should be valued by all on whom it is bestowed. The
Prophet David calls upon his soul, and all that is within his soul, to praise
God for such a mercy, Psalm 103. init. He that considers the worth of
salvation, the unworthiness of the persons enjoying it, the costlinesse of it,
the multitudes that shall never partake of it; must needs acknowledge it a
thing worthy to be esteemed. But so unthankful a piece is the heart of man,
that he does not value it at any considerable rate. Jesus Christ therefore,
before he bring any into such a state, will discover their misery to
themselves; that so he may provoke them to extraordinary thankfulness for it.
And the truth is, nothing does so much enhance the price of salvation in our
hearts, as a clear manifestation of our wretched condition. See how the
Apostles heart is enlarged upon this very consideration, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Had he
not seen himself to be the chief of sinners, he would never have thought
salvation by Christ worthy of all acceptance, as now he did.

5. That the skill of the Physician may be more clearly discovered. Jesus
Christ seeks to advance his own glory in all the works he does for the sons
of men; As in other his works, so especially in this great work of conversion.
Therefore it is, that he will not heal any till he have showed them their sad
estat^ (...) may see his wisdom, power, goodness, in their healing. Men that
think little or nothing ails them, do not half so much value the Physicians
pains, or skill, as those that see themselves at the very brink of the grave,
when the Physician takes them in hand. Jesus Christ therefore will show them
every sort, that so they may publish his glory that wrought it for them. I was
brought low, and he helped me, says David, Ps. 116. 6. See how the poor blind
man proclaims the honor of Christ, Joh. 9. 32.

4. Whether Jesus Christ observe the same method in this work of discovering
the sinners estate to himself? Whether all sinners have the same measure of
humbling and terror, and whether they continue for the same time under
apprehensions of wrath?

Answ. Jesus Christ is a free Agent. He is not tied to any certain method, nor
does he always walk in the same way. His dispensations in the work of
convincing men of sin, are various and different. The work is wrought on all
so far as to make the soul sensible of sins bitterness above all other
bitterness, and to make it sensible of Christ's excellency above all other
excellent things. But that it is done in the same violent manner in all, or
that it is of the same continuance, cannot be affirmed. Conviction and
conversion may be wrought at the same Sermon, as we see it was with those three
thousand, Acts 2. 37. 41. They were no sooner pricked in their hearts, but they
gladly received the word. There was great difference between this work in Lydia
and in the Jailer, Acts 16. 14. God showed her hersicknesse in ^ more mild
way. The Lord opined her heart, that she attended unto the things which were
spoken of Paul. But the Jailer, he had an earthquake, and great horrors in his
conscience, v. 27, 29.

1. Some sinners have been more scandalous then others. These are brought to
Christ with greater troubles, so it was with the Jailer: he had been a cruel
bloody man; God lays him under deep sorrow.

2. God has a greater work to do by some sinners then by others. These he uses
to deal with in a more rough way, that he may prepare them for service the
better. This seems to be the reason of his so sharp dealing with Saul, Act. 9.
15, 16.

3. Some sinners are of a more rough turbulent nature then others. These must
be handled more severely. Some men must be bound, before they will be ruled. So
it is with some kind of sinners. Thus with Manasseh, 2 Chr. 33. 11.

4. Some have been sinners of a longer standing then others. These Christ uses
to be more sharp withal in his way of curing.

5. Some sinners have been more confident in their civil righteousness then
others; As Paul was in his Pharisaisme, Phil. 3. These Christ uses to handle
more sharply. Jesus Christ is a wise Physician, he observes the nature of all
his Patients, and accordingly prescribes medicines for them. He that has the
least measure of this conviction, has so much, as that he sees himself lost,
undone, helpless, hopeless in himself. He sees the evil of sin, he sees
Christ an excellent, suitable, al sufficient good for his soul. This one thing
(...) Where there is the least sorrow before (...) con^^^sion, there is many
times greater sorrow, and more troubles of Spirit after conversion.

The Uses of this Point.
1. How sad is the condition of those that never yet were truly made sensible
of their sick estate. They never yet had a true, lively, sensible apprehension
of their sick condition. They were never so much as pricked in their hearts for
sin so as to make them loath it. They were never taken from all their high
conceits of their own natural estate, etc. These men have cause to suspect that
sin is not yet cured. A person may have some conviction of his misery and not
be healed, but a man cannot be healed without some conviction. The heart cannot
be broken for sin without the sight of sin, Ezekiel. 36. 31. There can be no
self-loathing, till there be a remembering of our ways and doings that have not
been good.

2. How necessary the preaching of the Law is to true conversion. A man will
never be taken off from the opinion of his own healthfulnesse but by the
preaching of the Law. The Law shows men what they are, what they may expect,
etc. The fallow ground of the heart will never be broken up without the plough
of the Law, Jer. 4. 3. The plough of the Law must go and make deep furrows too
before the seed of comfort be cast in. Though the preaching of the Law do not
convert, yet it helps forward conversion, in as much as it works that
preparatory work, without which conversion ordinarily is not; as the needle
makes way for the thread, so the Law makes way for conversion. The spirit of
bondage makes way for the Spirit of Adoption, and that is wrought by the
preaching of the Law.

3. The mistake of those who are against all kind of preparations to
conversion. They would have mercy held out to sinners as sinners, not as
sinners so and so qualified. Surely the Scripture has laid down qualifications
for sinners to whom the Gospel is tendered. They must be humbled sinners,
burdened sinners, etc. The mercy of the Gospel is not to be prostituted to
sinners as sinners, but to brokenhearted sinners, to heart-wounded sinners, to
sinners that see themselves lost in themselves, to hungring and thirsting
sinners. The brazen Serpent was only for such to look upon as were stung with
Serpents. Such as are in some measure sensible of the stinging nature of sin,
are to be invited to lay hold on Christ. As it is an undoing to wounded
sinners, to keep them from Christ, so it is an undoing to such sinners as are
not in some measure pressed with sin to apply the promises of the Gospel.
This was prefigured in the Leper, The L^per must cry unclean, etc. every
sinner is this Leper; sight of sin must go before healing of sin.

4. Let Ministers take the same way which Christ takes for the curing of
sinners. Jesus Christ is both an able and faithful Physician. It Is no
disparagement to use his method, yea it is the greatest wisdom to prescribe the
same receipts which Jesus Christ prescribes; he uses to take men off from the
opinion they have of their own way. His manner is to let men see they are sick,
to convince them of sin before (...) apply healing medicines. All those
Minis^^^ that desire to have their endeavors successeful must do so likewise.
People must be contente^ to suffer their condition to be known, to suffer
themselves to be made sick, that so they may be cured. This is Christ's way,
this is a safe way, this must be our way. Though such kind of preaching put
you to some present trouble, yet it will be to your eternal advantage. Your
sores cannot be healed comfortably till you see them to be sores and festred
sores. You must be contented to suffer the ploughings of the Law, that you may
be prepared for the comforts of the Gospel. You must be contented to be cast
down, that you may be prepared for raising up. You must be contented to be led
to the gates of hell, that you may be brought to the Kingdom of Heaven. Better
a great deal to go to Heaven through Hell, then to sail through an imaginary
Heaven, and land at the dark stairs of Hell in the end.

Doct. 5. Those that find themselves to be spiritually sick, shall find Jesus
Christ a Physician ready to heal them. No Physician was ever so ready to heal
a sick brother, as Jesus Christ will be to cure a sin-sick sinner. We find in
the Gospel that Christ was very willing to heal those that came to him sick of
bodily infirmities. We do not, that I remember, read of any one that was sent
away uncured, that earnestly begged his help either for themselves, or any of
theirs. The Leprous, the Paralytick, the Demoniack, the Lame, the Blind, those
that were sick of Fevers, those that had bloody issnes. Whatever sicknesses
men had, they obtained favor, Matthew. 4. 23. Christ ever valued the soul above
the body, therefore he will be much more ready to heal the sicknesses thereof.
He healed many of the sick Publicans, when they saw their diseases; As Zacheus,
Matthew, etc. And he will be to the end of the world, ready to afford the same
mercy to any that are or shall be in their condition.

Three things are here to be unfolded by way of Explication.

1. What it is to be spiritually sick of sin. 2. That Christ will be ready to
heal such. 3. What are the reasons of this readiness.
1. To be sick of sin, comprehends these six particulars.

First, A true sight of our sinful condition. That man who never yet had the
sight of his sinful estate, was never yet truly sick of sin, the soul must
be convinced that it is in a sinful estate. Thus it was with the Publican, Luke
18 13. He acknowledged himself to be a sinner, (...). Nor is all sight of
sin sufficient: but that sight of sin which is an ingredient of spiritual
sickness, must have these two properties.

1. It must arise from the Word of God. This was the foundation of the Apostles
sight of sin, Romans 7. 9. When the Commandment (...) sin re^ived* and I
died. Thus (...) th^usand, Acts 2. 37. (...) ^^^ked in their hearts. The sense
of sin did arise from ^ou^^ thing which was delivered to them out of the Word
of God. No other light besides this divine light will discover sin so as to
make the soul sick of it.

2. It must extend to sin in the root, as well as to sin in the branches. I
mean original birthsinne, as well as actual sin. Possibly the sight of sin
may arise first from some actual transgression. So it was with those Converts,
Acts 2. 37. that bloody act of theirs against Jesus Christ, was the first sin
they saw. Actual sins are more obvious to the eye then original sin. This
is a sin lying under ground, more remote, at a greater distance from the
cognizance of a sinner, therefore peradventure some actual offense first is set
upon the conscience, but sooner or later does this actual sin bring to the
sinners conscience, the sight of that sin, which is the root both of this and
of all other actual sins; namely, that body of death, that law of the
members, as the Apostle calls it. Romans 7. 23. Which continually warreth against
the Law of the mind.

Secondly, A serious apprehension of the misery and danger the soul is in by
reason of sin discovered. No man is sick of sin till he see the danger
which sin has, and which it is likely further to plunge him into. Thus it
was with those Converts, Acts 2. 37. The question they propound, What shall we
do to be saved? does inply clearly enough, that they looked upon themselves, as
men in a state of damnation in their present condition. And indeed the same
Word of God which discovers sin, does discover wrath also as the wages of
sin, so that the sick sinner is one that lies under the apprehension of
wrath, which he expects suddenly to fall upon him.

Thirdly, Compunction and contrition is wrought in the soul by reason of
sin. The heart throbs and aches by reason of that miserable state which by
sin he is brought into. Thus it was with those Converts, Act. 2. 37. They
were pricked in their hearts; their spirits were full of grief and vexation, to
remember what they had done, and what they were like to suffer. Thus it was
with the Publican, Luke 18. 13. He smote his breast, says the Text; his heart
was overwhelmed with grief, shame fear, sorrow. There was a mixture of all
these passions in him at once. Thus it is with all those that are spiritually
sick. This is that which our Savior calls laboring, and being heavy laden,
Mat. 11. 28. Sickness when it is seen, is evermore accompanied with pain and
anguish.

Fourthly, Dis-satisfaction with the present condition. This follows upon the
former; And you will find it has ever been in such as have seen their
spiritual sickness. What is the meaning of those questions which were
propounded by the three thousand, Acts 2. 3^. By the Jailer, Acts 16. 30 And by
Paul, Acts 9. 6. Do they not clearly evince that they were unsatisfied with
their present estate? It was no pleasing thing to them to continue any longer
in that condition. As if they should have said, it is no abiding in this estate.
It Is such a kind of reasoning as the four Lepers had among themselves, when
the famine was so raging in Samaria, 2 Kings 7. 3. Why sit we hear until we
die? Whatever the success or event be* (...) must think of some other course.
Just so i^ is with a conscience-wounded sinner, he cannot be contented with
that estate. Though he know not how to get out, yet he cannot be content to
abide there.

Fifthly, Despair of deliverance by any thing in himself. He that is sick of
sin, looks upon himself as utterly unable to help himself. This is that
which is called in another place spiritual poverty. And, says Calvin, Nemo
spiritu pauper, nisi qui in nihilum apud se redactus. Thus it was with those
sick sinners before-named. Their asking so seriously what they must do, did
clearly imply that they themselves knew not what to do? something they thought
must be done, and yet they knew not what it was. No man is truly sick, but he
that does clearly see that in regard of himself, he is both helpless and
hopeless. Self-insufficiency is one ingredient of spiritual sicknesses.
Self-denial and soul sickness are evermore companions. This is clear from
the Publicans confession and prayer, Luke 18. 13. He goes out of himself to
God, acknowledging that if ever he was healed, he must be healed by mercy.

Sixthly, A willingness to take any course God would have him, so he may be
healed. This is implied in that question so often mentioned, Acts 2. 37. Acts
9. 6. Acts 16. 30. They are very ready to follow the advice of God given by his
Ministers for a speedy cure. Cut them, lance them, scar them, bleed them, purge
them, any thing to free them from sin, any thing to save them from wrath,
which is ready to devour them. They will stick at nothing, let God take his
own way, and use his own medicines; whatever he prescribes, they are resolved
to drink it down be it never so bitter, be it never so unsavory, be it never so
contrary to their corrupt constitution. They hope he can heal them, they are
willing he should use his own method for the healing of them. This is the first
thing, wherein spiritual sickness consists.

2. That Christ is ready to heal such sinners as these. This appears three ways.

1. He inviteth such to come to him for cure. The invitations of Christ are not
empty complements as the invitations of men often are, but real things. He is
not in j^st, but in good earnest, when he bids men repair to him. Never did
one friend send to another with so much heartinesse, as Christ does to men. Now
we shall find him inviting sinners under this qualification. That Is a famous
place in Mat. 11. 28. Come unto me all ye that labor, and are heavy laden,
and I will give you r^st. And again, Esaias 55. 1. Ho every one that thirst^th,
come ye to the waters, etc. Who is he that thirsts, who is he that has no
money, but such sinners as I have described? These are the patients which
Christ invites.

2. He has promis^d to take care for the curing ^f such. The promises of Jesus
Christ are not false, ambiguous, or fallacious as the promises of men too
frequently are. He is the faithful witness, the Amen, Rev. 3. 14, All his
words are spoken in simplici^y and verity. Now it is his promise to cure
heart-wounded sinners. That in Mat. 11. 28. has an express promise annexed to
the invitation. The promise of refreshing or giving rest, is as good ^^ if he
had said, I will heal you. To this agrees that in Mat. 5. 3, 4, 6. Poverty of
spirit, mournfulnesse of spirit, hungring and thirsting do all go in into the
description of the sickness of the soul, and to each of these does Christ
make express and full promises of spiritual healing. Christ's Promise is the
best security Heaven or earth can afford.

3. God the Father has promised it in Christ's behalf. You will many times
find that the Prophets which have prophesied of him before his incarnation,
have by Gods appointment, and in Gods Name engaged themselves that he should
heal such sinners. That is a very full place amongst others, Esaias 42. 3. that
it is meant of Christ, is clear from Matthew. 12. 20. where this text is applied
to Christ, and it is applied to him upon this account, that he healed the man
with a withered hand, v. 10. 13. and multitudes of other diseased persons, v.
15. whereupon this of the Prophet is brought in, Behold my servant, etc. A
bruised reed shall he not break, etc. The words are a Meiosis, more is
understood then is expressed. He shall not bruise, the meaning is, he shall
strengthen it, he shall not quench, the meaning is, he shall cause it to flame,
and nourish it. By the bruised reed, and the smoking flax, we are to
understand such sinners as are bruised, and bowed down under the sense of their
great wretchedness; these sinners Christ will be ready to cherish. You have it
set out by another Metaphor, Chapter 40. 11. He shall carry the lambs, and
gently lead them that are with young. Who are the lambs, and such as with
young, but broken-spirited Christians that are overwhelmed and pressed down
with the apprehension of their own misery? Christ will be so far from
neglecting these that he will put them in his bosom, a place of warmth,
tenderness and security.

3. Why Christ is so ready to heal such sinners.

1. He does it in obedience to his Commission. God the Father, when he sent him
into the world, gave him a very special charge concerning these persons. He was
on purpose anointed to the place and office of a Physician, that he might take
care of such as these. You may read his Commission set down at large, Esaias 61.
1, 2, 3. There you have the Patients described, and the Physic applied, and
the Authority enjoining and enabling. The Patients are described by such terms
as set out the sensiblenesse of their condition. The meek, the brokenhearted,
the captives, them that are bound, them that mourn in Zion, them that sit in
ashes, them that are under the spirit of heaviness. The cure is set down in
expressions suitable to the nature of these sicknesses. To the meek good
tidings, to the broken hearted binding up, to the captives liberty, to them
that are bound, the opening of the prison; to them that mourn, comfort, the
oil of joy; to them that are in ashes, beauty; to the spirit of heaviness,
the garment of praise. The Authority enjoining, this is the Divine unction of
the Father by the Spirit. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, the Lord has
anointed me. So Esaias 50. 4. Jesus Christ is a very exact observer of his
Fathers Commandment. He has his (...) not only in his hand, but even in hi^
(...) Psalm. 40. 8. in the midst of his bowels. Now because God has in so
pecul^ar ^ manner recommended these to his ^are, therefore does he apply
himself to them for their cure.

2. From the instigation of his own mercifulness. Jesus Christ is very
tenderhearted, he is full of the bowels of compassion. The Apostle calls him a
merciful and faithful High Priest, Heb. 2. 17. He could not be a complete High
Priest, if he wanted either of these. Now being so merciful and compassionate,
he will not turn away his bowels from them that are in so dejected a
condition. This is rendered as the reason why he was so ready to heal the
wounded travellor, Luke 10. 33, 34. When he saw him he had compassion on him,
and bound up his wounds. Jesus Christ has lost none of his tenderness by
going into heaven. He is still touched with the sensible feeling of our
infirmities, Heb. 4 15. this inclines him to this readiness.

3. That he may not lose the glory of that work which he has begun. The
humbling and convincing of proud sinners, is as truly the work of Christ as the
restoring of humbled sinners. It Is his work to prick the heart as well as to
comfort the heart. Now if he should humble and convince a sinner, and then
leave him, and proceed no farther, he would lose the honor of what he has
done. The soul does not heartily praise Christ for conviction, till conviction
be carried on to conversion. The soul so long as it abides only under the
pains of conviction apprehends no love, but only wrath and anger, and so long
as the love of Christ is unseen, the glory of Christ is not proclaimed. Now
Christ will not lose the glory of the first work, therefore is he so careful
and ready to carry on the second work.

The Uses of this Point.
1. Let this preserve all that are in such a condition from despair. Satan's
great plot upon convinced and humbled sinners, is to drive them to despair. As
he endeavors to heighten, and harden unbroken sinners to presumption, so his
great design is to afright humbled sinners to despair. This Doctrine is a
good preservative against such temptations; you that see sin and complain of
your spiritual sicknesses, know this to your comfort that as Christ has
prepared you for healing, so he will be ready to heal you.

Object. I have been a long time under these heart-pricking convictions, and
yet cannot find any healing; my wounds are as wide and as deep as ever they
were. I have lain many months, yea many years under the apprehensions of
sin and wrath, and yet am not healed. How shall I believe this Doctrine?
Sol. 1. Many sinners are healed, who do not apprehend themselves to be healed.
Many wounded sinners will not believe themselves to be healed, unless they
could find no skarre or spot of sin upon them. They think they are not
healed of sin, (...) they are not quite delivered both from the being, and
acting of sin. They even look to find as perfect healing on earth, as they
shall have in Heaven. But we must know that a person may be healed, both of the
guilt of sin by Justification, and of the dominion of sin by
Sanctification, and yet still find many sores of sin upon, and new sores
breaking out every day in him. Paul was healed, when he cried out, O miserable
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Romans 7. 24.
David was healed, and yet he cries out, My wounds stink and are corrupt through
my foolishness, Psalm 38. 5. and again, verse 7. My loins are filled with a
loathsome disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh. When the love of
sin, the secret delight in sin, the allowance of sin, the commanding rule
of sin are removed, though there continue many wounds and scarres too upon
the soul, the cure of sin is wrought, and that which is wanting shall
perfectly be finished.

2. Many sinners keep themselves from being healed by their own default. They
do keep terror and apprehensions of wrath upon their souls, because they will
not close with the promises of the Gospel. Though the comforts of the Gospel be
held out never so clearly, and with never so much perswadingnesse, yet they
will have none of them. They are not humbled enough, as they think, they are
not so prepared as they should be, therefore they will not come to Christ to
close with him as with a Savior, nor apply the promises of the Gospel, but
reject them, and put them away as none of their portion. This is the case of
abundance of sinners. Is it any wonder if such say, they are not healed? It Is
because they will not be healed. They are not worthy of mercy, and therefore
they will have none. They do not consider that all our worthiness stands in
the sense of our own unworthiness. They do not consider that they do not come
to bring fullness to Christ, but to draw out of Christ's fullness, John 1. 14.
if such sinners would but lay aside this spiritual pride, and close with
Christ, because they see they are unworthy of him, they should find that he
would in a short time spiritually heal them. For he is willing to heal, and
willing to do it speedily. Jesus Christ never did, never will put any
sinne-lamenting sinner to any unnecessary trouble, to any unnecessary delay.

2. Let all the people of God, especially the Ministry of God be ready to
follow Christ's example. When you see or know of any soul that is wounded with
sin, apply what healing medicines you can, that they may be healed. It Is
given in charge to the Ministers of God, both in the Old and in the New
Testament, Esaias 35. 3. and 1 These. 5. 14. As it is cruel mercy to prostitute
the comforts of the Gospel to proud sinners, so is it great cruelty to
withold the cordials of the Gospel from such sinners as are burdened with
their sins. Jesus Christ will take it very kindly at any man's hand, that will
help forward the curing of a wounded sinner, he expects it at the (...) his
Ministers. As they must be (...) secure sleepy sinners, so they must be
^^^^basses to mourning sinners. A wounded spirit i^ an insupportable burden,
Prove. 18. 14. The more insupportable the burden is, the greater charity is it
to be a means to support the spirit under it.

3. Let this be a Motive to all sick sinners to come to Christ. This is enough
to persuade you to come to him, because there is none else can heal you. You
must either come to him, or else you must die in your sins. But this is more,
he is willing to heal you. There is a natural shynesse in sinners, that see
their sin to come to Christ. It Is hard to drive them. Cast away this
sinfulness, sloathfulnesse and come to him, cast your selves at his feet, and
say, Lord heal us.

Object. 1. I have been a sinner of a very great magnitude.
Sol. 1. Not greater then Christ has cured. Not greater then he can cure, Esaias
1. 18. Esaias 55. 8, 9.

2. Did ever Christ upbraid any with the greatness of their sins, that did see
them and bewail them?

3. Make them not greater, by refusing the Physician which God has sent from
his bosom to cure you.

Object. 2. I have continued long in them.
1. They are not of so long a continuance as some that Christ has cured.

2. Make them not of longer continuance by staying still in them.

Object. 3. I fear the time of healing is past.
1. While Christ calls, the time is not past.

2. It Is a sin for any man to think the time pas^.

3. He can heal thee at the last gasp. Adventure on sin; it is better to die
coming to (were it so) then running from Christ. You have both his promise and
his oath, that he will not cast you out. He that came to call sinners to
repentance, will not reject repenting sinners.

JOHN 8. 12. I am the light of the world. XII. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon. May
30. 1652.

IN the former Chapter we read of the cruel severity of the chief Priests and
Pharisees against V. 32
our Savior. He had by the excellency of his preaching gained much upon the
affections of the people that resorted to hear him; very many believed on him,
says the Text, and said, When Christ comes, V. 31
will he do more miracles then these which this man has done? The chief
Priests and Pharisees hearing that such things were murmured among the people,
presently send away Officers to apprehend his person, and bring him V. 32
before the Council. The Officers instead of bringing Christ's person, were so
taken with his preaching, that they return with a full testimony both of his
Person and Doctrine. Never V. 46
man spoke like this man. Whereupon the Pharisees are so enraged, that they
presently denounce Execrations upon all that adhere to him. Nicodemus who was
one of the Council stands up; and by a political Argument V. 49
staves them off from any further proceedings against Christ, till they had
heard him speak. He does not directly defend either the person or Doctrine of
Christ, but ^y a prudent and sober Argument, labors that all further dispute
about him might be laid aside, till according to the Law of God, they had heard
him, and received full proof of his actions. This does incense their envious
hearts not only against Nicodemus, but even against his Country also. And
thereupon V 52.
by the wonderful power of God, the Assembly is broken up, not without some
tumultuous confusion. And every man went to his V. 53
own house. Our Savior that night departs from Jerusalem, and lodges in the
Mount of Olives, Chap. 8. 1.
a place not far from Jerusalem, whither he was wont often to re^ort. He would
not lodge in so bloody and ungrateful a City, nor did he ever lodge in
Jerusalem again (as Chemnitius observes) till the night before his Passion. The
inhabitants of Jerusalem, for fear of their Governors* durst not receive him
into their houses, and Christ knowing their malice, would not trust himself
amongst them; and therefore departs to the Mount of Olives, partly to refresh
his body with necessary rest, and partly that he might have more liberty for
meditation and prayer. The next day our Savior comes early in the morning to
the Temple, and there sits down, as his manner was, to teach the people. V. 2
Though they sought to take away his life, yet he still endeavored to save
their souls, and therefore comes early to teach in the Temple. The Scribes and
Pharisees understanding that he was teaching in the Temple, thinking to find
an occasi^n V. 3. 4.
against him, brought to him a ^oman taken in the Act of adultery, and desire
to know his judgment in the case, (...) the Law of Moses, she (...) or no. Our
Savior knowing (...) declines to be a Judge in the case* ^e came not into the
world to be a political Judge, and therefore will not determine either one way
or other. But though he will not be a Judge* yet V. 6, 7
will he be a spiritual Physician, and therefore that he may convince them of
their hypocrisy speaks thus. He that is without sin among you, V. 7
let him cast the first stone at her. These words so work upon their
consciences, that they depart one by one as men self-condemned* and leave Jesus
alone, and the woman standing in V. 9
the midst. Our Savior after he had given some spiritual counsel to the woman,
dismisseth her, and returns to preach again to the people, V. 10, 11
from which work he had been hindered too long by this impertinent act of the
envious Scribes and Pharisees. The first Doctrine he delivers to them is
contained in the Text, I am the light of the world. Here are two words to be
explained a little, Light, World.

Light. This word is taken in Scripture two ways.

1. Properly. 2. Metaphorically, or improperly.
First, Properly. For that noble quality which enlightens the world, called the
light of this world, John 11. 9. Lux est claritas and splendour in corpore
luminoso, vel extr^ ^ corpore luminoso exiens, quae and lumen dicitur. This
natural ^ight was the first perfect visible creature that God made. It was the
first days work, Genesis 1. 3.

Secondly; Improperly, or metaphorically. And so its put for several things, as
they carry some resemblance to light, viz.

1. The word of God, Psalm. 119. 105. 2 Pet. 1. 19. 2. For the Ministers of God.
Mat 5. 14. 3. For regenerate men, Ephesians. 5. 8. 4. For the state of conversion,
Act. 26. 18. 5. For prosperity and comfort, Esth. 8. 16. Psalm. 97. 11. 6. For
deliverance from trouble, Esaias 9. 2. 7. For all outward good, Job 30. 26. 8.
For the glory of heaven, Col. 1. 12. 9. For knowledge, Dan. 5. 11. Esaias 60. 3.
10. For Gods special favor, Psalm. 4. 6. 11. For posterity, Prove. 20. 20. 1
Kings 11. 36. 12. For God himself, 1 Job. 1. 5. 13. For Christ; so it is used in
the Text.
In what respects we shall afterward see.

The World. The Greek word is (...), M^ndus; from that real and orderly
digestion, and composition of things that are in the world. God has made all
things in number, weight, and measure. The world is an orderly beautiful piece.
It Is used here (some think) to take away the difference between Jews and
Gentiles. Others think it is taken for the world of the Elect: But I rather
think in this place, it is taken for all sorts of men to whom this light is
offered. This benefit, says Calvin, is not offered to one, or a few, but to
all the world: though few receive it, yet the tender of it is made to all,
according to that of our Savior, Mark 16. 15.

The words are a Proposition; In (...)

1. The Subject. Jesus Christ. 2. The Predicate. The light of the world. 3. The
Copulate, joining these together, (...), All put together make this
Observation.
Doct. That Jesus Christ is the spiritual light of the world. Jesus Christ in
three respects is the natural light of the world as he is God.

1. He created the light. The first light that ever shined in the world was his
creature. The Sun, Moon and Stars, which are the vessels of natural light,
are the works of his hands. He as well as the Father is that Jehovah, who at
first said, Let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 1. 3. For all things
were made by him, and without him was not made any thing that was made, John 1.
3. All the luminaries of heaven, which carry the light of nature abroad, are
his creatures.

2. He preserves the light. The sin of mankind would extinguish those
vessels of light* those lamps of the world, did not the Lord Jesus Christ by
his Divine power and Providence keep them burning. When the Sun is set, and
darkness spread upon the world, it would never rise again if Christ did not
give it a Command.

3. He it is that created the eye of man, and endued it with power to set the
light. It is he that (as God) formed the eye of man, and gave it power to
behold the light of the Sun. It is he also that by his providence opens the
eye, when it is by sleep shut up in darkness. These windows of the body would
be pitched up for ever, if Christ did not open them morning by morning. David's
prayer, Psalm. 13. 3. must be our daily prayer, Lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep
the sleep of death. In all these respects, Christ according as he is God, is
the natural light of the world. And as Mediator he is the spiritual light of
the world. He was so when he was on earth and that both by his Doctrine, and by
his example. And he is still the spiritual light of men. The Scripture does
often affirm this of Christ. See a few places, John 1. 9. that was (speaking
of Christ) the true light which lights every man that comes into the world,
John 12. 35, 36, 46. What can be more express? The Prophets who Prophesied of
him, spoke of him as a light, Esaias 42. 6. I give thee for a Covenant of the
people, for a light of the Gentiles. And Esaias* 49. 6. I will give thee for a
light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the end of the
earth. He is therefore compared to the day star, Luke 1. 78. To the Sun, Mal.
4. 2. As all natural light is collected into the vessel of the Sun, and by it
dispensed to the world, so all spiritual light is gathered together, and placed
in Christ the Sun of righteousness, and by him communicated unto all those
whom God has given him.

In the opening of this Doctrine, I shall handle three things.

1. Wherein the proportion between Christ and light stands. 2. How Christ does
dispense the light which is in him. 3. How Christ is differenced from all,
^ther lights.
First, the resemblance between Christ and light stands in seven things.

1. Light has a manifestative quality. It does discover and cause to appear
things that do in darkness lie unseen. Darkness is a thick veil and shadow
under which things and persons are concealed, but light removes that shadow,
and shows both it self and every other thing in its own nature. When you would
see what a thing is, if you do not know it, you bring it forth to the light,
and then it appears. Whatsoever does make manifest, the same is light, Ephesians. 5.
13. Jesus Christ in this respect is well compared to light. He discovers and
makes manifest to men that which they never saw before. How many rare mysteries
has Christ discovered to the sons of men? When he came into the world, he
revealed those secrets that before were either not known, or not so fully
known. The Apostle speaks of this, Ephesians. 3. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9. When Christ
comes to a soul, what discoveries does he make there?

(1) That sin which lay hid for many years is now manifest; that pride, that
unbelief, that covetousness which was not discovered before, is now made
manifest. The very secrets of the heart are made known when this light begin;
to shine, 1 Corinthians. 14. 25. The soul wonders, that so much wickedness should
be so long undiscerned.

(2) That shining beauty which is in grace, which was not before discerned, is
now made manifest. He sees godliness to be another kind of thing then he ever
apprehended it to be. He sees a loveliness in every duty of Gods worship, a
loveliness in every act of holiness which he could have not believed, so that
he is able to say with the blind man restored by Christ; This I know, that
whereas I was blind, now I see. Christ has the discovering quality of light.

2. Light has a Directive virtue. It guids men in their way. The Traveller by
the benefit of the light, sees what path to keep which way to turn to his
intended journey. Our Savior mentions this effect of light, John 11. 9, 10.
Now Christ is fitly called a light in this regard. He it is that does direct
the sons of men in the way to life. And therefore he is called, not only the
light by which we see, but the guide that leads us, Luke 1. 79. Yea, he is
called not only the light and the guide, but the way in which we walk, John
14. 6. Jesus Christ is sent by his Father from heaven, to direct his Elect to
heaven. He is the great Pilot of his Church, that does steer it through the
tempestuous seas of this world to the Haven of glory.

3. Light has a Penetrating virtue. Light is of all creatures that are
material, the most immaterial; it is of so subtle a nature, that it conveys it
self into the least crevise. You can hardly make any fence so close, as wholly
to keep out the light. Jesus Christ has a penetrating and searching power. No
heart so close, but his eye is in it; no conscience so dark, but he sees to the
bottom of it. See what the Apostle says of him, Heb. 4. 13. All things are
naked and open to his eyes, and every creature is manifest in his sight.

4. Light has a chearing and (...). The light contributes much (...), and
growth, and life of (...) creatures. Light and motion are the come of that heat
which the heavenly bodies send down upon the earth. Light is that instrument
whereby all the influences of heaven are communicated and dispensed to the
world. The motions of nature are both quickened and comforted by the light, and
by it all the births of nature are cheared and comforted. Jesus Christ, has a
chearing, comforting and quickening virtue. It Is by influences from Christ
spiritual life and comfort are obtained and preserved. The Prophet speaks of
this virtue of Christ, under this very Metaphor of light, Mal. 4. 2. All that
spiritual liveliness, and brisknesse that believers have at any time in their
hearts, is from the beaming wings of Christ the Son of righteousness. He is
a heart-chearing, a heart-warming, a heart-quickening Savior.

5. Light has a Purifying virtue. Fogs and Mists that are gathered in
darkness, are dispersed and scattered when the light comes. When a candle is
lighted and set up in a room, if there be any damps, they gather about it.
Light is the fining pot of Nature. The world would be an unwholsom Pesthouse
if it had not light. Jesus Christ has a purifying and cleansing virtue. By
virtue from him it is, that those nasty filthinesses of sin which are in the
soul, are purged away, Heb. 8. 14. All the Levitical, Ceremonial purifications
used in the Law, were types of him. The Prophet compares him to a refiner, and
purifier of silver, Mal. 3. 3. By his blood he purifies the soul from the guilt
of sin. By his grace he cleanses the soul from the filth of sin. The Prophet
compares him to a fountain set open for purification, Ezekiel. 13. 1. All that
ever were, all that ever shall be cleansed from the filthiness of sin, are
cleansed by Jesus Christ.

6. Light is of an undefilable nature. Though it pass through sinks, and the
most polluted places, yet it contracts no defilement. It cleanses all things,
but is defiled by nothing. It is a quality so spiritual, that nothing can
fasten upon it to pollute it. Jesus Christ is fitly resembled to light in this
respect. He is not capable of any defilement. He assumed sinful nature without
the least sin. He had the likeness of sinful flesh, Rom 8. 3. but not the
least sin in his flesh. In the days of his flesh he did as a spiritual
Physician, repair to all sorts of sinners, but he carried away from them no
pollution at all. He conversed with Mary Magdalen, with Zacheus the Publican,
and other Publicans and sinners without the least taint of corruption. He was
born, he lived and died in a corrupt generation, in a very Pesthouse of sin,
without the least tincture of sin. He lived and died holy, harmless,
undefiled, and separated from sinners, as the Apostle says, Heb. 7. 26.

7. The nature of the light is hard to be known. The Philosophers are much
troubled about the defining and describing of it. It Is not a substantial form,
because it is perceived by the sight, which no substantial form is. It Is not a
body, because then when the light passes through a perspicuous body, two
bodies would be in one place, which is against (...) and reason. Nor is it an
(...) from a luminous body, for then the Son by his continual shining would
be deprived of ^ig^t; but it is an accidental form, or a patib^e quality, and
so very hard to be described. The Scripture speaks of the difficulty of
searching out the nature of the light perfectly by any mortal man, Job 38. 19,
20, 21, 24. Only he who is the Father of lights does perfectly understand it.
Jesus Christ is not perfectly to be understood by any living man. Who can
declare his generation, as he is the Son of God? Esaias 53. 8. Who can declare
his conception exactly, as he is the Son of man? the Holy Ghost has
overshadowed it, Luke 1. 35. He that created the flesh of Christ, is only able
perfectly to understand the manner of it. Who is able to declare the mystery of
the hypostatical union of the two natures in one person exactly? We believe
these things, comprehend them perfectly we are not able. His Name is wonderful,
Esaias 9. 6. there are such wonderful mysteries in the nature of this light, as
no man, no creature can fully and perfectly comprehend.

Secondly, Christ dispenses this light these two ways.

1. By the preaching of his Gospel in the public Ministry thereof. The
Ministers are called Stars; and the Ministry or preaching of the Gospel, is
that Orb in which this light shines, and by which it is communicated and
dispensed to the world. We preach Christ crucified, 1 Cor. 1. 23. Where the
Gospel has never been preached, this light has never yet shined. This is the
chariot in which this glorious light is carried about ordinarily in the world,
2 Cor. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6.

2. By the virtuous efficacy of his Spirit in the Ministry. The most powerful
preaching of Christ that can be, will be to no purpose without these inward
workings of the Spirit. By the Spirit of Christ three things are done.

(1) The blindness of the mind is removed. The holy Ghost causes the skales
to fall off the eyes.

(2) A visive faculty is bestowed. This is that which the Apostle calls the
enlightening of the eyes of the understanding, Ephesians. 1. 18.

(3) Power is given actually to close with the light. The soul is enabled to
follow the light, or to walk in the light as our Saviors phrase is, John 12.
35. So that by these two means this light is communicated. By the preaching of
the Gospel, the object is made present; and by the Spirit of Christ the object
is made visible, the faculty of sight is bestowed, and a power of following the
light is created.

Thirdly, Christ is differenced from all other lights, viz. Prophets, Apostles
who are called lights, Mat. 5. 14. He is differenced from all them five ways.

1. They are lights only Ministerially. They are lights only as they do by
their office hold out this light. They are lights, as the candlestick may be
called a light, because it carries the candle where the light is. But Christ is
a light of and in himself; He is a light, not Ministerially, but Originally.
The fountain of light.

2. They are small lights. Christ i^ (...) light. They were but like little
^^thing (...), Christ is as a great Torch which teaches from heaven to earth.
They are light as the Stars are light, a little glimmering, borrowed light.
Christ is light as the Sun, and therefore he is called, The Son of
righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. All the Prophets and Apostles were but Scintillulae
lucis, little sparks of light, mere glowworms, but Jesus Christ is an immense
incomprehensible light, Esaias 9. 2.

3. They are lights that have some darkness in them. The clearest and
brightest of the Prophets and Apostles were not without some darkness and
obscurity. But Jesus Christ is light, and in him there is no darkness at all.
Christ is a light that has no snuff in him. He ever burns and shines brightly.

4. They were lights that could not give sight. They were not able to make men
either see their light, or follow their light. They could not give eyes to the
blind; but Jesus Christ is such a light as can give sight. He can open the
blind eyes. He can overpower the soul to follow the light.

5. They were setting lights. They when they had run their course left
shining, they were wasting, decaying lights. John Baptist was a burning and
shining light, but now he is neither, as to this world, only his example and
Doctrine shines still in the Scripture. But Jesus Christ is an everlasting
light. He has been shining ever since that promise made to Adam, Genesis 3. 15.
and he shall be a light for ever and ever. He is the light of grace here, and
he shall be the light of glory in heaven.

The Uses are, Information. Exhortation. Consolation.

1. Information. In four particulars.

First, Behold the necessity of Christ. He is as necessary for the soul, as
light is for the body. Light is a very needful and pleasant thing. Jesus Christ
is as necessary as he is pleasant.

Secondly, The miserable condition of such as want an interest in Christ.
Whether they be Nations or Persons, their condition is mavelous sad. They are
indeed in a state of darkness. The Scripture affirms all to be in darkness
that are without Christ, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness, etc. Luke 1.
79. Esaias 9. 2. The people that sat in darkness have seen a great light. Where
this day star did never yet shine, it is yet midnight with that soul. A dark
condition is a very miserable condition. The misery of it will appear in three
particulars.

(1) A dark condition is a condition of fear. Those that can be bold in the
light, are usually surprised with fears in darkness. A black day is a
terrible day, Job 3. 5. Let the blackness of the day terrify it. Those that
are without Jesus Christ are subject to many terrors and fears, which the
children of light are delivered from. The Scripture makes mention of horrible
dread which the wicked are exposed unto. The name of Pashur may be given to
every one that is without Christ, Magor Missabib, Jer. 20. 3. because they are
liable to such shaking pannick fears, Prove. 28. 1. The ^^cked (...) when no
man pursues them. God threatens fears to the wicked as their portion, Lev. 26.
3^. I will send a faintness in their hearts, the sound of a shaken leaf shall
chase them. Wicked men are sometimes without actual shakings, they have some
kind of Joy, Peace and Security. But

[1] They are always liable to fears. They are under guilt, which lays the
foundation of fear.

[2] Their peace, when it seems to be most strong and settled, is presently
upon the least spark of Gods anger thrown into their consciences, turned into
terror. We have an instance of it in Belshazzar, Dan. 5. 5, 6. The least
manifestation of Gods anger dashes all their joy, and creates great trembling
in their spirits. The Prophet sets out this terror by an excellent Metaphor,
Esaias 5^. 20. The sea is sometimes so calm and smooth, that you may cast a dye
upon the face of it, but one quarter of an hours tempest puts it into a
dreadful combustion.

(2) A dark condition is a misguiding condition. It Is full of wanderings. When
men want the light of this world, how do they mislead others? how easily are
they mislead by others? He that walks in darkness (says our Savior)
knows not whither he goes, John 12. 35. Those that are without Jesus Christ,
are in a spiritual maze or labyrinth. They mislead all that follow them, they
are mislead by every blind guide that goes before them. Men that are without
Christ are great wanderers. You may easily carry them into the most dangerous
ways. This is the true reason of all those sad ^and^ings, and deviations of
men from the truth of God, and from the old ways of holiness which are at
this very day. Though they pretend not only light, but a greater measure of
light then others have attained unto; yet the truth is, they want this true
light, this celestial light, and therefore are carried away after the shining
of every ignis fatuus, that Satan casts in their way. They wander from verity
to falsehood, from a seeming strictness to profaneness, from one corrupt
principle to another, till they turn mere Skepticks, mere Atheists, without
all Religion. The Apostle calls them, (...), Jude 13. to whom, if they return
not from their wanderings, is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.

(3) A dark condition is a condition unfit for action. We call darkness blind
man's holy day, because in darkness a seeing man can work no more then a blind
man. When that fearful darkness was over the land of Egypt, they did not stir
from their seats for three days together, Exodus 10. 23. Man goes forth to his
work and labor until the evening, Psalm. 104. 23. When the black shadow of the
night has drawn the curtain of nature over the world, then are instruments of
working laid aside. Those that are without Jesus Christ are unfit for any
spiritual work. They can neither pray, nor repent, nor believe, etc. Whatever
work of this nature they take in hand, they spoil it utterly. They mar all the
work of God for want of light, John 15. 5. The Apostle tells us that the
natural man does not understand the things of the Spirit, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned, (...) to polish^ a jewel a^
(...), as man that i^ (...) is able handsomely to perfect any (...) This is the
second inference, the misery of men without Christ.

(3) The excellency of Jesus Christ. Light is a very excellent and glorious
creature. Truly light is pleasant, says Solomon, and a joyful thing it is for
the eyes to see the Sun, Eccl. 11. 7. Jesus Christ is an excellent and precious
person. He is very pleasant and desirable to those that have eyes to behold
him. He is all things spiritually to the soul which it wants, which it can
desire; bread, drink, physic, life, raiment, light, all in all. The Scripture
speaks much of his glory and brightness. No creature comparable to the light
for glory. God is therefore said to be clothed with light as with a garment,
Psalm 104. 2. Christ is unglorious to the eyes of blind men, so the Prophets
foretold, Esaias 53. 2, 3. But to them that have eyes to see him, he is a very
glorious person. Jesus Christ has a fourfold excellency above other lights.

First, They are created lights. The Sun, Moon and Stars, the vessels of light
are but creatures, Genesis 1. You read of the time and manner of their creation.
But Christ is an uncreated light. The humanity indeed is a creature, but the
Divinity which does enlighten the humanity is not a creature. Athanasius calls
him light of lights, very God of very God. He is the Father of Lights in regard
of his Divinity.

Secondly; They are lights that cannot give (...). Bring men that are blind to
the Sun, let it shine with his greatest splendour upon them, and they will not
be recovered. The light of the Sun has dazeld, and helped to put out many
seeing eyes, it never restored to sight one blind eye. But Jesus Christ is a
light that gives sight to the blind. He is an enlightening ^ight, he does by
his shining upon the soul, create in the soul a faculty of seeing, which it
never had before, 2 Cor. 4. 6. When this light shines in the heart, the light
of the knowledge of God is created. Hence the Apostle calls Christ a light that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, Joh. 1. 9.

Thirdly, They are lights only to the body. The soul is not better for the
light of the Sun. But Christ is a spiritual light* he is a light to the
conscience, to the will, to the affections, to the whole inward man.

Fourthly, They give light but in one place at once. The Sun shines but in
one Hemisphaere at once. It Is night with us, when it is day* with our Antipodes;
and when the Sun shines there, it is darkness with us. But now Jesus Christ
shines as a light in all places of the world, at one and the same time. He can
cast his beams when he pleases all the world over. Christ shines in England
and in America, at one and the same moment. And he has told us of a time when
he will give light to all the world. This is the third inference, Christ's
excellency.

(4) Behold from hence the excellency of the Gospel. Jesus Christ is the light
of the world as he is held out in the Gospel. The Gospel is the Candlestick in
which this Candle is set, the Gospel is the O^^ in (...) There is no other
sufficient and (...) ^^^covery of Christ besides the Gospe^.

There are three lights which God has ^^^^^ed to the Heathen.

The light of Creation, Romans 1. 19. 20.

The light of righteousness, which the Schools call Synter^sin.

The light of a natural conscience, Romans 2. 15.

Now although these be true lights, yet they are not sufficient lights. They
make a discovery of a Godhead unto men; Romans 1. 19, 20. They discover so much
to men* as to ^eave them without excuse, Romans 1. 20. but they cannot discover a
Savior to man. They cannot discover a Mediator, God and man in one person.
None of the wise Philosophers of the world* that had studied the mysteries of
nature, and attained to very great experience in them, were able to find out
reconciliation by Christ. No, no, the Gospel is the only ordinary way of this
discovery John 5. 39. Search the Scriptures. They are they which testify of
me, Romans 1. 16. 17. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ; For therein is
the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith, So 1 Cor. 1. 21. After
that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, It pleased God by
the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Now then the Gospel
being the only standing-way of discoverning Christ to men, it must needs be a
very excellent thing. Hence it is that the Gospel is called a light as well as
Christ, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy Word is as a lamp unto my feet, etc. And 2 Pet. 1.
18, 19* We have a more sure word of prophecy, etc. Herein lies the great glory
and dignity of the Gospel, that it is the only mediate fixed Candlestick, in
and by which Jesus Christ the true light is discovered and made known. This is
the first Use.

Use 2. Exhortation. It commends sour things to us.
1. Bless God for this light. We have very great cause to bless God for tho
natural light, that he has set up so glorious a Torch as the Sun is, to give
light to the inhabitants of the earth. What cause have we then to bless God
for this spiritual light, that this day star from on high has visited us? We
might have wandered in darkness as the Heathen do, if this light had not in the
glorious Gospel sh^ned amongst us. Bless God every day for this light,
especially you that have Christ not only a light to you, but a light in you.
You that have this Sun risen, and shining in your hearts, in and by
conversion, you have cause to bless God. Many shall be damned and perish that
have Christ as a light to them, but they shall eternally be saved that have
Christ the true light shining in them. How much cause had the Israelites in
Goshen to bless God, that had light in their dwellings, Exodus 10. 23. when
there was thick darkness in the land of Egypt? much more cause have you to
bless his great Name, that the Lord Christ is a burning light set up in your
hearts, when as abundance that live under the same light you do, are still in
the darkness of an unconverted estate? Ye were sometimes darkness, but now
are ye light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5. 8. This (...) loud, cordial, lasting,
everlasting praises to God and Jesus Christ, that this light is made a saving
light to you, when it is a damning light occasionally to very many.

2. When ever you see the light, remember Jesus Christ. When you open your eyes
in the morning, and behold the light of the Sun, then thin^ of Christ the
true Sun of righteousness. When you see the necessity of light, when you see
the benefit of light, then think of the necessity and benefit which men receive
by Jesus Christ. He is far more useful then the natural light, in as much as he
enlightens the soul. God would have us to spirituallize the whole Creation.
There is hardly any creature which is of special and common use, but it does or
may serve as a ladder on which we may ascend into Heaven, and be brought nearer
to God: bread, water, garments, the rain, the dew, the light, and a thousand
other creatures do daily preach some spiritual Doctrine to us. It will be happy
for us if we can take out spiritual lessons from earthly things.

3. Improve the light. In three things.

(1.) Be not contented that Christ is a light to you, but labor that he may be
a light within you. Get Christ into your hearts, into your consciences. It Is
damnable to live in darkness, even when the light of the creatures shines,
Romans 1. 20. It Is double damnation to live in darkness, where Jesus Christ the
true light shines. Arise, shine, for the light is come (says the Prophet) to
the Church, Esaias 60. 1. If you be not enlightened savingly by this light, it had
been better for you, you had never heard of it, that you had never seen it.
Better you had never seen this pillar of fire, then not to be savingly
enlightened by it.

(2) Be sure to walk in the light. This is our Saviors counsel, John 12. 35.
What is it to walk in the light, but to translate the light into our life! To
walk as children of the light, Ephesians 5. 8. To walk in the light of Christ's
example; To walk according to the d^rection of Christ's Doctrine. To walk
regularly, evenly, inoffensively, to have our conversation as becomes the
Gospel, Philippians 1. 27. This is the way to honor the light; this is the way
to communicate the light to others. He that walks as Christ walked, holds out
this light to the world; a holy Conversation makes a Christian as a golden
Cand^estick to hold ou^ Christ to such as do not see him.

(3) Acknowledge from whence all your light comes. That you have the light of
knowledge, the light of saving grace, the l^ght of spiritual comfort, it is
from Jesus Christ. He is the fountain of all true spiritual light. The light
you have is a beam of this Sun; You had never enjoyed one spark of it, had
not Christ freely communicated it.

(4) Receive nothing as light, but what comes from Jesus Christ. That that
thwarts Jesus Christ, is not light but darkness. That which comes not from
Christ's Word, is not light, but darkness. Men ta^^ of much light now adays.
They (...) light, darkness light; Well, the (...) way to judge of true light,
is to bring it to Christ; and to bring it to Christ, is to bring it to the
Scriptures. There it is that Christ shines, there it is that truth shines. A
written Revelation from S^ripture is more sure then an immediate Revelation
from Heaven. So the Apostle tells us, 2 Peter 1. 18, 19. I must try all
Revelations by Scripture. Now the touchstone is more sure then that which is
tried by it. There are some things which men cry up as lights, which quench
Christ the true light, the doctrine of the Socinians, Arminians, Papists, etc.

Use 3. Consolation.
This may comfort the children of God in all their present darknesses. The
Saints of God are in this life under many darknesses. They are under the
darkness of sin, not under the power of it, Colossians 1. 13. Yet they have
still some of this darkness in them. They are under the darkness of
ignorance, for they know but in part. They are under the darkness of outward
affliction, Micah 7. 8. They are under the darkness of spiritual discomfort
sometimes, Esaias 50. 10. Well, here is your comfort. Christ is light in all
these respects. He is a full light. He is a communicative light. He is a light
always present. Go to him in all these cases, depend upon him; put him in
mind of this Name of his, and you shall find that he will turn your
darkness into light. He will be a light to deliver you, to instruct, to
comfort you, to quicken you. He has received all the light he has as
Mediator, that he may communicate it to you.

HEB. 13. 20. -- Our Lord Jesus Christ that XIII. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon.
Aug. 8. 1652.
great shepherd of the sheep.
THis verse is a part of the Epilogue, or conclusion of the whole Epistle. The
conclusion begins at ver. 18. and it reaches to the end of the Chapter. He had
ver. 18, 19 entreated their remembrance of him: in this verse as an Argument to
persuade them, he falls a praying for them. The thing he prays for on their
behalf, is laid down ver. 21. Make you perfect, etc. The person to whom he
prays, is God, whom he describes by that glorious title, The God of peace. The
Arguments he has to support his faith for the Audience of his prayer, are
these three.

First, the power of God; this he expresses by one great act of his power, The
resurrection of Christ from the dead.

The second is, from Christ's office or relation to the Church for whom he
prays, He is the great Shepherd of the sheep. He prays in his Name who was
nearly related to the Church, therefore he did not doubt of audience.

The third is the way whereby he expected his requells to be granted, The blood
of the everlasting Covenant; he came to a God of peace by a Mediator through a
Covenant of blood, therefore he did not fear the speeding and issuing of his
requests. The words which I have read, have two things in them which shall be
the parts of the Text.

1. A description of the people of God. They are sheep. 2. A description of
Christ in relation to them. That great Shepherd.
Sheep. This word is taken in Scripture either Properly or Metaphorically.
Properly, for that kind of creatures which are known by this name. Improperly
or Metaphorically, and so it has a double signification. It Is taken sometimes
for harmless and innocent people. So it is used, 2 Samuel 24. 17. 2. For the
Elect of God especially, such of them as are regenerated, and called, And so
it is used in this Text.

Shepherd. This word is likewise used in a Proper, and in a Metaphorical sense.

In a proper sense, it is used for such as keep and feed flocks, whether they be
flocks of sheep, or of other cattle. In this sense Abel is called a shepherd,
Genesis 4. 2. The sons of Jacob that kept cattle, are called shepherds in this
sense, because they dealt in sheep and other cattle, Gen 46. 32, 34. In this
sense Moses is called a shepherd, Exodus 3. 1. And David before his anointing to
the office of a King, Psalm 78. 70, 71.

In a Metaphorical sense, and so its referred to other persons and emplovments,
as they carry some resemblance to this office. As,

1. Magistrates are called shepherd^ (...) has this name given him of God,
Esaias. ^4. ^^. Thus Moses the Ruler of Israel is called (...) sh^pherd of Gods
flock, Esaias 63. 1^. (...) Agamemnon, (...). It Is an usual expression in
Scripture to call Magistrates, Shepherds, Jer. 6. 3. The shepherds with their
flocks shall come unto her. That is, foreign Princes with their soldiers
prepared for War. So Micab 55. We shall raise against him seven shepherds,
and eight principal men.

2. Ministers. Governors of the Church are called shepherds, Jer. 3. 15. I
will give you pastors, or shepherds after mine own heart, Jer. 17. 16. I have
not hastened from being a pastor, or shepherd from following thee, Esaias 56.
11. speaking of the sloathful Ministers, he says, They are shepherds that
cannot understand. And the usual notion whereby Ministers are set out in the
New Testament is, Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. There is a great affinity
between the work of a Minister, and the work of a shepherd.

3. God himself is called a shepherd. David gives him that name, Psalm. 23. 1.
And again, Psalm. 80. 1. He is called, the shepherd of Israel; because his care
of Israel has great resemblance to the care of a shepherd over his flock.

4. Jesus Christ is called a shepherd, as in many other places, so in this
Text. It Is him of whom we are to understand this Text, Our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd. He is called, (...), to distinguish him from all other
shepherds, who in comparison of him are very small and inconsiderable
shepherds. Thus much for Explication. The Observations are two, according to
the two Metaphors, viz.

1. The people of God are sheep. 2. Jesus Christ is the great Shepherd of these
sheep.
Doct. 1. The people of God are sheep. It Is a very usual Metaphor whereby godly
persons are described in Scripture. Sometimes they are called Gods sheep, Ezekiel.
34 6, 11, 12. Sometimes they are called Christ's sheep; so frequently, John 10.
and John 21. 16. Feed my sheep, says Christ to Peter. And sometimes they are
called sheep without any mention of the owner of them. Take but two or three
Texts for farther confirmation, Psalm. 74. 1. Why does thine anger smoke against
the sheep of thy pasture, Psalm. 79 13. So we thy flock, and sheep of thy
pasture, Ps. 100. 3. We are the sheep of his pasture.

In the handling of this Point, I shall open two things.

1. In what respects they are compared to sheep. 2. How they come to be sheep.
First, They are like sheep in five respects.

1. Sheep are very harmless and innocent creatures. Wolves, they tear, and
hurt, and do mischief; but sheep are innocent and inoffensive creatures; they
neither bite with their teeth, nor kick with the heel as other creatures do.
Innocent and harmless persons are called sheep in Scripture, 2 Samuel 24. 17.
These sheep what have they done? The people of God are ^ ^^^mlesse and innocent
generation, though the world looks upon them as turbulent, etc. The^ know it is
the Will of God that they be harmless and blameless, Phil. 2. 15. and they
desire that they may so walk. They desire and endeavor that they may walk
without offense, that no man may receive the least detriment, or prejudice by
them, either in temporals or spirituals. You may see this in the Apostle Paul,
Act. 24. 16. the same desire is in all the sheep of Christ; and if they do
through mistake or inadvertency harm any, they are never at rest till they
have made them reparation and satisfaction.

2. Sheep are meek and patient Creatures. The sheep is an emblem of meekness.
The sheep suffers the shearer to take his fleece, and the butcher his blood,
without the least frowardness or resistance. The meekness of the lamb is grown
into a Proverb. Quum fervet maxim, tam placidum quam ovem reddo. Terent. The
people of God are a patient and meek people. They are called in Scripture the
meek of the earth, because they excel in this grace, Psalm. 76. 9. Zeph. 2. 3.
They can endure losses, bear afflictions, suffer persecutions for the Name of
Christ without impatience. They do not render reviling for reviling, nor
railing for railing. Yea, they repay sweet for bitter, blessing for cursing.
When Shimei railes on David, Come out thou man of blood, etc. how meekly does
he bear it? Let him curse, for God has bid him curse David, 2 Samuel 16. 10.
When he was so unnaturally used by his Son Absalom, how sweetly does he
subject himself and kiss the rod! Psalm. 39. 9. A ch^^^e of God may sometimes
fall into a sir of frowardness and impatience, as Jonah did. Even meek Moses
was once too much transported with passion, Numb. 20. 10, 11. but they are much
grieved for such angry heats. The frame and bent of their hearts is toward the
grace of meekness; and what the heart of a person would be, that God
interprets it really to be. Wicked men are men of blustering and turbulent
spirits, but Gods people are of a calm placid temper.

3. Sheep are clean Creatures. Swine they use to wallow in filthy and myry
places. But sheep desire and delight to preserve themselves clean, they love
pure streams and green pastures. The people of God are a clean and holy
generation. See how the Holy Ghost describes them, Psalm. 73. 1. Our Savior
calls them the pure in heart, Mat. 5. 8. They study holiness, they pray for
holiness, they allow no spot, yea they are heartily grieved when they do
bemire themselves, and are never at rest till they be cleansed again. See the
Prophet David, when he had fallen into the mire and defiled himself, how
earnest he is with God for cleansing, Psalm. 51. 2. and again, v. 7. and yet
again, v. 10. Create in me a clean heart O God. He that has the nature of a
true sheep of Christ in him, though he may fall into sin, yet he cannot lie
and wallow in uncleanness, as the wicked do.

4. Sheep are simple creatures. Some kind of bruit creatures are very cunning
and crafty, as the Fox, the Ape, etc. but the sheep is of a simple nature. Ye
use to call silly men sheepish men. The people of God are a simple
plain-hearted people, no^ only with^^^ (...) without guile, Psalm. 32. 2. That
(...) of their Father Jacob, Genesis 25. 2^. it is (...) all his posterity in
their propo^tion, they are plain-hearted men. Though they have hypocrisy in
them as they have other corruptions, yet they are not hypocrites. They know
not, nor are they desirous to learn the art of dissimulation, equivocation.
They cannot look one way, and row another; they love not to have oil in their
mouths, and swords in their hear^s. They desire to be sincere, without mixture.
They cannot carry fire in one hand, and water in the other. They are strangers,
and they desire to be strangers for ever to those doublings, and fraudulencies,
and subtle artifices which hypocrites use. They can pray, and do pray with
David, Psalm. 119. 8. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes, etc. Their tongue
and heart go both one way; they desire that God would keep their hearts right,
and they desire that their tongue may be the interpreter of their heart; they
choose to act, not according to principles of carnal policy, but the rules of
Gospel piety; they had rather be the meanest of Christ's Disciples, then the
highest of M^chiavels Scholars.

5. Sheep are creatures of a tractable nature. They are easy to be led. A
child may drive a flock of sheep with more ease, then many can a herd of other
cattle. The people of God are of a ductile, tractable nature. They are more
easily guided then other men. Show them what the mind of God is, let them have
the Rule clear, and then a little child may lead them. We have a Gospel
prophecy of the l^^enesse which grace works upon the hearts of men, when it
comes in power upon them, ^say 11. 6. Other men cannot be ruled by all the
importunity that God and men use. Though precept ^e upon pre^ept, and line upon
line, Esaias 28. 10. yet they will be extravagant and loose; but godly men are of
a ductile frame. They desire that God would lead them, and guide them in his
way, and they are willing to be led. They will not resist truth, they will not
stand out against convictions as other men do. They are pliable and yielding to
all divine Revelations from the Word of God. No man shall lead them by his
fancy or opinion without a Rule, though he be never so wise, or never so
seemingly godly; but any man shall guide them, and turn any way, even an enemy,
an inferior, if he can bring a sufficient Authority from Gods Word. Show us
the Father, and it suffices.

Secondly, How they come to be sheep? They are not so by nature; for by nature
they are Goats, Wolves, Tigers. They have not one property of a sheep in them
by nature. They are as bad as the worst by nature, Ephesians. 2. 2. How then a^e they
sheep? It Is by Grace and Regeneration. Jesus Christ the Lamb of God
communicates his nature to them by his Spirit, and so of Goats makes them
Sheep. He infuseth into them a new nature, and so makes them sheep.

1. God chooses them for his sheep.

2. Christ purchases them.

3. Having chosen them from eternity, and purchased them, he does in time by
his Spirit change their natures, bring them into his fold, and puts all the
good properties of sheep into them; whereas, they we^^ (...) makes them
harmless; (...) froward, he makes them p^cient (...) were filthy, he makes
them cle^^e (...) they were hypocritical, he makes them p^^^-hearted; and
whereas they were before un^^ly, he now makes them tractable.

The Uses of this Point.
1. The great difference between converted and unconverted. The one are
Flowers, the other are Weeds; the one Light, the other Darkness; the one
Wheat, the other Tares; the one Goats, the other Sheep. Grace puts a great
difference between man and man, Prove. 12. 26.

2. Let all of us labor that we may be sh^ep. Beg of Christ that he would
remove the wolvishnesse of thy nature, and make thee a sheep. At the day of
judgment all men would be glad to be placed among the sheep, Matthew. 25. 32, 33.

3. Let all the people of God carry themselves as sheep. Study those things
which I named before, be sure they be found in you, otherwi^e you cannot have
any hopes that you are sheep. And to those let me add two or three duties
more, which are fo^nd in all the sheep of God and Christ, viz.

(1) Labor to be profitable. Sheep are very profitable creatures Their flesh
is for food, their fleece is for clothing, their milk is for nourishing; their
very excrements are profitable, the Husbandman finds benefit even by them. A
believer should be a profitable creature. It Is said of Onesimus, that after he
was (...), he became a profitable branch, (...) 11. Christians should endeavor
to be profitable every way as sheep are. You should ^eed others by your
knowledge, you should nourish others by your comforts, you should refresh
others by your graces. All your speeches, all your actions should some way or
other tend to the benefit of your brethren. An unprofitable sheep is a
contradiction. It Is a glorious thing to profit others. It Is one end of all that
good which God has bestowed upon you. The manifestation of the Spirit is given
to every man to profit withal, As the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 12. ^.

(2.) Labor to be fruitful. Sheep are a very fruitful creature, they do much
enrich him that keeps them, they often bring forth twins, Cant. 4. 2.
Believers should be fruitful; Rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 18. Filled with the
fruits of righteousness, Phil. ^. 11. A Christian should be like th^se sheep,
which are mentioned Cant. 4 2. Christ feeds his sheep in large pas^ures, and in
fa^ pastures, therefore they should bring forth good fruit, and much fruit.

(3) Labor to be ^^ciable one with another. No ^^^atures are of a more
sociable nature then sheep; they feed together, and ^old together, and live
qu^etly together. The sheep is a rare emblem of unity. Believers should in
this be like sheep, they should maintain love and unity amongst themselves.
This grace, love, and unity and oneness of mind is much pressed in Scripture,
Ephesians. 4. init. Phil. 2. init. Biting and devouring one another, is not to be
like the sheep, but rather like the wolf. The greater noise the devouring
creatures make, the closer do sheep keep together.

1. O that Christians would be (...) this property. Fearful things are (...)
them that make divisions in the Church of (...). Vid. Romans 16. 17, 18.

2. How great is the advantage which Gods people will get, by uniting amongst
themselves!

First, unity is their strength. Fellow-Travellers, while they keep together,
strengthen one another against invaders; if they divide, they are easily
destroyed.

Secondly, unity is their glory, Psalm. 133. 1. Pearls are called uniones (some
say) because they are seldom found two together; others say to denote the
preciousnesse of union. Unity amongst Gods people is the best pearl they can
wear, Cant 4. 9.

Thirdly, unity makes way for the communication of gifts, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.

Fourthly, remember the communion of Saints, 1 John 1. ^.

Fifthly, remember how often Christ prayed for it, John 17. 21, 22, 23. It Is
his great honor; only we must know that all our union must be in the truth,
union in the Lord; otherwise it is not the union of sheep, but the union of
robbers, Prove. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

Doct. 2. The Lord Jesus Christ is the great Shepherd of these sheep. In many
places of Scripture the name and office of a Shepherd is attributed to Christ.
Consider these that follow, Esaias 40. 11. He shall feed his flock as a Shepherd.
It Is a prophecy of Christ, as the context shows, Ezekiel. 3^. 23. God promises
Christ under this (...) I will set up one Shepherd over them, and ^^ shall ^eed
them; even my servant David; And again, Ezekiel. 37. 24. David my servant shall be
King over them, and they all shall have one Shepherd, Zech. 13. 7. Awake O
sword against my Shepherd, etc. Smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be
scattered; It Is applied to Christ, Mat. 26. 31. Our Savior himself does give
himself this name. John 10. 11, 14, 16. I am the good Shepherd, etc. The
Apostle Peter calls him so, 1 Pet. 2. 25. The Shepherd and Bishop of our souls,
and Chap. 5. 4 He calls him, (...), The chief Shepherd: when the chief Shepherd
shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of glory that fades not away.

Two things I shall open by way of Explication.

1. The parallel between Christ and a shepherd. 2. Why Christ is called That
great Shepherd.
First, the parallel between Christ and a shepherd, stands in these five
particulars, viz

1. A shepherd ^^ed this stock. It Is his work to provide both pasture and water
for his sheep. Pastor ^ Pasc^nd^, Ezekiel. 34. 2. Should not the shepherds feed
the flocks? A good shepherd will take care that his flock may have both grass
and water. When they have eat one place bare, he drives them to another; when
one fountain is dry, he leads them to another; he had rather want bread
himself then that his sheep should want provision. He feeds them with his own
flesh and blood, John 6 5. Jesus Christ provides sufficient food and
nourishment for his sheep. Three things (...)

(1) He has provided Ordinan^^ (...) very Ordinance is a spiritual (...)
fountain for the feeding of Christ (...) Psalmist speaks of this, Psalm. 23. 2.
He (...) to lie down in green pastures; he leads me beside the still waters.
What are those pastures of tender grass? What are those waters of quietness,
but the Ordinances of the Gospel, the fields where Christ's sheep feed, the
rivers where they drink? The variety of the Ordinances shows the variety of
^eeding, the richness and fullness of the Ordinances, shows the
plentifulnesse of Christ's feeding: here are many pastures, and every pas^ure so
rich, that it can never be eaten bare; here are many streams, and every
stream so deep and broad, that it can never be drawn dry: the sheep have been
eating in these pastures ever since Christ had a Church on earth, and yet they
are as full of grass as ever. The sheep have been drinking at these streams
ever since Adam, and yet they are brim full to this very day; and they will so
continue, till the sheep be above the use of them in heaven.

(2) He has provided shepherd^ to d^spense these Ordinances. The sheep can
neither feed themselves, nor water themselves, unless they have some to help
them. The Ministers of the Gospel do by virtue of their office, open these
pastures, and lead the sheep into them; they roll away the stone from the mouth
of these Wells, and draw water for them, that they may drink and be satisfied.
The Apostle tells us, that Pastou^s and Teachers are given of Christ, for the
edification of his Church, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. This was the work of the Prophers in
their (...) Apostles and Evangelists in their genera^on, and of Pastors and
Teachers, the present Ministers of the Church; yea, we shall find how severely
Christ bath charged them, under the pain of his highest displeasure, to be
diligent in feeding the flock. See 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. and he ^ath allured them by
the most glorious promises, that they should be careful in this work, See 1
Pet. 5. 2, 4. and John 21. 15, 16. And he furnishes them with gifts and
abilities for this very purpose. Vid. Luke 12. 42.

(3) He does by his Spirit bless the feeding which he has provided. He has
promised to be present with the sheep and shepherds, when ever they come to
feed in these pastures, and drink at these waters; he has promised (I say) to
be present to bless their fo^d and water for the good or their souls. He
promised it, Mat. 28. ult. and he does to this day make it good, he does walk,
and he will walk in the midst of the Golden Candle sticks, to bless the
seeding of the sheep to the end of the world. He has purchased the Holy Ghost
to be bestowed both on the sheep and shepherds for this very purpose.

2 A Shepherd k^owes (...). He knows the number of his sheep* and he knows them
particularly (...) sheep. Those phrases which are (...) concerning the sheeps
p^ssing (...) rod, ^ ev. 27. 32. and of passing under the (...) of him that
tel^eth them, Jer. 33. 13. show ^^e knowledge that good Shepherds have of their
flocks: they know one of their own sheep, though it be in the midst of a
strange flock; Jesus Christ knows his sheep exactly. He knows his people, qu^t
sint, and quinam sint, both the (...) ticular persons, John 10. 11. (...)
dungeons, prisons, though the (...) off, and the skin torn by persecution, yet
(...) they are within the knowledge of Christ. Consider four things.

First, He knows them as they are given to him by the Father in his eternal
Election. God the Father has given all the Elect unto Christ from eternity,
John 17. 6. By virtue of this donation does Christ know them. He has taken
them by number from the Father, and he is to surrender them by number to him
again. Their names are all written from eternity in the Lambs book of life,
Rev. 21. 27. while this book continues, they cannot wear out of the knowledge
of Christ.

Secondly, He knows them, as he sees in them his own image. Every sheep of
Christ does partake by grace of the image of Christ. There is a conformity of
likeness between him and them. His Fathers Name is written upon their
foreheads, Rev. 14. 1. What is this Name of God but that Divine nature, which
is from Christ communicated to every sheep of the fold? So long as this Name
abides on their foreheads (and it shall abide for ever,) they cannot wear out
of the knowledge of Christ.

Thirdly, He knows them as he sees the sprinklings of his own blood upon them.
Every sheep of Christ is washed white in the Lambs blood, Rev. 7. 14. They are
clothed with his righteousness for the justification of their persons. They
have his merits in which they are invested. Now so long as this garment
remains (...), and it can never be worn off, or ^^ollen off; Jesus Christ must
needs know them.

Fourthly, He knows them, as he remembers the service they have done fox him in
the world. Every sheep of Christ that has attained unto years of discretion,
has with care served Christ in its generation. They have often prayed to him,
they have often worshipped him, they have to their very uttermost laid out
themselves for his glory in the world, etc. Jesus Christ has recorded and set
down all their good actions; and as long as he remember^ their works, he cannot
forget or be ig^orant of their persons. This we may gather from that which
stands on record, Mat. 25. 34, ^5, etc. They have fed him in his hungry
members, they have clo^thed him in his naked m^mbers etc. Christ will never
forget these holy actions; therefore he can never forget the persons of them,
by whom they were performed. They have both done for him, and suf^ered for him,
therefore he knows them, and will know them

3. A Shepherd preserves his st^ck. It Is the work of ^ Shepherd to defend his
sheep. David bazarded his own li^e, to de^end his sheep from the inv^ding ^^on,
and ^^venous bear, 1. Sam. 17. 34. Shepherds watch their flocks by night as
well as by day, to pre^erve them from the dev^uring creatures. So did Jacob,
Genesis 31. 40. So did those Shepherds to whom the birth of Christ was first
pre^ched, Luke 2. 8. Jesus Christ is the desender of his sheep; he preserves
them carefully from them that would devour them. The Devil has been
way-laying them, and attempting upon them ever since the fall of Adam; and yet
the eye o^ (...) was so diligent and watchful, (...) ^ver able to get the least
lamb o^ (...) shall he ever be able to gain one o^ (...) they be all folded up
in heaven. The sheep of Christ are all sealed in their foreheads; so we read,
Rev. 7. 3, 4. Why are they sealed?

First, they are sealed for distinction.

Secondly, they are sealed for secrecy.

Thirdly, they are sealed for security. Neither men nor devils can break open
this seal. This similitude is used, Cant. 4. 12. A garden enclosed, a spring
shut up, a fountain sealed; under all those expressions is set out the fence
which Christ makes about his sheep for their preservation. Though Christ
sometime suffer their bodies to be torn and devoured by men, and though he
suffer their souls to be assaulted, yet he will not suffer their souls to be
destroyed. He did once lay down his life for them, John 10. 11, 15. and having
died for them, he will preserve them. There is a six-fold defense which Christ
sets upon every sheep for his preservation from Satan.

(1) His death. The grave of Christ is a fold, in which the sheep sleep safely;
his Sep^lcher is a hedge about the Church, I mean the virtue and merit of his
death. Jesus Christ by his death has overcome the Devil and all his Host, Col.
2. 15. he has taken him captive, and delivered the sheep out of his hands. Now
so long as the death of Christ is in force, (and in force it shall be for ever
and ever) the sheep shall be defended. The sea of Christ's blood does encompasse
every sheep of the fold; and Satan must either wade thorough, or dry up (...)
before he can annoy the sheep, as (...) eternal salvation. Roar and rage he
may, mine or tear in pieces he cannot; the bottomless sea of Christ's blood
flows continually about them.

(2) His intercession. The Scripture makes mention of the Advocateship of
Christ for his people, Heb. 7. 25. He lives for ever to make intercession;
therefore he is able to save, (...). This Advocateship of Christ has three
properties. First, it is full. Secondly, it is constant. Thirdly, it is
effectual. This intercession is the s^eeps safe-guar^. Christ must ^e outed
from the work of mediation, before any of his sheep can be eternally hurt; and
outed he cannot be, for his Priesthood is an everlasting Priesthood, Ps. 110.
4. Thou art a Priest for ever, etc.

(3) The presence of Christ. We learn from Scripture that Jesus Christ is ever
present with his sheep; he is not one moment absent from the fold; ^e by his
spiritual presence lodges with them every night, and walks with them all the
day. Of this presence of Christ the Holy Ghost speak^, Rev. 14. 1. He stands on
the Mount Sion, he stands not in a running posture, but in a watching posture.
The devil must drive Christ from his standing, before he can snatch away any of
the sheep, for he stands there as a guard to them.

(4) The mystical union between him and the sheep. The Scripture makes mention
of this union, John 17. 23. I in them, and Thou in me. Every sheep grows in the
Shepherds side, as a member of his body. Now this union is an indissoluble
union. As the natural union between the Son and the Father can (...), so
neither can the (...) Christ and the sheep. (...) and mighty hedge about the
sheep* (...) must drag Christ to hell, before he can (...) any of the sheep
thither; for they are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh.

(5) The promise of Christ. Jesus Christ has engaged his Word, and this
engagement is recorded in the Scriptures, that the gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the Church, Man. 16. 18. This promise is not a rash,
indiscreet; but a deliberate, sober, advised promise. It Is not the promise of a
fraudul^nt person; but of a faithful Savior: for he is the Amen, the faithful
and true witness, Rev. 3. 14. This promise is the Churches safety. Satan must
disannul this, before he can devour the sheep; and disannulled it cannot be,
for his Word endures for ever in heaven.

(6) His recommending of them to his Father. Jesus Christ a little before his
death, made his last Will and Testament. In this Testament amongst other things
he did solemnly comm^nd the tuition of his sheep to his Fathers care,
entreating him by all the dearnesse between them, that he would preserve them
from the devil, and all his evil designs against them. This is set down fully,
John 17. 11. 15. he had received them from the Father upon his recommendation,
v. 9. and he had kept them safe while he was with them; now he entreats the
Father, that as he had kept them upon his recommendation, so he would now
likewise for his sake undertake the tuition of them, v. 12. While I was in the
world, I kept them, etc. So long as Christ's Testament is in force, so long as
God (...) of Christ's bequeathment; and accept of i^ he will, for ever the sheep
shall be safe.

4. A Shepherd gathers his sheep when they are s^attered. When either by dogs,
or storms, or by their own vo^untary wandering they have been dispersed; the
Shepherds work is to gather them again, Ezekiel 34. 12. Jesus Christ is a good
Shepherd in this respect; the sheep are wanton, they wander and stray: Christ
reduces them, brings them to the fold. How often does every sheep wander? so
often as they wander. does Christ reduce them. You know the parable, Luke 15.
4, 5, 6 etc. And he will never leave, till he have gathered them into heaven,
where they shall scatter no more. He gathers them from their first dispersion
in unregeneracy, when they wander upon the mounts of profaneness and unbelief,
etc. When they are scattered by persecution, temptation, etc. he still gathers
them. He gathered them when they were scattered in Babylon; in the dispersion
in the Apostles days, of which you read, Acts 8. He has Gentile sheep
scattered, Jewish sheep dispersed; both these will he gather: the Gentiles,
John 10. 16. the Jews, 2 Chr. 16. 6, 7, 8, 9. One end of the Ministry is to
gather the scattered sheep, who were never converted. One end of the Min^stery
and discipline, is to gather them that wander, after conversion. See the office
of Christ to this purpose, Ephesians 1. 10. He is the Center in which all things
meet. All are to be gathered together by him, to him and in him; his meaning
is, all the Elect are gathered to a head, as the word signifies, (...), in
Christ who is the Head of the body; and at the^ day (...) he will gather them
all (...) that they shall be free from (...) Mat. 25. 31, 32, 33, etc.

5. Shepherds are to heal their sh^ep, Ezekiel. 34. 4. Christ is a healer.

First, by his promises; they are oil.

Secondly, By his threatenings.

Thirdly, by Church Censures, Christ's physic; that is wine, Luke 10. 34.

Secondly, Why Christ is called That great Shepherd? This I told you, was a
discriminating note to put a difference between him and all other shepherds;
both those that went before him, and those that should succeed him to the end
of the world. There is a vast difference between Christ and other shepherds. It
stands in the eight following particulars.

1. In regard of the dignity of his person above others. All other shepherds
were only men, Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers; the
best of them were but men. Though many of them had gifts and abilities
extraordinary, yet they were but men; but this Shepherd is both God and Man. He
is the Son of God, as well as the Son of Adam. Never was there any shepherd
in the Church before him; never shall any arise after him, of whom it can be
said, this Shepherd is equal with God. This is said of Christ by the Father
himself, Zech. 13. 7. Awake O sword, against the man that is my fellow, says
the Lord of Hosts, smite the shepherd. No shepherd beside this, had the honor
to be by oneness and identity of nature, the fellow and companion of God.

(...) the great Shepherd, in regard of the great (...) ^e has. Other
shepherds, although they had many of them singular abilities, both for feeding
and ruling; yet in respect of the abilities of Christ, they were but small.
Other shepherds, though they were richly furnished, yet they had not any of
them all kinds of gifts. God scattered his gifts and graces amongst them, in
some of one sort, in others of another sort, to maintain unity amongst them.
See what the Apostle says to this purpose, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
Some of them did excel chiefly in one thing, some in another; and then none of
them had any other then a stinted and measured portion either of gifts or
grace; so the Apostle tells us, Romans 12. 3, 4, 6. those that had the miraculous
gift of healing could not heal that way when they pleased; Trophimus have I
left at Milesum sick, 2 Timothy 4. 20. Paul would not have left him sick, if he
could have cured him miraculously. But now this great Shepherd ^ath ^ll k^nds
of abilities; he is as good at one part of the Pastoral work as at another; the
gifts which were scattered amongst the other shepherds, do all meet in this
Shepherd: he is as good at feeding as at ruling, and as good at ruling as at
feeding. To one shepherd is given the Word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge, etc. 1 Cor. 1^. ^. but now all these are equally given to Christ: he
is as exact in the word of wisdom, as in the word of knowledge: he can
perform equally, exactly the work of the Pastor, and of the Teacher. And then
as he has all kind of abilities, so he has an unlimited fullness of all, for
John 3 34. God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. He has not only the
fullness (...) but of the fountain; the fullness (...) head dwelling bodily in
him. And then (...) all the abilities of other shepherds are (...) themselves,
but from him; but the abilities of Christ are from himself. The Divinity has
filled the humanity with all those gifts which it has received for the work of
a Mediator.

3. He is the great Shepherd in regard of his propriety in the sheep. Jesus
Christ is not only the Shepherd of the sheep, but the owner of the sheep also.
He often calls them his sheep, Joh. 10. He is the possessor of the sheep, as
well as the feeder of the sheep. Other Shepherds are only shepherds, not
proprietors. They are forbidden to carry themselves as Lords over the sheep, ^
Pet. 5. 3. The sheep are said to be theirs only in a Ministerial way, as the
care and charge of them is committed to them; but they are Christ's in an
hereditary way: the Father has given them to him, John 17. 6. He has by his
own blood purchased them, Acts 28. 20. and they have voluntarily dedicated
themselves to him for a possession; they have by the Baptism dedicated
themselves to Christ. Other shepherds are only servants, but Christ is the
Lord of the flock. This is that which the Apostle mentions, as the difference
between Christ and Moses, Heb. 3. 5, 6. Moses was faithful in all his house as
a servant, but Christ as a Son over his own house. It Is the horrible pride of
that man of sin, that he dares to call himself the head of the Church, because
this title is only proper to Christ.

4. Other shepherds are sheep as well as shepherds. (...), Apostles,
Evangelists, and all the (...) which succeed them, are sheep as well as,
shepherds. They are shepherds Ministerially in regard of the Church; but they
are sheep Really in regard of Christ. They have as much need of feeding,
watering, and governing as any of the sheep have; by the same Ordinances by
which they feed others, are they themselves fed; by their preaching and
praying, they instruct, encourage, and comfort themselves as well as others.
But now Jesus Christ is only a shepherd; he feeds others, but has no need of
being fed himself. He teaches others, but he himself has no need of being
taught. Preaching, Prayer, Sacraments, all other Ordinances, are as useful for
other shepherds, as they are for the sheep; but they are not at all useful or
necessary to Christ. When he was on earth, he made use of them, to show his
obedience to the Law, to teach others their duty, to sanctify them to others
that should make use of them; he wanted them not then. He stood in need of
nothing for which the Ordinances were appointed; much less does he stand in
need of them now: but all other shepherds did stand in as absolute need of the
Ordinances as the sheep did.

5. Christ is the great Shepherd in regard of his Dominion over all other
shepherds. He is as truly the Lord of the shepherds, as of the sheep. He is the
Master of all the Shepherds which ever were in the Church, or which shall be in
the Church, to the end of the world, Eccles. 12. 11.

(1) They received their Authority from him, He made them shepherds of the
flock, Ephesians. ^. 11. He has set them over his (...) ^^vested them with all the
power they have (...) that do not come into Pastoral office; and authority by
him, they are not shepherds, but thieves, John 10. 1, 2.

(2) They are to act, and administer all they do as shepherds, in his Name, and
in his Name only. All acts of feeding, all acts of ruling are to be done in
the Name of the Lord Jesus. When Paul excommunicated the incestuous person, he
did it in this Name, 1 Corinthians. 5. 4, 5. In the Name of our Lord Jesus, (says
he) and by the power of our Lord Jesus deliver such a one unto Satan. All
Church acts of Government are to be done by the Shepherds of the Church in
Christ's Name, and by power derived from Christ. And then

(3) They are to be accountable to him for all their misdoings. He will judge
them for all their miscarriages, either toward one another, or toward the
flock.

6. Christ is the great Shepherd in regard of the success he can give to what
he does. Other shepherds may lead the sheep to the pastures, or drive them to
the waters, but they cannot make either successeful to the sheep. They cannot
give digestion, concoction, growth, 1 Cor. 3. 7. But now this great Shepherd is
able to do all this: he can give the sheep an appetite to eat and drink, and he
can by his blessing, make their eating and drinking successeful. He can make
the sheep strong, and lusty, and vigo^ous. He can exercise discipline, and give
them an heart to submit to it, and to be bettered by it: He can lay a plaster
to their wounds, and when he has done so, can say, the wound shall be healed.
He can call them from their wanderings, and speak so effectually, that they
shall return and wander no more.

7. He is the great Shepherd in regard of the great jurisdiction he has over
the sheep. All other shepherds that ever were or shall be, have but a limited
power, they cannot do what they will; they cannot make any rules for the
ordering of the flock; nor can they teach any doctrines to the flock, but what
Christ has taught, 1 Cor. 11. 23. But now Jesus Christ the great Shepherd has
a boundless, illimited Authority. He can do what he pleases with the sheep; he
can, he has made what Laws pleased himself for the ordering of the sheep. He
can cut, lance, wound, put them into fat pastures, into barren pastures, as he
pleases. His Dominion is absolute over them.

8. He is the great Shepherd in regard of the latitude and extent of his
jurisdiction. Other shepherds are shepherds over particular flocks; but Christ
is the universal Shepherd, the whole Catholic Church is his flock; he is the
universal Shepherd of the Church. That which the Pope ^alsly and treasonably
challenges to himself to be the Universal Bishop* is most truly ^ffi^med of
Christ. The Apostles were shepherds to the universal Church where they came,
but it was only to the Church that was in their generation, but Jesus Christ
has been, and still is the Universal Shepherd in all generations. He was the
Shepherd of the Church in the Prophets time, he was the Shepherd in the
Apostles days, and he will be Shepherd to the e^d of the world. This the
Psalmist foretells by way of Prophecy, Psalm. 72. 8. His dominion shall be from
sea to sea, and from the (...) of the earth. Ever since the Church wa^ Christ
was Shepherd; and while God has (...) in the world, Jesus Christ will continue
to be the great Shepherd thereof, Eccles. 12. 11.

The Uses concern both the inferior shepherds, and the whole flock of sheep.
First, Concerning the shepherds. Here are five duties.

1. This may teach them to act for Christ. It becomes all the Ministers whom
Christ has made shepherds, to consider that Christ is the great Shepherd. They
are but ministerial, inferior, subordinate sh^pherds; therefore whatever their
parts be, whatever interest they have in the hearts of the sheep, they are
still to remember that Christ is the great Shepherd, and that it is their duty
to lay out all their abilities and interest, in gathering together the sheep
unto Christ. This is the character of a true shepherd, in all his actings to
serve the great Shepherd who^e servant he is. John Baptist is an eminent
pattern for this; he did not serve himself but Christ, and therefore was
contented to be diminished, to be nothing, so that Christ the great Shepherd
might be exalted. See that famous Text, John 3. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. He humbles
himself to the dust, that by his falling Christ might rise.

2. This may tea^h them, not to Lord it over the sheep. Ministers though they
be shepherds in respect of the sheep, yet they are but sheep in respect of
Christ. This Caution the Apostle gives them upon this very account, in 1 Pet.
5. init. The great Shepherd may do what he will, but the inferior shepherd must
not do what he will, but what Christ will, 2 Cor. 4. 5.

3. This may encourage them in hoping for reward from Christ. The great
Shepherd does take an account of the diligence and faithfulness of inferior
shepherds: and if they be faithful in their work; whatever their success be,
the great Shepherd will abundantly reward them. He that has called himself the
great Shepherd, knows what belongs to the work of a shepherd, and therefore he
will consider him according to his work. This the Apostle tells the shepherds,
1 Pet. 5. 1, 2, 3* 4.

4. This should teach them to go to this great shepherd, both for Pastoral
Abilities and for success. As they should learn to carry themselves in the
managing of their Pastoral work by Christ's example the great Shepherd, to be
diligent, painful, watchful, affectionate as he was; so they should, when they
want strength, wisdom, encouragement, go to him. The great Shepherd who has
set them on work, will both strengthen them in the work, and bless them with
success, though not so much as they desire, yet with so much as shall make
them cheerfully go on with their work.

5. To learn of Christ, meekness, patience, painfulnesse, faithfulness,
forbearance, love to some, bearing with infirmities. Zeal to preach with
authority, impartiality, courage, self-disregarding.

Secondly, concerning the sheep. Here is both Instruction and Consolation.

I. Instruction; they may learn three lessons from hence.

1. Be ruled and governed by Christ. It (...) shepherds work to govern as well
as to (...), (...) signifies both to feed and to rule. The sheep is to follow
the shepherd; Those that are Christ's sheep in truth, do follow him, John 10. 4.
They follow him without disputing, they follow him without murmuring, they
follow him universally. It does not become a sheep of Christ to refuse the
Shepherds conduct. The Shepherd is wiser then the sheep; they will err if they
follow their own counsel, they cannot wander if they follow Christ. The sheep
are safe while they follow Christ, he never led any of his sheep into dangerous
places. When you hear the voice of the great Shepherd, be sure to yield
obedience. We are to obey the voice of subordinate shepherds, yet no farther
then they teach Christ's commands; but the voice of the great Sheperd is to be
obeyed in all things. Let me add but this one word to persuade you to it;
Jesus Christ will not be a feeding Shepherd, where he may not be admitted to be
a ruling Shepherd; the discipline of Christ is an act of mercy to the sheep, as
well as his feeding.

2. Create no other shepherds then what Christ sets over you. Christ is
therefore called the great Shepherd, because he appoints other shepherds under
him to feed the flock. It Is the duty of Christ's sheep to adhere to these
shepherds, and to reject all others though they come in Christ's Name. This has
been the practice of Christ's sheep heretofore, John 10 5, 8. The sheep did not
hear him. So Cant. 1. 7. Why should I be as one that turns aside by the
flocks of thy companions? Who are those companions of Christ? false shepherds
who come in Christ's Name, pretending themselves to be the companions of Christ,
when indeed they are nothing less. It Is the casting off (as much as lies in
us) the Authority of the great Shepherd, to make to our selves, or to follow
an^ ^ther shepherds then what Christ sends. But how shall we know such
shepherds as are sent of Christ?

First, If they preach Christ's Doctrine, and that only. He that preaches that
Doctrine that Christ never taught, is no shepherd sent of Christ.

Secondly, ^f (...) b^ according to Christ's life. He that live (...) to the
life of Christ, is not really to be look^ ^^on as a shepherd of Christ.

Thirdly, If he enter in according to Christ's Rule. He that enters not in by
the door into the sheepfold, but climb^th up some other wa^, the same i^ a
thief and a ^obber. They are our Saviors own words, John 10 1. 2. We read in
Scripture but of two ways of sending shepherds by Christ; the one was by
immediate commission, as Prophets, Apostl^s, Evangelists were sent. This kind
of Mission was ever accompanied with extraordinary gifts, either of miracles,
or foretellin^ things to come; whosoever will plead this call, must show it by
extraordinary qualifications. The other according to eslablished Gospel Rule
from Christ, by the Ministry of the Church, viz. by Ordination thorough the
imposition of the hands (...) Presbyters, of which we read^, Tit 1. ^ 1 Timothy 5.
22. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Acts 13. init. Acts 14. 23. I shall say but this one thing to
set this duty upon (...) Christ's blessing cannot be expected to (...) long with
those shepherds which he never created, Ierem. 23. 32. They shall not profit
this people at all. It Is spiritual theevery for any man to make himself a
shepherd after his own fancy, and to hear such, is to be accessory to this
spiritual theft, John 10 8.

3. In all things carry your selves as the sheep of this Shepherd.

First, Hear his voice. John 10. 3.

Secondly, Love his pastures. Rejoice in, and be thankful for that way of
feeding, which he has established in his Church. Christ could have appointed a
more externally glorious way of feeding his sheep: but this plain way of
feeding is most for his glory, best for your good. The Ministry of men best
suites with the feeding of men.

Thirdly, Bring forth fruit to him. Who feeds a flock and ea^e^h not of the
milk of the flock, 1 Corinthians. 9. ^? Do Christ what service you are able. This
Shepherd has bought you with his blood, and he seeds you with his blood: so
great a shepherd should have great increase of his sheep.

Fourthly, Know him. It Is the honor of Christ's sheep that they are known of
him, and it is their property, that they know him, John 10. 14. You must not
only know him in his natures, offices, etc. but you must acknowledge him. When
he is reviled, reproached, opposed, yet then must the sheep acknowledge him.
When it is death to own him, yet then (...) you ^^^dly, openly acknowledge him.
He that will not acknowledge the great Shepherd here, shall not be acknowledged
by him as a sheep hereafter.

Fifthly, reject not those shepherds which he sends, 1 John 4 6. Luke 10. 16.

II. For Consolation. This Title of Christ the great Shepherd, is very
comfortable for every sheep.

1. That he will provide subordinate shepherds. Though Christ be the great
Shepherd, yet the Church wants subordinate shepherds. He feeds the sheep not
immediately, but by the Ministry of inferior shepherds. Now he that gave them
will preserve them. He will continue them, he will increase their gifts, he
will bless them with success. For your good he has given them, for your good
he will uphold them; only you must by prayer importune him so to do. The
earnest prayer of the sheep to the great Shepherd, will procure a blessing upon
the endeavor of the subordinate shepherds.

2. In case of your present weaknesses. Christ is a healing Shepherd. You are
weak, infirm, ready to miscarry. Well, know this for your Comfort, that Christ
the great Shepherd will heal your wounds, will consider your infirmities. No
sheep are more carefully tendered by the shepherd then the weak and wounded
sheep, Esaias 40. 11. He shall gather the lambs with his ar^e, and carry them in
his bosom, and shall gently lead them that are with young. And then

3. In case of wanderings and straglings. You are ready to run from the fold;
you wander thorough your ignorance and blindness. Well, the great Shepherd
will gather you with his Arm; his Arm is very long, he ^an (...) ever the
shepherd will do for (...) will do for you. But I am unworthy, (...) that made
you sheep when you were (...) will not suffer you to want any thing that is
needful for sheep. Though you be unworthy to be used like sheep, yet Christ is
so faithful, that he will fulfill toward you all the duties of a good Shepherd.
He is a good Shepherd, as well as a great Shepherd, John 10. 11.

JOHN 15. 5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches. XIV. SERMON at Mary Wolnoth. L^^
October. 1^. 1652.

OUr Savior in this Chapter treats ^hiefly of three things.

1. Here is an exhortation to his Disciples, that they would continue constant
in that faith, into which they were implanted. This is from verse 1. to verse 8.

2. An exhortation given them to abound in good works, especially in that duty
of mutual love one to another; this is from verse. 8. to verse 18.

3. Encouraging arguments against the fear of persecut^^n, and the hatred of
the world; this is from ver. 18. to the end of the Chapter. His exhortation ^o
constancy and perseverance in the faith, is pressed by the parable of the Vine
and Branches. As the Branches when they are planted into the Vine, do continue
in it, so those that were by faith, and the Doctrine of the Gospel plan^ed into
Christ, ought to continue in him and bring forth fruits. The uttering of this
parable, is thought by Piscator, to be occasioned upon the (...) by our Savior
and his Discip^^^ (...) through the City. It was (...) from the beholding of
(...) teach spiritual Doctrines. From the woman of Samaria's coming to Jacobs
Well to dr^w wa^^r, our Savior takes occasion to speak f^lly of the water of
life, John 4. 7, 10. From the Disciple^ entreating of him to eat meat, he takes
occasion to preach of his zeal in promoting his Fathers work, John 4. 32, 34.
From the Peoples flocking about him for material bread, he takes occasion to
speak of the bread of life, John 6. 27. And here from the sight of a vine, as
he went up and down in Jerusalem, he takes occasion of preaching himself to be
the true Vine. That this Sermon was preached as he walked in the City, may
(says Pisc^tor) probably be gathered from ver. 1. Chap. 18. Where it is said,
that when he had spoken these words, he went forth with his Disciples over the
brook Kedron; This going forth (says he) cannot be understood of his going
forth of the house (for chap. 14. ver. last, he went out of that before) but of
his going forth out of the City, where he had preached this Sermon as he walked
up and down. It is not much material where this Sermon was preached, though it
is more likely, that it was preached in some house, then in the streets of the
City; especially if that be true which some conjecture, that that prayer, Chap.
17. which belongs to this story, was prayed at the institution of the Supper,
it is not (I say) much material. It Is Christ's Doctrine wherever it was
preached. In the words of the Text we have two things.

1. A de^enption of Christ in relation to believers. I (...) the Vine.

2. A dese^^ption of believers in relation to Christ. Ye are the Branches.

By Vine we are to understand not the vineyard or place planted with vines
(though the Greek word here used, as Calvin notes, does sometimes signify a
vineyard,) but we are to understand it of the vine, or plant it self;
especially of the root of the vine into which the branches are ingraffed.

By Branches we are to understand those slips which are by him that keeps the
vineyard ingraffed into the stock of the Vine. The words afford a double point.

1. That Christ is a Vine. 2. That believers are Branches of this Vine.
Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ is a Vine. We are not to understand it in a proper
sense, (for Christ, to speak properly is neither vine, nor door, nor rock, etc.
but the eternal Son of God, who is both God and man in one person.) but we
are to understand it in a Metaphorical sense; he is so called by way of
resemblance: there is a very great similitude between Christ and the vine.
Twice expressly does our Savior in this case call himself a Vine, v. 1. I am
the true Vine. and v. 5. I am the Vine, and many times covertly in those
expressions of abiding in him, to which he exhorts his hearers.

For the opening of this Metaphor, I shall show three things.

1. In respect of which, (...) called a Vine. 2. Wherein the resembl^nce (...)
what respects Christ is so^ Why he is (...) ^led so? 3. The excellency of
Christ above all other vines.
1. For the first. Christ is compared to a Vine in respect of both natures.
Although some resemblances do relate more chiefly to the Divine Nature, and
some more chiefly to the humane; yet the general is to be understood in respect
of both natures. Christ is a Vine in respect of the whole person, as he is
Mediator, God and Man. It will be made evident by this Argument. Christ is a
Vine in that respect and latitude, in which Believers are Branches ingraffed
into him. Now the union between Christ and believers is not between them and
the humanity of Christ only, nor between them and the Divinity only, but
between them and the whole person: Not only is the soul of a believer united
to the soul of Christ, nor the flesh of a believer to the flesh of Christ; but
the whole person of every believer is united to the whole person of Christ.
This is the first particular.

2. In what respects in Christ a Vine? In four respects.

1. In regard of the meannesse of his outward condition. The Vine is not like
the Cedar for height, nor is it comparable to the Oak for strength, it is but
mean to the outward view. Jesus Christ when he came into the world, did not
come with any great outward pomp and glory. There was indeed a star at his
birth, that ^^^ught the wise men from the East to worship him, but for his
outward condition generally it was very mean: he was born in a stable, laid in
the manger; he was born of a mean Virgin, and his life was but mean here on
earth. His Kingdom is not administered with that outward state and splendour
that earthly Kingdoms are. Jesus Christ did decline all outward glory and
greatness. See what the Prophet foret^ls concerning him, Esaias 53. 2. He shall
grow up before him as a tender plant, and as a root ^^t of a dry ground, etc.
The reason of this is that which he himself gives to Pilate, John 18. 36. His
Kingdom was not of this world. He came not to be Ministered unto, but to
Minister, Mat. 20. 28 He came to make others great, but to make himself little;
to fill others, but to empty himself, Phil. 2. 7. He came in the form of a
servant to be trampled upon, to be reviled, disgraced, and at last crucified.
External pomp was not suitable to such a de^igne. This is our first res^mblance.

2. In regard of his fruitfulness. The Vine is a fruit^^l plant. Though^t has
little pomp, yet it (...) much plenty. The fruitfulness of it appears three
ways.

1. It brings forth pleasant fruit. No plant ^ields more delightful fruit then
the Vine; the grape i^ delightful; the wine is a very pleasant thing: and what
is that but the blood of the grape, D^ut. 32. 1^?

2. It yields pr^fitable fruit. The blood of the grape, if it be moderately and
seasonably taken, does warm the heart and cheer the spirits. It does as the
Scripture speaks, make glad the heart of man, Psalm. 104. 15. (...) repa^rer of
natures detays. ^ts both food and Physic.

3. It yields great plenty of frui^. Other (...) bring forth single fruit, they
bring forth by one and one. But the Vine bring^ forth cluster^. There are
sometimes hundreds of berries in one cluster, and many of those clusters upon
one Branch. The Scripture uses the Vine to set out plenty of increase. Thy
wife shall be as the fruitful Vine upon the walls of thy house, Psalm 128. 3.
So Hos. 14. 7. Jesus Christ may well be compared to the Vine for fruitfulness,
in all these respects.

1. He brings forth pleasant fruit. All the fruits that grow upon Christ are
very pleasant, Cant. 2. ^. I sat down under his shadow (says the Church) with
great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste. All the trees of Paradise
did not afford such pleasant fruit as grows on this Vine. Consider what the
fruits of this Vine are, and it will be granted that they are pleasant. I will
name some of the fruits of this Vine. I shall present you with four clusters by
which you may judge of the rest.

First, the fruits of his death. There are many particulars in this cluster, I
name but six.

1. The satisfaction of Divine Justice. The appeasing of Gods anger toward the
Elect, Esaias 53. 6. Christ by his death did as perfectly satisfy the demands of
justice as though God had never been offended, he made full payment.

2. The reconciliation of believers to God. He has not only paid what justice
required, but he has perfectly made agreement between God and the sin^er; that
now thorough, Christ God is as well appeased, and is become as perfect a friend
to the believer as he was to Adam i^ Paradise. God has not in his heart the
least gr^dge toward his person. Of this the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2. 14, 15.
and Col. 1. 21, 22.

3. The working out of a complete righteousness for the sinner. Such a
righteousness as that the sinner may with a holy boldness challenge the Law of
God to find fault with it. Of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 17, 18, 19.
This is called in diverse respects righteousness of God, Romans 1. 17. The
righteousness of faith, Phil. 3. 9. Romans 4. 13. The righteousness of Christ,
Romans 5. 18.

4. The destroying of him that had the power of death. Of this you may ^eade,
Col. 2. 15. and Heb. 2. 14. Sa^ans supremacy over the soul is abolished, and
the captived soul made the Lords freeman.

5. The sweetning and per^uming of the grave, and the freedom of the sinner
from the fear of death. This fruit is mentioned by the Apostle, Heb. 2. 15.

6. The killing of the power of sin. Christ by dying for sin slew sin, so
as that it can never damn any of the Elect. Of this you may read, Romans 6. 4, 6.

Secondly, the ^ruits of his resurrection. These are many; I shall set a few
before you; these four.

1. Spiritual vivifi^ntion. The soul of a believer is raised up and empowred
to walk in ^^^^nesse of life. This the Apostle applies principally to the
resu^^^ (...) 2. 12, 13. You being de^^ i^ (...) He ^ath quick^ed together (...)

2. An assured evidence (...) from sin. This the Apostle (...) resurrection
of Christ, Romans 4. 25. He was (...) again for our justification. The
resurrection of Christ from the grave is a full proof that all the debt is
paid; the discharge of the prisoner is a clear testimony of the discharge of
the debt. The Prophet puts them together, Esaias 53. 8. He was taken from prison
and from judgment. And hence the Apostle argues against those that deny the
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 17. If Christ be not raised, we are yet in our sins.

3. An Argument of the resurrection of our bodies at the last day. If the Head
be raised, the body shall not lie for ever in the grave; the Resurrection of
Christ is a pledge of ours, as the first fruits were unto the Jews a pledge of
the ensuing harvest. The Apostle alludes to that, 1 Cor. 15. 20. And therefore
the Apostle says, that Believers are raised up together with Christ, Ephesians. 2.
6. They did rise in their representative when Christ was raised.

4. The Confirmation of our hope of heaven. This fruit of Christ's Resurrection
the Apostle sets down, 1 Pet. 1. 3. We are begotten again to a lively hope, by
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead. The Doctrine of Christ's
Resurrection is the nourishment of the grace of Hope.

Thirdly, The fruits of his Ascension. This is a very rich cluster. I shall
name a few, these five.

1. Leading captivity captive. The Apostle mentions this, Ephesians. 4. 8. By
^eturning to he^ven from whence he came, he did publicly ^ar^y his spoil with
him, he did declare that ^ll the enemies of our salvation were perfectly
brought under. As great Conquerours, when they have subdued their enemies, do
lead captive those whom they have overcome; so Christ the great Captain of our
salvation, did by his Ascension let his people see that their spiritual enemies
were all eternally vanquished.

2. The conferring of M^nisterial gifts, yea of the office of Ministry on his
Church. Of this the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4 8. The Ministry of the Church is a
fruit of Christ's Ascension. And it is as possible to pull him out of Heaven, as
to destroy that which he so solemnly settled at his Ascension.

3. The more ple^tiful effusion of his Spirit upon his Church. Of this fruit of
his Ascension our Savior speaks, John 16 7. If I go not away, the Comforter
will not come; but if I go away, I will send him. Christ when he departed,
powered forth his Spirit in greater plenty then ever it was before, to supply
the want of his bodily presence. And then

4. Preparations of Mansions for his members. This fruit is mentioned, John 14.
3. As a man when he has espoused a wife, provides a house for her abode
against the day of marriage: so Christ having espoused the Church, goes to
heaven beforehand to make all things ready for their entertainment against the
marriage day.

5. An assured evidence of their corporal As^ension. Christ ascended and (...)
as the forerunner of his Chur^^; (...) The Apostle tells us that Christ (...)
(...). Not only for ou^ (...) our stead to give us an undoubted (...) that we^
also shall personally entertain* the ascension of the head, is the praeludium
of the glorification of the members.

Fourthly, The fruits of his Intercession. These are very many. I shall name
these four.

1. Assurance of the Application of all his benefits. Whatsoever Christ
purchased by his death, ^e does actually apply to the Elect by his
intercession. The Prophet puts them together, Esaias 53. ult. This is one fruit
of Christ's intercession; believers are sure to be put into full possession of
all that which Christ has merited for them by his bloodshed. This some make
to be the meaning of that Scripture, John 14 3. They refer it to his
intercession. Christ by his satisfaction obtained for the Elect a right to
heaven, and by his intercession he does actually apply it to them.

2. The superseding and stopping of all Accusations made against them. The Law
accuses, Satan pleads the Law against believers, and hence accuses them.
Christ is interceding continually at Gods right hand to invalidate all these
accusations; There can no sooner come in any complaint, but Christ throws it
out. Of this fruit of his intercession the Apostle speaks, Romans 8. 33, 34.

3. Manuduction into the presence of the Father with boldness. Christ is at
Gods right hand for this very purpose, that when ever a believer has any
request to pre^er to God, he may take them by the hand and bring the^ to the
Father with confidence. This fruit of his inter^ession is set down by the
Apostle, Heb. 4. 14. 16.

4. Assurance of the acceptance of our weakest services. This fruit of his
intercession is mentioned, Rev. 8. 3, 4. The ascending of the incense out of
the Angels hand, before God notes the complacency that God takes through Christ
in the obedience of his Saints. Put these together and see whether Christ do
not bring forth pleasant fruit. All the Vineyards in the world cannot show such
grapes for pleasantness as these are.

2. He brings forth profitable fruit. The wine that comes out of this Vine,
does cheer, and refresh and strengthen, and make glad, and that not the outward
man, but the soul and conscience also, which no other wine can do. If I should
go over all these fruits again, and show you the advantage which believers
have by them, you would then say they were profitable fruits. Healing fruits
and strengthening fruits, and quickening fruits. They remove all fears, they
bring in all joy, etc.

3. He brings forth plenty of fruit. I have named many, but I have named but a
few in respect of what I might name. All the graces of his Spirit are the
fruits which he brings forth, says, love, meekness, perseverance, etc. All
the promises are his fruits; eternity will be too short to measure all the
fruits which grow on this Vine. This is the second resemblance.

3. In regard of the shadow which he casts over the Church. The Vine is a
shadowy plant, it is in regard of the (...) fittest of any plant for s^adowing.
(...) Arbors of the vine. Micah 4. 4. (...) shadow to his Church. The Scripture
calls hi^ a shadow, Esaias 32. 2. A hiding place from the wind, a covert form
the tempest, the shadow of a great rock in a weary land; the words are spoken
of Christ, as is clear from the first verse, Behold a King shall reign in
righteousness: he who is there called a King, is afterward called a shadow; I
sat under (Cant 2. 3.) his shadow: so Jesus Christ is called the Churches
only shadow.

1. He is a shadow to defend them from his Fathers wrath. God is in himself a
consuming fire. So the Apostle, Heb. 12. 29. His anger is declared against all
the sins of men. He can as well cease to be, as cease to be displeased
against sin in whomsoever it is. Now Jesus is the Believers shadow to
preserve him from being burnt by his wrath. Yea, Christ has by satisfying his
Fathers Justice for sin, quenched this wrath as to believers; and this
satisfaction is such a thick shadow, that whenever the believer retreats to
it, and sits under it, the wrath of God cannot reach him to hurt him, the
Screen of Christ's perfect satisfaction does continually stand between God and
the believer to preserve him from the fury of Divine anger. The wrath of God
must kindle upon Christ before it can kindle upon the believer; and upon Christ
it cannot kindle. He has once born the wrath of God, and by bearing it has
for ever quenched it. Since Christ has made himself a sacrifice for sin
once, God has many ways declared that he is well pleased with him. Abide
under his shadowy vine, ye that are believers, the wrath of God cannot come
nee^e you.

2. He is a shadow to defend them from the de^is^ rage. Satan is full of rage
against the godly. They have broke out of his prison, they have renounced his
service, they have proclaimed perpetual war against him and his kingdom, they
have by the grace of conversion blotted his Name out of their hearts, this
fills him with rage against them. He is continually way-laying them, he is
daily fighting with them, he never cease to tempt them, that he may destroy
them 1 Pet. 5. 8. Jesus Christ is a shadow to preserve his Church from the fury
of this destroyer. By his death he has broken his head, Col. 2. 15. By his
intercession he does safeguard his from all the attempts he makes upon them,
Luke 22. 31, 32. The devil must overcome Christ, he must pluck off all the
leaves of this Vine, before he can devour the soul of a believer. Retreat to
Christ by faith when Satan hunts you, and continue here, and you may laugh at
Satan and all his assaults.

3. He is a shadow to defend them from the fury of men. The world is a bitter
enemy to the servants of Christ. They cannot walk after the fashion of the
world, they cannot but reprove the wickedness of the world, both by their
lives and by their speeches too as they have occasion. This makes the men of
the world mad against them; you may see this both in the Old and in the New
Testament. In the Old Testament, Genesis 19. 9. they were ready to tear Lot in
pieces, because he reproved their filthy wickedness. In the New Testamen^
(...) 4. because the godly cannot drink of (...) ^^ters they do, therefore do
they (...) Jesus Christ is a shadow to preserve them from the worlds fury. He
did by his death obtain victory, as well over the world as over the devil,
John 16. 33. and he does shadow his Church in the world from the rage of the
world. Some particular members of his Church are perhaps overcome by the world,
but the body of the Church can never be overcome; And for the particular
persons or Churches that are ruined by them, their ruin tends to their own
personal salvation, and to the preservation of the whole body; the blood of
particular persons or Churches is a sanctified seed which tends to the
enlargement of the Church Universal.

4. In regard of the influen^ial Communications from him to the Branches. This
is that which is especially meant in this place; believers are compared to the
Branches, Christ to the Vine. As the Vine does communicate sap and nourishment
to the Branches, so does Christ communicate spiritual sap and nourishment to
believers. All the Churches springs are in Christ, Psalm. 87. 7. Believers have
nothing but what comes from him, Believers can do nothing that is good, but by
assistance from him. He is the strength of their strength, the wisdom of their
wisdom. God has put all their stock and portion into his hands. They have
their dependence on him, they have all their supply from him: This is that
which is laid down ver. 5. of this Chapter, Without me, or severed from me ye
can do nothing. Of this I shall speak more in the next Doctrine.

3. The excellency of Christ above all other vines. He has the pre-eminence in
these seven respects.

1. Christ is a Vine immediately of Gods planting. Other Vines are the
plantations of men. It Is true, In the Creation God did by the Word of his power
without the help of any creature, cause the Vine as he did all other plants to
spring, Genesis 2. 4, 5. But since the creation of man upon the earth, these
plants are the work of his hands. We read of a vineyard planted by Noah after
the flood, Genesis ^9. 20. and we see that since, to this day, vines are still set
by the hands of men. But Jesus Christ ^s the mere plantation of God alone, God
prepared him a body, Heb. 10. ^. God appointed him for the work of Redemption.
It could never have entered into the heart of man, nor into the understanding of
Angels to have planted the Son of God as a Vine, for the bearing and feeding of
mankind. This is that which our Savior himself declares, v. 1. of this
chapter. I am the true Vine, and my Father is the Husbandman. This order of
grace, that Christ should be the head of life and salvation, that the Elect
should be ingraffed into him and saved by him, is appointed and set by God
alone. He is the author of this Divine husbandry; Men wonder at it, the Angels
of heaven do to this very day admire it, and shall admire it to eternity; but
God himself is the only Inventor, and Author of it. It is a work of Gods
doing; and it is, and will be, and ought to be mavelous in our eyes, Psalm.
118. 23. Behold I ^ay in Sion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, etc.
Esaias 28. 16. This foundation had never been laid, this Vine had never been
pla^^^^ (...) self had not done (...) dry.

2. Christ is a Vine that does (...) ^^rish. Other vines are not always (...)
depth of Winter, they have neither leaves no^ fruit; when the vintage is over
they are empty vines. But Christ is a Vine that i^ continually green; the
vintage is never over with this Vine, he knows no^ winter. Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13. 8. He keeps his vigor
and freshness from generation^ to generation. Jesus Christ flourishes now as
gloriously as ever he did since the first day he was planted, and he will be as
green and lively to the end of the world as now he is. A few years put an end
to the life of all other vines; they have their infancy, a time when they do
not bear; and they have their full growth, a time when they are in their
height; and they have their old age, a time when they are past fruit: but
Christ knows no such changes; he did bear fruit the very first moment of his
planting, and there will never be a time when he will cease bearing. It is
always vintage-time with Jesus Christ. Never did the eye of man see him empty,
never shall eye see him withering. He is called a tree of life, Rev. 22. 12.
because neither mortality nor old age shall ever betide him.

3. Christ is a Vine whose fruits never abate. Go to the fullest vine that ever
grew upon the earth, and pluck off but one cluster, and there is a cluste^
less; if you take away but one berry, there is a diminution. But Jesus Christ
knows no abatement. All the Patriachs, all the Prophet^, all the Apostles, the
Sa^nts i^ the Ol^ Testament ever since Adam, the Saints in the New Testament to
this day have been feeding upon him, and yet there is not one clust^^ less
then there was at first. He has not lost one berry since his first plantation.
The reason is that which the Apostle mentions, Col. 2. 9. In him dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Fullness is in Christ, all fullness is in
him, all fullness is in him bodily, (...), that is personally, not only in
regard of efficacy and assistance as in the Saints, but in regard of
hypostatical and personal union, and then all this fullness dwells in him,
(...), dwells in him inseparably, dwells in him undecayingly. ^ather never so
much fruit from this Vine, and yet he still retains his fullness. We beheld his
glory (says the Evangelist) full of grace and truth, John 1. 14. All the old
Saints had been eating of him since Adam to that day, and yet he was still full
of grace, and so he continues as full as if his fruit had never been touched
with hands, nor tasted by any of his Elect.

4. Christ is a Vine of greater ext^^tion then other vines. Earthly vines are
but of a small compass. A few yards will measure both their length and
breadth; but Christ is a Vine of great dimension, his Branches reach all the
world over. He has some Branches in all Nations under heaven, Rev. 7. 9. This
Vine spreads it self into all the quarters of the world, Asia, and Europe, and
Afric^, and America; this Vine grows in all these parts of the world. The
Universal Church is the Vineyard, this Church is dispersed thoroughout all
Nations, and every member of this Church* is an (...) Vine.

5. Christ is such a Vine as (...) of his Branches. Other vines are often (...)
their branches, even of those branches th^^ were truly ingraffed; every child
can rob ^^ of its branches. But this Vine can never lose a Branch: some
branches there are that are seemingly ingraffed, they are ingraffed only in
regard of visible profession, these may be broken off and burned, yea they
shall be, ver. 6. of this Chapter. But for the Branches that are really
implanted, they can never be taken away. All the strength of men and devils is
not able to divide one Branch from the Vine. Every Branch of the Vine does tend
to the mystical perfection of the Vine; the Saints are the fullness of him that
fills all in all, Ephesians. 2. ult. He cannot lose one of them without empaiting
himself. The devil has been plucking and hewing, but he was never yet able to
break off the weakest Branch.

6. Christ is a Vine whose fruit seeds the soul. Other vines they only bring
forth fruit for the body. The outward man is cheared and nourished by the
grape, and by the liquor of the grape. But now Christ is a Vine whose fruits
are for the soul. Wine for the conscience, for the soul, comes out of the
fruit of this Vine. When the heart is cold by reason of inward fears, this Wine
warmes it: when the heart is heated by reason of violent temptations, this Wine
will cool it; when the soul is ready to die, this Wine will revive it.

7. Christ is a Vine whose fruits never surfeit. The fruit of all material
vines, if it be taken immoderately, breeds distempers and sicknesses. Noah
drunk of the Wine of his vine, yard and was drunk; Genesis 9. 21. many bereave
themselves of their health and of their wits too, by the excessive use of the
fruit of the vine; we have too many examples of this. But the fruits of this
mystical Vine have no surfeiting quality. A man cannot take too much of them.
Eat O friend drink yea drink abundantly O beloved, Cant. 5. 1. The sickness
and the death of the soul arises not from the immoderate using, but from the
refusing of the fruits of this Vine. ^. 8. A Vine that never costs any of his
fruits. He brings all his fruits to perfection.

The Uses of this Point.
1. This may help us to understand that speech of Christ, when he says, This
is my body, and my flesh is meat indeed, etc. John 6. 53, 54, 55. The Papists
understand it in a proper sense, as if the bread were changed into the
substance of his body, etc. They are angry with the Protestants because they
will not believe it. Amongst many reasons which overthrow that fond
interpretation; this and such like other figurative speeches may help us to
understand that. Christ sometimes calls himself the light, sometimes the door,
and here the Vine; not as if he were substantially changed into these things,
but to show the spiritual resemblance which is between him and these corporal
things. Why there should be any more change of substance, when Christ says,
this is my body, then when Christ says, I am the door, I am the Vine, I cannot
see, but God has upon the blind Papists fulfilled that threatening, 2 These.
(...) ^^dicially blinded their (...) antiscriptural opinions (...).

2. See the excellency; and (...) All these comparisons are but to convinc^
(...) carnal souls of Christ's transcendent excellency, Christ has in a
spiritual sense all the good properties of the Vine, and of all the fruits of
the Vine. He has all the excellencies of Wine. I name four.

(I.) Wine nourishes. It helps digestion. Christ is a great nourisher, the
soul would decay and dwindle to nothing, if Christ did not continually nourish
it and feed it.

(2.) Wine is a comforter, Psalm. 104. 15. Jesus Christ is the great comforter
of the soul. When the soul droops and languisheth, when it is cast down and
dejected, the love and presence of Christ does cheer it again, Ps. 21. 6. David
confesses it in Ps. 23. 3. He restores my soul. Jesus Christ is the souls
restorer.

(3) Wine emboldneth. Being a spiritual creature it does raise the spirits, and
being moderately used, puts courage into the fearful. Jesus Christ does
embolden the soul His presence and his grace fills the soul with a holy
courage; he that was fearful, dares now speak for God, and act for God; the
very tidings of Christ's coming expels fear from the hearts of his people, Esaias
35. 3, 4. There is no true valor in the soul till Christ be there. All the
souls confidence is built on Christ, and on Christ alone. We have no boldness
in prayer, no boldness in approaching to God in any Ordinance, but is
communicated by, and from Jesus Christ, Heb. 10 19.

(4) Wine is healing. Some kind of wines are prefer bed for the healing inward
of distempers, etc. The Samaritan poured oil and wine; Luke 10. 34. Christ is
a great heales, he heales broken hearts and wounded spirits, and all inward
distempers whatsoever. There is no health in the soul till Christ be there.
Unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise with healing
in his wings, Mal. 4. 2. Christ is that tree of life whose leaves are for the
healing of the Nations, Rev. 22. 2. Christ is an excellent and precious person.
Never look upon the Vine, never see the fruit of the Vine, but meditate on
Jesus Christ.

JOHN 15. 5. Ye are the branches. XV. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon. October. 24.
1652.

I Go on to the description of believers in reference to Christ, as it is laid
down in these words; Ye are the Branches. The Observation will be this, viz.

Doct. That all true Believers are spiritual Branches ingraffed into Jesus
Christ. Jesus Christ is the royal Stock, and all Believers are mystical
Branches of this Stock. The Scripture asserts this privilege in many places,
Romans 6. 5. If we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall be also in the likeness of his Resurrection, (...). Christ is there
compared to the Root, and Believers to the Branches or Cions that grow in this
Root. Erasmus therefore translates it very fitly, Insititii, ingraffed or
implanted. The Apostle sets down this mystery under another apt similitude of
the foundation-stone of a house, and the superstructory stones, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21.
Christ is compared to the foundation, and the Believers to stones built upon
that foundation. Ye are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, in (...) the whole building
fitly framed together (...) unto ^^ holy T^mple in the Lord. There are (...)
ways of being Branches of Christ. The one is by external profession only. In
this respect, all that are members of the visible Church are Branches of
Christ. Thus the Apostle says, that all the Gentiles when they were called
into the Church by the preaching of the Gospel, were graffed into Christ, Romans
11. 17. the Metaphor is often used in that Chapter. This is not that ingraffing
which I shall now handle. For though it be an honor and privilege to be a
branch of Christ in this general way, yet is it not a saving privilege. A man
may be a Branch of Christ in this respect, and yet at last be cut off and
burned. So our Savior says in the verse after the Text. The other way of
being graffed or made a Branch of Christ, is by the grace of union. Thus all
true Believers, and only true Believers are made Branches. This is that which
the Apostle elsewhere calls being members of Christ, Ephesians. 5. 30. and dwelling
in Christ, John 6. 56. and putting on Christ, Gal. 3. 27. That they are made
Branches of Christ, besides these testimonies of Scripture, it will appear
from the Sacraments, both of Baptism and the Supper. This is the plain
language of both the Sacraments.

1. Baptism speaks it. It Is the seal and sign of this ingraffing. This is
clear from two texts before cited; the one, Romans 6. 5. If we have been planted
together into the likeness of his death, How is that? see verse before. We are
buried with him by Baptism unto death. The other i^, Gal. 3. 27. As many of
you as have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. Nor as if all
baptized persons were really made Branches, but because this is sealed in
Baptism as the privilege of all Believers. They are as certainly made
Branches of Christ invisibly and mystically, as all that are baptized are made
members of the Church visibly and externally.

2. The Supper of the Lord does also speak it. Our eating and drinking of
Christ Sacramentally is a seat and pledge of our being ingraffed into him
spiritually. This is clear from that Text I cited before, John 6. 56. He that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. We are
therefore nourished by his flesh and blood, because we are united to his body.
In the handling of this Doctrine two things are to be opened by way of
Explication.

1. How we are made Branches of Christ. 2. What benefit we have by being so.
For the first, How men are made Branches of Christ. There are three things
which concur to this work of the souls ingraffing into Christ. The Word of God,
The Spirit of God, Justifying Faith.

1. The Word of God. The Word preached is the ordinary and common mediate
instrument, whereby this great work is wrought. By this Word is the soul first
cut off from the wild stock of corrupt nature, and planted into the true
Olive Tree, or Vine, Jesus Christ. Hence the work of planting is in Scripture
attributed to the Ministers of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 3. 6, 7. I have planted,
says the Apostle, Apollo watered. God indeed is the great Planter. So v. 1. of
this Chapter. I am the true Vine, and my Father i^ the (...). He is the
Master-Planter, the Ministers are subordinate-planters; We are laborers
together with God. 1 Cor. 3. 9. They are so called, because by the Word
preached, this great work is done, This the Prophet clearly affirms, Esaias 61.
1, 2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed
me to preach Christ; that they might be called trees of righteousness, the
planting of the Lord. These mystical trees are Gods planting; but the
instrument whereby they are made such trees, is the Word preached. Hence the
Word is called the incorruptible seed of regeneration, 1 Pet. 1. 23. As all the
Trees and Plants in the first Creation were set, and sprung up by the Word of
God, Genesis 1. 11, 12. So are all these mystical Branches ingraffed by the
Ministerial Word.

2. The Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost is the immediate Instrument whereby the
soul is ingraffed. It is the Spirit which gives efficacy to the Word, both to
cut off the soul from the stock of nature, and to implant it into the Stock of
grace. The Word would never be able to tear off any person from his first root,
if it were not edged and streng^hred by the Spirit of God. The Scripture
calle^h the Holy Ghost the finger of God, Luke 11. 20. compared with Mat. 1^.
28. He is so c^^^ed as for other reasons, so for this, because he is the
immediate instrument whereby God works in the hearts of his creatures.
Particularly for this work of ingraffing the soul into Christ, the Holy Ghost
is affirmed to be the immediate instrument 1 Cor. 12. 13. By one Spirit are we
all baptized into one body, etc. and have been all made to drink into one
spirit. And again, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. where the Apostle speaking of this great
mystery under another resemblance, says, that in Christ we are builded an
habitation of God thorough the Spirit. The same Spirit which builds us upon
Christ into one Temple, does ingraffe us into Christ as one Vine.

3. Faith. This is the immediate instrumental cause on man's part. Faith is an
uniting grace, it knits the soul to Christ, and Christ to the soul. Faith is
an incorporating grace, it does as it were embody the soul into Christ, making
it one with Christ, and Christ with it. This is that which the Apostle says. 1
Pet. 2. 4, 5. To whom coming as to a living stone, etc. Ye also are built up as
lively stones, etc. Two things are observable in that Text.

First, that the Saints are built together upon Christ the foundation-stone, an
holy house to God.

Secondly, how Christ and they are cemented together into one building; this is
by believing, set out by the expression of coming, which is used ordinarily for
believing, as Mat. 11. 28. The Spirit of God first works says in the heart of
a person through the Word, and then the soul is by the Spirit through faith
ingraffed into Christ, and made a lively Branch.

For the second particular, What advantage the soul has by being a Branch of
Christ, I shall here follow the Metaphor. The same advantage the Branch has by
being ingraffed into the Stock, has a Believer in a spiritual sense by being
ingraffed into Christ. I name these five.

1. Spiritual supportation. The Branch has this benefit from the Stock into
which it is ingraffed, that it is born up and supported by it. The Branch does
not bear the Vine, nor does it bear it self, but is born of the Vine. A
believer has supportation from Jesus Christ. We stand on Christ's legs, not on
our own. I can do all things (says the Apostle) through Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. 4. 13. The strength of the Branch is in the Vine; so is
the strength of a Believer in Christ. Who is this that comes out of the
Wilderness leaning on her beloved! Cant. 8. 5. I laid me down and slept,
(says David) I awaked, for the Lord sustained me. Many blasts pass over a
believer, many violent concussions and shakings is he exposed unto, partly by
reason of sin, partly by temptations from the Devil, from men; in all these
shakings he has sustentation from Christ into whom he is implanted. My grace
(says Christ to Paul) shall be sufficient for thee; for my strength is made
perfect in weakness, in 2 Cor. 12. 9. A believer may with confidence go to
Christ, and pray for support in all his weaknesses. A believer may go to Christ
and challenge support. Christ would never have made thee a Branch, if he had not
intended to support and strengthen thee, Esaias 41. 10. there are repeated
promises of sustentation. I will strengthen thee, I will help thee, I will
uphold thee. In doing, in suffering, in dying is a believer supported by
Christ. A believer never wants support; but when either through pride he will
not have it, or through slothfulness he will not (...) Jesus Christ.

2. Spiritual nourishment. The Bran^^ does not give nourishment to the Stock,
nor does it nourish it self, but it receives nourishment from the Stock. A
believer has nourishment from Jesus Christ. The Root feeds the Branch, it
conveys its sap to each Branch, whether it be great or little, whether it be
nearer the Root, or at a farther distance from it. Christ conveys proper
nourishment to every believer. The Apostle speaks of this, Col. 2. 19. The
whole body from Christ by joints and bands has nourishment ministered; the
Ordinances are the joints and bands by which nourishment is carried, but Christ
is the great treasury from whence it is carried. He nourishes Faith, he feeds
Hope, he nourishes love, etc. Of his fullness have we all received, and grace
for grace, John 1. 16. Every grace a believer has, would die and wither, if it
did not receive daily nourishment from Jesus Christ.

3. Spiritual increase. The branch receives its Augmentation from the Vine. The
graffe when it is first implanted, is very small; a child may break it with one
of his fingers: but by abiding in the Stock it grows till it come to
perfection. All a Believers increase is from Jesus Christ. It Is by and through
him that we grow from infancy to a perfect man. Two Texts of Scripture do fully
set out this benefit of our implantation; The one is, Col. 2. 19. In him the
whole body having nourishment ministered, increases with the increase of God.
The other is, Ephesians. 4. 16. Where the Apostle tells us, that by and from Christ
the whole body being fitly joined together, and compacted by that which every
part supplieth, makes increase of the body. That their knowledge is stronger
then it was at first, that the habits of grace are strengthened, etc. This is by
virtue of their implantation into the Vine. Christ is the believers breast; the
believer by sucking at the breast, grows from a child to a young man, from a
young man to an old man in Christ.

4. Spiritual fructification. The fruitfulness of the Branch is from the
fullness of the Root. The Stock sends out its sap to every Branch, and so every
branch buds, and blossoms, and brings forth fruit Abeleevers spiritual
fruitfulness is from Jesus Christ. Christ sends out his sap and fatness to
him, and then he does according to his kind, bud, and blossom, and bring forth
fruits in his season. This is that which follows immediately after the Text;
He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit, for
without me ye can do nothing. It Is (...), separated from me ye can do nothing.
David, Psalm 1. 3. tells us from whence our fruits spring, namely from our
implantation. He shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, which
brings forth his fruit in his season. So Psalm. 92. 13. 14. Those that be
planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God. They
shall still bring forth fruit in old age, etc. This preheminencie these
mystical trees have of the natural. Old age makes the natural tree barren; but
it makes the mystical tree the more fruitful. Consider what God says to his
people, Hos. 14. 8. From me is thy fruit found. This the Church acknowledges,
when she calls them Christ's fruits, Cant. 4. 16. They are borne by the
Church, (...) produced by Christ. The^ (...) fruits in regard of benefit, but
(...) Christ's fruit in regard of production. The Creation, the Preservation,
the ripening of (...) are from Christ. They are our fruits in regard of
Inhaesion, but they are Christ's fruits in regard of Procreation. That Christian
is either blinded with ignorance, or filled with malice, or swelled with pride,
who will not acknowledge his spiritual fructification to be from Christ.

5. Spiritual fellowship. The Branch by virtue of its ingraffing into the
Stock, has fellowship with the Stock, it does partake of all the good of the
Stock. A believer by virtue of his implantation into Christ has spiritual
fellowship with Jesus Christ in all his good things. God is faithful (says the
Apostle) by whom ye are called into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 1. 9. He that is a Branch of Christ is spiritually married to Christ. Hos.
2. 19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, in righteousness, in
judgemene, in loving-kindenesse, in mercies, and in faithfulness. Marriage
gives the wife an interest in all the good things of her husband. His honors,
his riches, his relations are now related to her. Her name is set upon all the
goods which are marked with her husbands name; where he is Caius, she is Caia;
where he is Master, she is Mistress. By our implantation into Christ, all his
possessions are ours. His honors are ours, we are called by his name; He
Christ, we Christians. His riches are ours, his relations are ours; I ascend to
my Father, and your Father; to my God, and your God, John 20. 17. Hereby, 1. We
communicate with Christ in his death, Romans 6. 5. All the fruits of his death
are ours, only by reason of our ingraffing into him. 2. Hereby also we
communicate with Christ in the fruits of his resurrection, Romans 6. 5. We shall
also be in the likeness of his resurrection. Hereby, 3. we have communion with
him in his life, Romans 6. 8. If we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall
also live with him. He will be for ever unto us a spring of spiritual life.
Because I live, you shall live also, John 14. 19. Herein do these spiritual
Branches differ from the natural: a natural branch may die, though the Root
live; but a spiritual Branch of Christ, can never die while there is life in
Christ his Root. Hereby, 4. Do we participate of the Spirit of Christ; the
Spirit of Christ is ours, because we are Branches of Christ, in 1 Cor. 6. 17.
He that is joined unto the Lord, is one Spirit. Consider but one Text, which
does fully show our spiritual fellowship from this very ground. It Is 1 Cor. 1.
30. Of him are ye in Christ Jesus, etc. There are three things in this text.

First, that believers are in Christ.

Secondly, that their being in Christ is from Gods Donation, Of him are ye in
Christ.

Thirdly, that by virtue of their interest in Christ it is, that they come to
have fellowship with Christ; he is to them wisdom, etc. because they are in
him. He is their wisdom, as he has revealed salvation to them, as he guides
them in the way of salvation. He is their righteousness, as he has perfectly
obeyed the Law commanding, and as he has fully satisfied the Law (...)
Sanctification to them, as he has (...) them his Spirit to renew them by
regeneration; and he is their Redemption, as he shall raise the^ up at the last
day, and glorify them. Th^^ much for Explication.

The Uses of this Point are of three sorts.
1. Information. 2. Exhortation. 3. Consolation.
1. For Information.

1. We may learn from this Metaphor, the nature of the union that is between
Christ and believers. The Doctrine of our spiritual union with Christ, is a
stupendous mystery, therefore the Holy Ghost makes use of natural similitudes
to set it forth. Among others he makes use of this of the Vine and Branches.
Which teaches us three properties of this Union.

(1) That it is a Real union. The Branches and the Vine are not united
appearingly, but truly. Christ and a believer are united, not imaginarily, but
really. Though it be an invisible union to the eye of sense, yet it is visible
to the eye of faith. Though it be a spiritual union, yet it is a true union.
Hence it is that the Name of Christ is communicated to all his members, 1 Cor.
12. 12. so also is Christ. Not Christ personal, but Christ mystical. If the
union were not in reality, Jesus Christ would never impart his name to any of
them.

2. That it is a very strict union. The union between the Vine and Branches, is
not a loose union, but a close union; by virtue of this union they are made one
tree. The union between Christ and a believer is a very close union. They are
not united together as a wooden leg is united to the body, only by external
bands and ligaments; but as the natural leg is united to the body by inward
bands, by those influences of Spirits, Animal and Vital, which descend from the
Head to the members. The believer is not tied to Christ only by the bands of
an outward profession, but made one with Christ by a real incorporation.
Christ and the believer are made one, not by mixture, as water and wine are
made one; but by marriage, as the husband and wife are made one. Next to the
union of the three persons in one nature, and the union of the two natures of
Christ in one person, this spiritual union between Christ and the believer is
the most glorious. This is the first inference.

2. We may from hence learn the high descent of true Believers. They are of a
very eminent extraction. However they be mean in regard of their natural birth,
yet in respect of their spiritual birth they are nobly descended. They are the
offspring of the great family of heaven. See what the Apostle says of them, 1
Pet. 2. 9. (...). What Heraldry is comparable to this! They are buds of the
celestial Vine. They are Branches of Christ; and by virtue of their union with
Christ they come to be made one both with the Father and the Holy Ghost, John
17. 21. That they may be all one with us. They are of the blood royal of
heaven. They are of ^in to all the persons of the (...). It Is an honor which
the (...) Heaven are not advanced unto. To which (...) the Angels said Christ
at any time, (...) Vine, ye are the Branches? Though they he above us in regard
of their nature, yet are we above them in regard of our union. T^^e Saints are
not contemptible persons: whatever they be as men, yet as Saints, as new men,
they are better descended then the best bor^e of the Sons of men. This is the
second Inference.

3. That it is an union wrought by God, not by us. What does the Branch
contribute to its union with the Root? What do we contribute to our union with
Christ? we neither cut off our selves, nor graffe in our selves. Man is passive
in his first conversion, Ephesians. 2. 10. (...).

2. For Exhortation. I shall direct it first to them that are Branches;
Secondly, to all others that grow upon their first Stock.

1. To the branches of Christ. I have from this Doctrine these four things to
commend to them, which I would entreat them to lay to heart.

(1) That they would be very thankful for this great privilege. Bless the
Lord that has made you branches. Ye are not branches by your natural birth,
but ye are made Branches by your spiritual birth. There is this difference
between the natural branches and the mystical. The natural branch is ordinarily
better then the stock into which it is ingraffed. Your Gardiners, if they can
but get a good graffe; they care not much how mean the root be. A crab-tree is
good enough to grass upon; but here it is quite contrary: the Stock is better
then the Branches. The best of us by nature are wild vines, as the Apostle
says of the Gentiles, Romans 11. 24. We were cut out of the Olive Tree which is
wild by nature; the more cause have we to admire the goodness of God the
great Husbandman, that such crabbed, sour, knotty, crooked branches as we were
by nature, should be implanted into such a sweet, glorious, honorable root as
Christ is. Behold here (as the Apostle says concerning the implanting of the
Gentiles) the goodness of God, Romans 11. 22. Our visible external implantation
is a very great mercy, our spiritual implantation far greater. We were made
Branches of Christ.

When we were by nature very unfit;

When we were very unwilling; And

When others as good as the best of us, were passed by, and suffered still to
grow on the sour stock of nature. Bless God for your rooting in Christ; your
rooting in him is the ground of all other blessings. This is the first. And
then,

(2) That they would be fruitful. The Scripture calls frequently for
plentifulnesse of fruit from the Saints of God, Phil. 1. 11. he would have us
to be filled with the fruits of righteousness. Great reason there is why it
should be so. We are ingraffed into a fruitful Vine: God may well expect we
should be fruitful Branches. Read what the Prophet speaks by way of prediction
concerning this very thing, Ezekiel. 47. 12. By the river shall grow all trees for
meat, etc. We should be careful to fulfill this Prophecy. God may (...) made us
branches of such a Stock, (...) very fruitful branches. We may well (...) our
implantation, if we be not (...) in is the excellency of the mystical (...)
that they are not any of them barren. (...) ^^leevers fruitfulness does
greatly honor (...) the Husbandman, and Christ the Vine; (...) his
unfruitfulnesse dishonours both, John 1^. 8. Herein is my heavenly Father
glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit, etc. Fruitfulness does distinguish
between the nominal disciple, and the real Disciple. He that is a Disciple
indeed, is a fruitful Disciple. We are therefore made Branches that we may be
fruitful. Of all branches the Vine branch is good for nothing if it be not
fruitful. I beseech you be fruitful. Let the fullness of the root appear in the
fruitfulness of the Branches. And be sure of this, that ye bring forth the
fruits of the Stock. Here is another difference between the natural branch, and
the mystical. The natural branch brings forth its own fruits; not the fruits of
the stock into which it is ingraffed, but the fruits of its own kind: but the
mystical Branch must bring forth the fruits of the root, the fruits of Christ;
His meekness, his patience, his heavenlinesse, etc. The end of this and all
other privileges is our fruitfulness. So the Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
Ye are a chosen generation, etc. To what end? That ye should show forth the
virtues of him that called you out of darkness into his mavelous light. This
is the second. And then,

3. That they ^^^ld be very holy. Take heed of wickedness you that are the
Branches of Christ. Mean and sordid employment is not fit for persons that are
of noble or royal descent. Sin is an unmeet employment for a Branch of
Christ. Holiness becomes thy house O Lord for ever, Psalm. 93. 5. The Apostle
presses it from this very Doctrine, 1 Cor. 6. 15. Shall I take the members of
Christ, and make them the members of an harlot? God forbid. For a Branch of
Christ to lie, or cheat, or defraud, how unseemly! For shame, let it not be
so. He that is borne of God sins not, 1 John 3. 9. He that abides in him
sins not, ver. 6. He sins not that unpardonable sin; He commits no
sin as others do, with delight, with allowance, with deliberation, etc.
Either disown sin, or disown to be Branches of Christ. When Satan tempts you,
when the flesh stirs you up to sin; say to them, and say with resolution of
spirit, such dishonorable employment is very unfit for him who is a Branch of
Christ. Let them that are branches of the devil do the devils work, but let
them that are branches of Christ do the work of Christ. He that says he
abides in Christ, ought himself so to walk, even as he walked, 1 John 2. 6.
And then,

(4) That they would acknowledge their whole dependence to be on Christ. The
branch does not depend upon it self, but upon the Vine. All a believers
dependence should be on Christ.

1. On him we depend in point of fruition. God has laid up all that ever we
shall have in Christ; All that the branches receive, they receive from the
root. All the good which a believer shall have, it is from Christ. Out of his
fullness have we all received, John 1. 16. And then,

2. On him we depend in (...) the good we receive is from him (...) we do is
done by him; he is the (...) good, both in a Passive sense, and in (...) sense,
Without the ye can do nothing, John (...) It is very unseemly, and very in
congruous (...) Branch of Christ to deny his dependence o^ the root, either by
Word or Action. To expect any thing but from and through Christ, to go about to
do any thing without power derived from Christ, is to deny our dependence on
him. And he that denies his dependence on him, shall have no benefit by him.
Christ in you the hope of glory, Col. 1. 27. He that will have either glory or
grace any other way then thorough Christ, shall certainly come short either of
grace or glory. He that will undertake to perform any action, to encounter any
temptation without actual rolling himself on Christ, shall find the action too
hard, the temptation too strong for him to encounter. A Christian may do all
things when Christ does strengthen him, but he can do nothing till Christ
enable him. It Is a dangerous thing not to depend on Christ. These two
inconveniences follow upon it.

First, He that does not acknowledge his dependence on Christ for what he does
will not give Christ the glory of what he does; And what Sacrilege is it to
rob Christ of his glory? And then

2ly. He that will not acknowledge his dependence on Christ does stop up the
current of the grace of Christ to himself. If we withold our
acknowledgements, Christ will withold his outflowings. Let this persuade all
Christians to own their dependence on Christ. And then,

(5) Strengthen your union with Christ more and more. Grow farther and farther
into Christ. The Apostle speaks of growing up into Christ, Ephesians. 4. 15. A
believer, as soon as ever he is implanted, is inseparably united; but yet the
union may be strengthened. As the tree shoots up in height, so the root grows
down-ward in depth; and every branch, the longer it grows in the stock, the
more firmly is it united. A believer must get faster and faster hold on Christ
every day. He must strengthen his faith in Christ daily. As our faith is
strengthened, so is our union with Christ strengthened. The Apostle tells us
this in that Col. 2. 6, 7. As ye have received Christ Jesus the Lord; so walk
ye in him, rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith. As our
faith is stablished, so is our union stablished. Every Sermon, every Prayer,
every Sacrament should cause us sink deeper and deeper into Christ. Thus for
the Exhortation as it respects them that are Branches of Christ.

2. To them that are not branches. That they would endeavor to be implanted. I
know a Christian is merely passive in his first conversion; the grace of
conversion is preventing grace, yet something may be done. The Word of God, I
told you, is the mediate instrument of our implantation. Wait constantly on
this Word; when ye come to it, lift up your hearts to God, and get others to
join with you, that God would cut you off from the stock of the wild vine, and
implant you into Christ. Sigh after Christ; when Christ lays hold on you by his
Spirit to cut you off, do not resist. Cut your selves off from sinful acts, and
God may cut you off from a sinful cool. This is (...) ^^hortation.

3. For Cons^lati^^ This Doctri^^ (...) are branches of Christ affords many
(...) of Comfort. There are four springs, (...) to believers, arising from
four priviledge^* which redound to them from this relation the^^ stand in to
Christ. As

1. Surely Christ will be very sensible of all the wrongs which are done you.
They come very near to Jesus Christ, that lay violent hands upon his branches.
There is sympathy between the Root and the branches. There is sympathy between
Christ and believers, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, Acts 9. 4? He that
hacks and hews the branches, is injurious to the stock that bears them. He that
hews and hacks at a believer, does hew at Christ who is the Root of a believer.
And

2. Surely Christ will revive you under all decayings and dyings. Believers,
these mystical hranches have their winte^s as well as the natural branches.
They lose their verdure and greenness sometimes thorough sin as other trees
do. Well, here is your comfort, Christ your stock will send out his sap, he
will by the communications of his influences, restore you to your luster and
greenness again: He will cause a fresh and beautiful Spring to succeed a
drooping Winter: He will make you fresh and gay after al your spiritual
witherings and failings. The Root owes this to the branch, to revive it, to
convey sap to it. Jesus Christ having undertaken this work and office, to be
the Churches Stock, does owe this to every believer, to communicate sap and
moisture to him. God has put fullness into him that he might send out to all
the branches. David had once lost his greenness; Peter was foully withered;
many other Saints have languished; but Christ has sent out his moisture and
revived them again He restores my soul (says David) and leads me in the
paths of righteousness for his Names sake, Psalm. 23. 3. A branch of Christ may
promise to himself that he shall have spiritual restorings from Christ after
spiritual languishings. Christ may for a time let his branches wither, but he
will not let them die. And then

3. Surely Christ will bear thee up in all shakings. Believers meet with may
sore tempests in this world, they have storms and earthquakes; fightings
without, and fears within. Jesus Christ will not suffer you to be broken off
by any of these storms. In this, the mystical branches exceed all the natural.
They may be broken off from the stock, but those cannot. You have seen
sometimes strong arms of mighty trees, broken off by strong winds, mighty
thunders, etc. But let it lighten and thunder never so violently, Christ will
secure these branches; Once a Branch, and ever a Branch. Simon. Simon, Satan
has desired to lift thee, etc. Luke 22 32. He that will pluck off a branch
must first pluck up the root. While the stock has strength to bear the
branches, they shall be borne up; only two things the Branches must be careful
of.

1. They must importune Christ by their prayers. They must beg of him what they
want, and he will bestow what he has promised. Jesus Christ cannot deny
importunate prayer.

2. They must clasp about him by faith. Faith is the soul* (...) Jesus Christ.
A hand (...) from Jesus Christ. And (...)

4. Surely Christ will (...) in glory. Christ is a Root of glory as (...)
grace. We are implanted into Christ in g^^ce, in order to our implantation into
glory, (...) we are made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints
in light, Col. 1. 12. He that is in Christ by grace, shall be with Christ in
glory, Col. 3. 4.

Luke 1. 69. Has raised up an horn of salvation. XVI. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth.
Lon. Aug. 29. 1652.

THese words are a part of that holy Song or Prophecy, which was uttered by
Zacharias the father of John Baptist, after the use of his speech was restored
to him. God was pleased to deprive him of the use of his speech for a time,
that he might correct him for his unbelief, as you read, v. 20. of this
chapter. The occasion was this; An Angel of the Lord is sent to him, as he was
burning incense in the Temple, to inform him that his wife Elizabeth should
conceive and bear him a son, v. 13. Zacharias knowing that both himself, and
his wife were now so old, that according to the ordinary course of nature they
could not expect seed, does in an unbeleeving manner desire a sign from the
Angel, ver. 18. the Angel gives him a sign; which was not only a sign, but
inflicted upon him as a punishment; Thou shall be dumb and not able to speak,
ver. 20. The child being born and circumcised on the eighth day, according to
the Law, God remembers his servant, and opens his mouth (...) so long shut,
(...) God fills his hear^ (...) by virtue of which (...) which begins, v. 68.
and (...) 80. This prophecy has two parts, (...) Preface or Introduction.

1. That that concerns Christ, v. 68. to v. 76. 2. That that concerns John,
v. 76. to v. 80.
(1) Concerning Christ, there are two things uttered.

1. He blessed God for the Mission of Christ. v. 68. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for he has visited his people.

2. He shows the benefit the Elect have by this sending of Christ. This is two
fold.

First, Redemption. This is amplified by many words which signify one and the
same thing. He has redeemed his people, he has raised up a horn of salvation,
etc.

Secondly, Sanctification. This is set down v. 74, 75. That he would grant us,
that being delivered, etc. We might serve him without fear in holiness and
righteousness, etc.

(2.) Concerning John there are likewise two things Prophesied.

1. The nature of his office; He should be an extraordinary Prophet, v. 76.

2. The work of this Prophet, with the success he should have in his work, v.
76, 77, etc. Thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his way, etc.
God that had raised him in an extraordinary manner, would bless him with more
them ordinary success, Many of the children of Israel shall he turn unto the
Lord his God, as the Angel had told him, (...).

The words which I have read, are a part of that Prophecy which is uttered
concerning Christ. They are a glorious title which Zachary gives him before he
was borne. A horn of salvation. From which title we gather this Note.

Doct. That Jesus Christ is a horn of salvation to the Elect. God has raised
him up for this very purpose, to be unto his Elect an horn of salvation. God
has raised up (says he) (...), he was not yet raised, but the time now drew
near; God had promised it. Faith looks on what God has promised, as a thing
already done. And then this phrase [In the house of his servant David] is
added, to show the accomplishment of the promise of Christ made to David God
had often promised David, that he would raise up one out of his loins, to sit
upon his Throne, and that his Kingdom in Christ should be a perpetual
Kingdom, Jer. 23. 5. Jer. 30. 9. Now at this time, the Kingdom of David was
even cast down, the Scepter was even departed from Judah; the promises of God
made to David seemed now to fail, his Kingdom was even broken, therefore is
Christ said here to be raised in the house of David, because in Christ the
Tabernacle of David was raised up, which was even fallen, according to that
Prophecy, Amos 9. 11. And therefore Christ is called also the horn of David,
Psalm. 132. 17. because he was raised up to fulfill the promise made to David,
for the perpetuation of his Kingdom. And he is called the horn of the house
of Israel, Ezekiel. 29. 21. It Is a (...) interpreters generally (...) his Elect an
horn of salvati^^.

In the opening of this, three (...) be explained.

1. What salvation is here meant. 2. Why Christ is called a horn of ^^^vation.
3. How he comes to be a horn of salvation to the Eect, to deliver them.
Christ is salvation, 1. Privatively. Christ is salvation, 2. Positively.

1. He is a horn of salvation Privatively, in three respects.

1. In respect of sin. 2. In respect of Satan. 3. In respect of men.
1. In respect of sin. Sin is a thing which does much endanger the souls
of the Elect. It Is indeed the only great endangerer. Neither the devil nor men
could endanger them, if it were not for sins which betray them into the hands
of both. There are three things in sin from which the Elect need to be saved.

(1) The guilt of sin. Guilt is the obligation of the sinner to deserved
punishment. This does every sin expose the sinner unto, Lev. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4.
Now Jesus Christ is salvation to them in respect of this. He has taken all
their guilt upon himself, and so freed them from it, so that though there be
upon them simple guilt, yet none that shall for ever redound upon the person.
The Apostle speaks of this salvation, T^^. ^. 14. He gave himself for us, that
he might red^^me us from all iniquity. This is that which the Angel tells
Joseph from the interpretation of his name, Mat. 1. 21. He saves them from then
sin, by being made sin for them, as the Apostle speak, 2 Cor. 5. 21. From
hence is the justification of our persons in Gods sight.

(2) The Dominion of sin. The Dominion of sin is the sovereignty and
command which sin exercises over all men by nature. Hence it is that they
are called (...). The Apostle uses this expression, Romans 6. 16, 17. To whom ye
yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom ye obey, etc.
Now Christ is a horn of salvation to them in this respect, for he does by the
communication of his Spirit undermine and abolish the Lordly dominion of sin,
and by the infusion of grace, and the communication of the Divine nature to
them, cause them to become the servants of righteousness. Of this the Apostle
speaks, Romans 6. 18. Being made free from sin, ye became the servants of
righteousness. This is the work of Sanctification. Of this the Apostle speaks,
Tit. 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might purify us unto himself,
etc. Christ takes off the yoke of sin, and puts on the neck the yoke of
grace. This the Apostle fully expresses, Romans 8. 2. The Law of the Spirit of
life in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of sin and death.

(3) The condemnation of sin. The wages of sin is damnation, Romans 6. ult.
Jesus Christ is a horn of salvation to his (...) for he has (...) the wine
(...) anger, and suffered the (...) their sins for them. Of (...) speaks, in
1 Pet. ^. 2^. Who his (...) sins in his body, etc. And the (...) affirms,
Romans 8. 1. That there i^ (...) to them that are in Christ Jesus. Thus in
respect of sin Christ is a horn of salvation.

2. In respect of Satan. Satan is a sworn adversary to the Elect. He goes
about continually like a roaring lion, seeking how he may devour them, 1 Pet.
5. 8. There are three things in respect whereof Christ is salvation to them
from Satan.

1. The Dominion of Satan. The Elect are by nature as well as others the
bondslaves of Satan, Ephesians. 2. 2. they are his servants by nature, and by their
own voluntary sinfulness they have enslaved themselves to his bondage more: Of
this the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Now Jesus Christ is salvation to the
Elect from this estate. He does at the conversion of the Elect, cut the cords
and unloose the chains, by which the devil holds them fast in bondage. Of this
our Savior speaks, Luke 11. 21. By his death he did triumph over him, Col. 2.
15. and at the moment of our conversion, he does actually put us into the
possession of this victory. Acts 26. 18. He does then turn us from the power of
Satan unto God.

2. The temptations of Satan. Satan as he tempted Christ the Head, of which we
read, Mat. 4. 1, 2, 3. so does he not cease to assault and tempt all his
members. The more visible Christ's image is in any person, the more violently
does the devil assault him. The Apostle speaks of this as in many other places,
so fully in Ephesians. 6. 12. Now in this respect Christ is salvation to them. He
stands by them, that these temptations may not prevail over them. He
interposeth himself between them and the teeth of this roaring lion; that he
may not have his will on them. Of this our Savior speaks, Luke 22. 31, 32.

3. The accusations of Satan. The devil is called in Scripture, The accuser of
the brethren, Rev. 12. 10. and he is a diligent creature at this work, for he
accuses them day and night before the Lord. There are many imperfections and
weaknesses in the children of God, they do too often step aside out of Gods
way, we have too many sad instances of the truth of this in Scripture which I
need not name. The Devil takes occasion from these to accuse us, not only to
men, but to God. He that turns every stone to hurry us into sin, does when
he has overcome us, represent all to God against us in the ugliest shape he
can, that he may hinder mercy from us. Yes, he is so malicious, that when he
can have nothing visibly to lay to our charge, he will pretend something, as we
see in the case of Job, Chap. 1. 9, etc. Chapter 2. 4, etc. Christ now is a horn
of salvation to us in this respect; He stands continually pleading for us at
Gods right hand; as soon as Satan puts in a Bill, Christ puts in an answer,
and so does cast out and nullify all his Accusations. Thus is he salvation to
them in respect of Satan.

3. In respect of ^^n. (...) by men, both in the^^ (...) spiritual estate.

1. In their outward (...). Men (...) against them: they (...) because they
(...) image, they have so much of the (...) Because I have chosen you out of
the (...), therefore does the world hate you, John 15. 19. The great ones of
the world, they rise up often against them, and vex them, etc. Now Christ is
salvation to them in this regard. Sometimes breaking the horns that devour
them. Sometimes melting the hearts of their devourers, making their enemies
their friends. Sometimes removing them from them that would break them; always
delivering them from the evil and hurt of the attempts made against them,
turning them for their greater and best good; He makes their vinegar better
then their wine. Of this the Apostle was confident in his own case, Phil. 1.
19. This shall turn to my salvation, through your prayer and the supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ. Christ is a horn even of temporal salvation to the
Elect in this regard. He makes your troubles as good friends to you as your
comforts; He makes your worst conditions work together for your best good.

2. In your spiritual estate. Christ is salvation to you from men in two
respects.

First, In regard of the corruptions of the world. Wicked men give wicked
examples, and by the example of one wicked man others are corrupted. Now albeit
the Godly are sometimes infected, in regard of some particular acts; yet are
they saved from the general corruptions of wicked men, amongst whom they live.
Jesus Christ keeps them from soyling themselves as others do. This is that
which is recorded of the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, Rev. 2. 1^. and of
those few in Sardis, chap. 3. 4. Th^s was Noah saved in that corrupt age in
which he lived, Genesis 7. 1.

Secondly, ^n regard of the evil counsels of men. Wicked men are of the same
mind with the devil their father. They are daily tempting, enticing, alluring
and persuading the godly to walk with them in their ways. Joseph was tempted
by his Mistress, Genesis 39. 7. This is put in amongst the Catalogue of the
sufferings of the old Martyrs, that they were tempted, Heb. 11. 37. Christ the
great Counselor of his Church saved all these from yielding to such
temptations. Though they are sometimes ensnared, yet they are again brought
off by Christ from those ensnarements, and Christ gives them power afterward
the more to resist them, and to abhor them.

II. Positively, Christ is salvation.

1. In respect of grace.

2. In respect of glory. Jesus Christ is eternal salvation unto the Elect. All
that salvation which has been mentioned before, is in reference to this which
is the upshot of all. He therefore saves them from sin, from the devil, from
men, that he may bring them to this eternal happiness. He is called in
Scripture eternal life, 1 John 5. 20. The Author of eternal salvation, Heb. 5.
9. The salvation of Israel, Psalm. 53. 6. The Captain of our salvation, Heb. 2.
10. To show that this eternal (...) from him.

1. He has merited this salvation for the Elect: It Is his purchase.

2. He keeps it for them, and them (...) 1 John 5. 11.

3. He will actually put them into full possession of it, when he returns from
heaven in the latter end of the world; of which he speaks, John 14. 3. Thus
much for the first particular, namely the extent of that salvation, of which
Christ is said to be an Horn. He is the salvation of the Elect Privatively from
all evil; Positively to all good, till he have brought them to heaven the place
of eternal salvation.

2. Why Christ is called an Horn of salvation. That we may come to the full
understanding of this, let us consider how the word is used in Scripture. Now
we find that this word does Metaphorically denote two things especially.

1. Glory and dignity; So we find it used, Lam. 2. 3. where the Church
complaining of the misery which had befallen her, has these expressions, The
Lord has cut off in his fierce anger all the Horn of Israel, That is,
whatsoever was glorious or excellent in Israel, God has now removed. So we may
see clearly if we read the first verse. The Lord has cast down from heaven
unto earth the beauty of Israel, he has covered the daughter of Sion with a
cloud, etc. and then it follows, He has cut off all the Horn of Israel. The
glory of God manifested in his appearings, when he brought Israel out of Egypt,
is expressed by this Metaphor, Hab. 3. 3, 4. His glory covered the heavens,
etc. His brightness was as the light, He had horns coming out of his hand,
etc. So Psalm. 9^. 10. My Horn, says the Psalmist; shall thou exalt like the
horn of an Unicorn; that is, thou shall increase my glory and dignity.

2. Serength and Power. So it is used, Lam. 2. 17. He has set up the horn of
thine Adversaries, says the Church, that is, he has increased the power and
strength of thine Adversaries. So when God threatens to weaken the power of
Moab, he does it by this Metaphor, Jerem. 48. 25. The Horn of Moab is cut off,
and his arm is broken. The breaking of the arm does fully expound the cutting
off of the Horn. And when God promises to give his people power to subdue
their enemies; he uses this expression, Micah 4. 13. Arise and thresh, etc.
for I will make thine horn Iron. Now then when Christ is called an Horn of
salvation, the meaning of the Holy Ghost is, 1. The glory of his salvation. 2.
The strength of his salvation.


First, The glory of his salvation. Jesus Christ is a glorious Savior; and the
salvation which he brings to his people is a glorious salvation, in three
respects.

1. Consider the person of Christ. God raised up many horns of salvation for
his people, when they were in distress. The History mentions them, Neh. 9. 27.
According to thy manifold mercy thou gave them Saviors which saved them.
Gideon, and Jepthah, and Sampson, etc. they are called Saviors, because they
saved instrumentally the people of God from their enemies. But they were but
mean Saviors in respect of Christ, his person (...) They were but men; He God
(...) person. Though his glory was (...) eyes of carnal men, yet they that had
spiritual eyes did behold it, John ^. 14. We (...) glory, the glory as of the
(...) begotten of the Father. If the person of Christ be compared with the
persons of other saviors, it will appear that he is a glorious Savior. All
other horns of salvation were but wooden horns, Christ is a golden Horn of
salvation.

2. Consider the nature of the salvation it self. It Is spiritual salvation,
it is eternal salvation. All those horns of salvation, which were raised up in
sundry ages for the defense of the Church, were but horns of outward salvation,
and of temporary salvation. They saved only the outward man, and that neither
but for a time. The Church was in as much peril after they had wrought
salvation for them, as ever they were before. When Gideon was dead, the
children of Israel fell into as great danger as they were in before. So after
the death of Jepthah, and after the death of Sampson, they were overwhelmed
with as great hazards as before, as you may read in the story in the book of
Judges. But now Christ is a Horn of salvation to their souls, as well as to
their bodies. He saves them from their spiritual enemies, Sin, Satan, as well
as from men. He saves them from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. 10. And then he
saves them for ever. The Church never can be, never will be in that danger
again as they were before this Horn of salvation was raised. He has for ever
perfected them that are sanctified, Heb. 10. 14.

3. Consider the glorious manner of the working of this salvation. Never any
salvation so glorious at this. There are three things in it.

(1) He saved the Elect by his own power. The power by which all other horns
of salvation delivered the Church, was by a power one of themselves; the
strength they had was none of their own, but the power by which Christ saved,
and still saves his Church, is from himself; the Divinity empowered the
Humanity, Psalm. 98. 1. His own right hand, and his own holy Arm has gotten
him the victory.

(2) He saved the Elect solely. Other horns of salvation had the concurrence of
many besides themselves, Gideon, and Jepthah, and Sampson, etc. They blew the
trumpet and gathered multitudes, to assist them in the battles which they
fought for the salvation of the Church. All Israel came after them: But this
Horn of salvation wrought the Churches deliverance alone, Esaias 63. 3, 5. I have
trodden the wine press alone, etc. He had no other Horn to help him; He entered
the field, and fought the battle alone, and by himself obtained the victory.

3. He saved the Church by his own death. Other horns of salvation delivered
the Church by the death of the enemy. Ehud slew Eglon, but he himself did not
die, Judges 3. 21, 22. Gideon show Zeha and Zalmunna the enemies of Israel,
Judges 8. 21. but he himself was not slain. But now this Horn of salvation got
the victory by dying, his Cross was his Conquest. He triumphed over
principalities and powers on the Cross, as the Apostle speaks, Col. 2. 15. He
subdued all the horn of the (...) of his blood. (...) life, his grave is our
victory. (...) do fully prove that Jesus (...) salvation; that is, a gloriou^
^^lvation (...) first.

Secondly, The strength of his (...) Christ is a strong Savior; the salvation
(...) he works for his people has strength in it. He has raised up a mighty
salvation for us; so some translations render this text. To this agrees that of
the Prophet, Psalm. 89. 19. I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have
exalted one chosen out of the people. When God committed our salvation to
Christ, he committed it to one that was mighty. Christ is not a reed of
salvation, but a rock of salvation. A strong Redeemer, as the Scripture calls
him, Ierem: 50. 34. Consider four things.

1. What strong enemies Christ was to vanquish, that he might save us.

(1) He was to save us from sin. Now sin was very strong, it grew fast and
deep in the heart. Sin is interwoven in the very constitution of every man.
Christ could not save the Elect, if he did not pluck up the very roots of
sin. He was to save them from the guilt, from the power, from the
filthiness, yea from the very being of sin. Had he not been very strong, he
could not have subdued such a potent enemy as sin was.

(2) He was to save them from the devil. The devil is called in Scripture, The
strong man, yea, the strong man armed, Luke 11. 21. One devil has more
strength then all the men in the world, and there are many Legions of devils
which are in the possession of the Elect by nature. The devils are called
principalities and powers, for the greatness of their strength, Ephesians. 6. 12.
Jesus Christ, if he had not been very strong, could never have routed these
mighty spirits. Consider,

2. The manner how he was to save us. He was to bear and undergo the wrath of
his Father for his Elect; a heavy burden, which they were notable to bear. The
grappling with sin and Satan was but easy in respect of this, to bear the
wrath of God without sinking. The Prophet speaks of this, Esaias 53. 5, 6. all
the punishment of the sins of men was laid on Christ. He treads the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, Rev. 19. 15. There
it is spoken of him as the Executioner of his Fahters wrath, but he did first
tread it as a sufferer. And he did bear all this alone. And he was to undergo
it without sinking and fainting. Had he not been a strong salvation, he had
perished under this burden. To bear the wrath of God, is a greater work then
the subduing of all the devils strength. He could have done this by a word; but
to satisfy the justice of his Father, could not be done without his personal
suffering. Consider

3. The multitude of the persons he was to save. Thousands and millions, an
innumerable multitude the Scripture affirms them to be, Rev. 7. 9. All the
Elect of God which did then live; yea, all that had been, all that should be to
the end of the world. Had he not been a strong Savior, he could not have saved
so many. And (which does show his strength more) All these were at first
unwilling to be saved by him. The Elect, when Jesus Christ (...) them, and to
apply the salvation (...) which he has merited for them, are (...) unwilling
to be saved; they run away from him, they like their condition so well, that
they desire not to be removed out of it. They ^^ject Christ, yea they fight
against Christ and the salvation that he brings, until he have subdued their
hearts, and of unwilling made them willing, by the power of his irresistible
grace. And then they willingly and freely adhere to him; Draw us, and we will
run after thee. Consider

4. The perfection and fullness of his salvation. His salvation is a complete
salvation. This is that which the Apostle says, Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save
(...) to the uttermost, o^ to perfection. What is it to save to the uttermost
or to perfection?

1. It Is to save the whole man.

2. It Is to save from all evil to all good.

3. It Is to save to eternity. Jesus Christ does perfectly save in all these
respects. He will never leave off his Elect till he has brought them to glory.
Christ is called a Horn of salvation, because he saves both Offensively and
Defensively; he saves his people, and wounds his enemies, It Is a Metaphor from
horned creatures, which do save themselves, and offend their assailant. Thus
much for the second particular; Why he is called an Horn of salvation.

3. How Christ comes to be an Horn of salvation. This is expressed in this word
(...), God has raised him up. This phrase notes these three things.

1. Gods decree whereby Jesus Christ was from eternity designed to this work.
The Scripture ^^lls that by a solemn Decree of all the three Persons, Jesus
Christ the second person, was designed for this work of salvation. He was set
apart by the determinate Counsel of God, to be the Author of salvation unto
the Church. The Psalmist speaks of this, Psalm. 2. 6, 7. Yet have I set my King,
etc. I will declare the Decree; the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee.

2. Gods Mission of Christ. As he was before all time appointed for this work;
so he was in the fullness of time sent to accomplish it. In the fullness of
time God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the Law, Gal. 4. 4, 5. Of this Mission the Prophet speaks
largely; Esaias 61. 1, 2, 3. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, etc. He has
sent me to bind up the broken hearted, etc. To this belongs that solemn
public promulgation of the Father, whereby he proclaimed Christ as his
salvation to the world, Mat. 3. 17. by an immediate voice from heaven, This is
my well beloved Son.

3. The Act of God in furnishing Christ with such qualifications as might
render him fit for such a work. As he established him by his Decree, and by his
public Mission sealed him for this work; so he did furnish him with all those
qualifications which were necessary for the carrying of it on for the good of
his Elect. This furnishing of Christ relates to two things.

1. The preparing of a body for him. A humane nature was necessary for him,
that was to be the salvation (...) must be made to Justice by the (...) that
committed the trespass. And (...) besides the Divine Nature was not capable of
saving that way that salvation must be wrought, namely by suffering. God
therefore fitted Christ with a body, in which body by the grace of personal
union the Godhead was caused to dwell. Of this the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10. 5.
Sacrifice and meat offering thou would not have, but a body have thou fitted
me.

2. By conferring upon the humane nature fullness of all those spiritual
qualifications and endowments which were necessary for him, to the carrying on
of his work. Strength, wisdom, judgment, mercy, love, patience and many other
graces were needful for this work of salvation. God therefore furnished Jesus
Christ with all these, Esaias 11. 1, 2, 3. And as he had variety of all these
graces, so did God bestow upon him a fullness, of all these; not a limited,
stinted fullness, as he bestowed upon others; but an unmeasurable fullness of
all grace; A fullness of redundancy, which from him might flow out to all the
Elect for the filling of them with a fullness of sufficiency. Of this the
Scripture speaks, John 3. 34. and John 1. 16. In all these respects God has
raised him up to be a Horn of salvation. Thus much for the opening of the
Doctrine.

The Uses of this Doctrine.
Use 1. For Information, in two things.

First, The miserable condition of those that are without Jesus Christ. Who are
without Christ? Not only Jews, and Turks, and Pagans, but all unbeleevers in
the Church. Whosoever is without true saving faith, is without Christ. It Is
faith that makes Christ Actually ours Faith unites us to Christ, and Christ to
us. Their misery is very great. Christ is a horn of salvation, the only Horn
of salvation; he that is without Christ, is without salvation: God has put the
salvation of men into Christ's hands, 1 John 5. 11. He has given us eternal
life, and this life is in his Son. And he that has the Son has life; but
he that has not the Son has not life, ver. 12. God himself cannot save him
that is without an interest in Christ. He has set down this way of salvation,
and he cannot deny himself. It is a question amongst the Schoolmen, whether God
could have saved sinners without Christ's satisfaction. They generally conclude
upon good grounds that he might; but now it is not so much as a question. God
has resolved, that whosoever is saved, shall be saved by Christ; and without
mutability, he cannot save men another way. Better never to have seen the
light, then to die without an interest in Christ. And he that does not believe
truly in him, has no saving interest in him, John 3. 18. How shall I know
whether I do truly believe or no? I shall here to help you, lay down a twofold
note of true faith.

1. It is a heart-purifying grace. This effect of faith the Apostle mentions,
in Acts 15. 9. Whosoever has true faith in Christ, will find his heart
purified and cleansed thereby. The efficient cause of the purification of the
heart is the Spirit of God, who is called the Spirit of Sanctification, 2 These.
2. ^3. The (...) cause is Christ's blood; 1 John ^. 7. The instrumental cause is
faith. This grace purifies the hear^^ as it is an instrument whereby the blood
of Christ which purifies, is conveyed to the soul* and as it does take hold
upon the promise of cleansing; the promise is, I will sprinkle clean water,
Ezekiel. 36. 25. Faith applies this promise and improves, and so purifies the
heart. If you have not purification of heart, you have not faith; and if you
have not faith, you have not Christ as a Horn of salvation. Now that heart may
be said to be purified, that has these three properties.

1. If it bewail impurity. Impurity that is truly lamented, is in Gods account
as if it were removed, Romans 7. 23, 24. If thy pollution be thy greatest burden,
thy heart is purified in Gods sight.

2. If it be cautious of every thing that may defile. A heart that is purified,
dares not willingly come near any defiling puddle, it will avoid occasions,
temptations of defilement, Job 31. 1. Carfulness of shunning defilement is an
infallible note of purification.

3. If it be through inadvertency defiled, it will not be quiet till it be made
clean. A purified heart cannot lie in any uncleanness when God has once
discovered it to him. Thus David, when he saw his pollution, with what
earnestness does he run to the Laver that he may be washed? Ps. 51. 2, 7.

2. Saving faith has very high and precious thoughts of Christ. This character
is laid down by the Apostle, in 1 Pet. 2. 7. No unbeleever can truly have
precious thoughts of Christ, nay they have low thoughts of him, as 1 Pet. 2. 7,
8. and Cant. ^. 9. Try your faith by this note. Now if Christ be truly precious;

(1) He shall reig^^ and rule over thee. His precepts will be as precious as
his promises. His Sovereignty will be as precious as his sacrifice; his yoke
will be as desirable as his merits; the Apostle opposes says and
disobedience, 1 Pet. 2. 7. Where Christ is disobeyed, he is not believed in.

(2) If Christ be truly precious to thee, his dishonours will pierce thy soul.
The dishonours done to him in his truths, worship, government, will be a
greater grief to thy heart then all the dishonours that are done unto thy self.

(3) If Christ be truly precious to thee, it will be thy meat and drink to do
him any service. Thou will make it thy study to set him up, and to make him
great where ever thou come.

(4) If Christ be precious to thee, all his Ordinances will be precious. Thou will have a high esteem of his Word, of his Sacraments, of his Sabbaths, and
that for his sake, who has instituted these things. If it be not thus with
thee, thou art an unbeleever; and if an unbeleever, thou have for present no
saving interest in him that is the horn of salvation.

Secondly, The impossibility of the perishing of any of the Elect. Their
eternal salvation is a thing of absolute certainty. They can never perish. They
may seem to be lost sometimes in their own apprehension. I said (says Jonah) I
am cast out of thy sight, Jonah 2. 4. He was in his own eyes, as if he had been
a cast-a^ay (...) impossible it should be so, as in other (...) so in this,
because Christ is the horn of their salvation. He that has wrought their
salvation is able to preserve salvation for them, and them for salvation. If
Christ be able to save you, ye shall be saved. When you look upon that in your
selves, that may seem to hinder your salvation, look upon that that is in
Christ to maintain your salvation. You shall be as certainly saved, as Christ
himself is saved. Father, I will that they whom thou have given me may be with
me where I am, that they may behold my glory, etc. John 17. 24. Your salvation
is now fully accomplished; he that was able to accomplish your salvation, is
able much more to apply it now it is accomplished. Consider these seven Notions
to make this out.

(1) Christ will not lose the merit of his blood, nor be deprived of the end of
his death; and he must do both these, if one of his Elect should miss of
salvation.

(2) Christ did not conquer for the Devil, but from the Devil; Christ will not
be at the charge and cost of redemption, and when he has done, suffer the
devil to go away with the spoil.

(3) Christ will not impoverish himself to enrich the Devil; and impoverished
he should be, if one of the Elect should perish: for every Saint helps to make
up his mystical fullness. So the Apostle tells us, Ephesians. 1. ult.

(4) Jesus Christ will not rob his Father to enrich the Devil. Now if any Saint
should perish eternally, God himself would be robbed; for every Saint i^ his
inheritance, Ephesians. 1. 1^.

The Lord Christ (5.) will not suffer the Spirits Temple to fall into the
eternal possession of the Devil. Now the Elect are the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor 6 19.

(6) Christ will not empty Heaven to fill Hell. Every Saint helps to fill
heaven.

(7) Christ will not bear a Name in vain. He will neither mock himself, nor
mock his Father, nor his people. Now if he should be called an Horn of
salvation, and not actually his Elect of salvation; he would be the greatest
mock that ever was in the world.

2. Use. Reprehension. Those are to be blamed that erect other horns of
salvation.

1. The Papists; they do set up their own works as a horn of salvation; at
least they join works and Christ together, as con-causes of salvation; the
Scripture lays the whole merit on Christ, they lay a part of it on works.
Greater dishonor then this cannot be done to Christ. If he be of himself
sufficient, what needs the addition of other things? but he is sufficient, Heb.
1. 3. chap. 7. 25. Hear what the Scripture says concerning those that look for
salvation by works, Gal. 5. 4. As many as seek to be justified by the Law are
fallen from grace. How did it fall out with Israel that followed after the Law
of works? the Apostle will tell you, Romans 9. 30, 31, 32. Yea I shall add this;
Jesus Christ will be a horn of destruction to those who will not make him the
sole horn of Salvation.

2. Much like to these are many ignorant Protestants, who think to be saved by
their duties, by their prayers, and by their repentan^^ (...) men should
consider, that Christ must (...) them from the guilt of all their duties, as
well as from the guilt of their sins. Our holiest services have a mixture of
unholinesse in them. Domine lava lachrymas, was Austins prayer. And it must be
ours. The filth of our holy things must be expiated by Christ, it is thorough
him that they are accepted. You may read this Gospel in the Ceremonial Law,
Exodus 28. 36, 37. The holy services we do are not accepted, because of any
worth that is in us or them, but because of the engraved plate which is upon
the forehead of Christ.

3. Use. Exhortation.

1. This should provoke all sinners to close with Christ. The great work of the
Ministry is to bring Christ and the soul together. They are the friends of
the Bridgroome, and it is their office to woo sinners to come in to Christ. Here
is encouragement enough in this text. He is a horn of salvation, a horn of Gods
raising; fly to him for salvation; salvation is to be had in Christ, salvation
is to be had no where else, Acts 4. 12. Under the Law offenders did fly to the
horns of the Altar, 1 Kings 2. 28. He that flies to the horns of this Altar
shall be sure to be safe. Only two things must be observed.

(1) All sin must be cast away; The wicked man must forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, Esaias 55. 7. Jesus Christ will not be a horn of
salvation to an impenitent sinner. He came not to save men in their sins, but
to save them from their sins, Mat. 1. 21.

(2) Christ's own terms must be embraced. Christ came not to save men upon any
terms, but upon his own terms. Now the terms of the Gospel are, A voluntary
resignation of our solvet to be at Christ's disposing: To do his Will, to submit
to his Scepter. The soul must say, as Saul did to Christ, Lord, what will thou
have me to do? Acts 9. 6. That soul that does cast away sin by repentance,
and surrenders himself to Christ, to be in all things ruled by him, shall,
whatever his condition has been before, find Christ an horn of salvation to
him. Do not say, my sins are great, etc. The greatest sin thou did ever
commit, is thy so long standing out against Christ, John 3. 19. Murder,
Adultery are great sins; but the souls refusal to come in to Christ is a
greater sin: those are sins only against the Law; this is a sin against
the Gospel, this is a sin against the Remedy, this is a sin that binds and
continues the guilt of all thy other sins upon the conscience. He that does
not close with Christ, says one of these things; either that he has no need
of Christ, or else that Christ is not able to save him.

2. This teaches Gods people whither to go, when their salvation is
endangered. Sometimes Satan by hot temptations, sometimes corruption by its
violent out-breakings, do so exceedingly prevail upon the servants of God, as
that in their apprehension their salvation is in a great hazard; they fear the
Crown will be plucked away from them. God lets them come into such jeopardy,
that they may exercise all their graces, and thrive the faster. They pray, they
watch, yet Satan gets ground; sin overpowereth them, so that the^ (...) to
conclude, that the hope of (...). In such case your only refuge must be to
(...) is horn of salvation. David when sin was (...) hard for him, goes to
God, Psalm. 65. 3. We must fly to this horn, and by his strength defend our
selves, and vanquish our enemies. There are several branches of this Horn,
which must be improved at such a time. His Death, his Resurrection, his
Ascension, his Intercession; All his Attributes, all his Promises, these are
several little horns growing out of this great Horn. This Horn will give you
strength to overcome, this Horn will keep what he has purchased for you. He
has pushed down Satan, sin, the world already; and if they get head again,
he can easily subdue them. He is not only the Horn of your salvation, but the
Captain of your salvation, Heb. 2. 10. (...). It was his free will at first to
undertake it: but having undertaken it, it is his office to perfect it. When
salvation is at a hazard; go to him, fight in his Name, and he will give you
victory.

3. Bless the Father for Jesus Christ. This holy man that pend this song, he
begins it with praises. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited
and redeemed his people; and has raised up an horn of salvation. Never think
of a horn of salvation, but have in your hearts and mouths a Benedictus
Dominus. If every thought of heart were a rapture, we could never sufficiently
extol the love of God in raising up Christ for us. Especially, if he have made
Christ an horn of salvation to us in particular. What storms did Christ go
thorough? what deeps did he wade over, that he might be to us an Horn of
salvation? He that is not thankful for Christ, can be truly thankful for
nothing. When God gave Christ, he gave all. Naturallists speak much of the
Unicorns horn; Christ is the true Unicorn.

4. Do not, O ye servants of God, despondingly fear the attempts of your
enemies. Gods Church, though it be the worlds great friend, yet meets with
many enemies; many bloody horns are goaring at it to destroy it; Look into all
the ages that are past, and you will find it. Pharaoh was a horn, and a bloody
one. Nebuchadnezzar was a horn. You read of four horns, Zech. 1. 18, 19. In the
New Testament you read of horns; Herod, the Heathen Emperors; these were
bloody horns. You read of a little horn, Dan. 7. 8. This is Antichrist. Oppose
this horn of salvation to all these horns of destruction. 1. This horn is
longer then they; they reach to one Kingdom, he the world over. 2. This horn
is stronger then they. 3. This horn is longer-lived then they, Vid: Micah. 4.
12, 13. No horn has yet been able to stand. None shall, Psalm. 75. 8. 10. That
horn of Christ, that with one push overthrew many Legions of Devils, is it not
strong enough to bring down men?

PSAI. 72. 6. He shall come down like rain upon XVII. SERMON. at Mary Wolneth.
Lon. Novem. 14. 1652.
the mowen grass.
THis Psalm was penned by David, as appears from v. 20. It was composed by
him a little before his death, when he had made his son Solomon King. Upon
the occasion of Ad^nijahs rebellion, we read in 1 King. 1. 33, 34, etc. that
Solomon was by the appointment of David anointed King of Israel and Judah.
David having set him in his Throne, does in the close of his life make this
Psalm, wherein he does prophetically foretell, and accordingly prays for the
prosperity of him and his Kingdom, under which he does also Prophecy of the
felicity of Christ's Kingdom, of which Solomon was a type. Here are some
passages which cannot be properly understood of Solomon, or his Kingdom; but
are chiefly to be understood of Christ and his Kingdom, as that in ver. 7, 8,
17, etc. He shall have dominic^^. His Name shall endure for ever. Therefore it
is to be expounded of Solomon and his Kingdom as they were typical of Christ
the true Solomon and his Kingdom. Here are three parts of the Psalm.

1. Matter of petition, v. 1, 2, 3. 2. Matter of Prophecy, v. 4. to 18. 3.
Matter of praise, v. 18, 19.
The Text falls under the second head, which I called matter of Prophecy. David
does describe by the Spirit of Prophecy the Kingdom of Solomon, but especially
the Kingdom of Christ, which was prefigured by Solomon's Kingdom. This
Kingdom is described two ways.

1. By the righteousness of it, v. 4. There are both the parts of
righteousness. The defending of the good; He shall judge the poor of thy
people, and save the children of the needy: The punishment of the wicked; He
shall break in pieces the oppressor.

2. By the blessed fruits of it. These are several, as namely,

1. The holy fear and reverence of God, ver. 5. They shall fear thee as long
as the Sun and Moon endure, thoroughout all generations.

2. The propagation of his Kingdom by the calling in of the Gentiles, ver. 8,
9, 10, 11. He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, from the river to the
worlds end.

3. The great blessing which should accrue to his Subjects, and the great glory
of the King. This is v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. He shall redeem their soul
from deceit, etc.

4. The great increase and edification of his Church. I name this last, because
it is in the text, and the verse following the text. He shall come down like
rain, etc. In which we have.

First, a Prophecy of Christ's communications to his Church. He shall come down.

Secondly, the nature of this communication. As the rain, as the showers.

He shall come down. (...) There is a fourfold descending of Christ which the
Scripture mentions.

1. His incarnation, the manifestation of himself in the flesh.

2. The abasing of himself in condition. He did not only assume humane flesh,
but all the natural infirmities of our flesh; he took upon him the form of a
servant, lived in the meanest and lowest condition of the sons of men. Of
this descension the Apostle speaks, Phil. 2. 6, 7.

3. The subjecting of himself to death. His abiding under the power of the
grave for three days and three nights. This is the lowest piece of his
descension. Of this the Apostle speaks, Ephesians 4. 9. In that he ascended, what is
it but that he also desconded first into the lowest parts of the earth? These
descensions or comings down of Christ are included one in another. When he took
our nature upon him he did truly descend. Not as if the Divine nature came
where it was not before, but because God did in the incarnation of Christ,
manifest himself after such a manner as he never had done before; For God
cannot properly be said to ascend or descend; he being a most simple and
spiritual Essence, is not moved from place to place as creatures are, but he is
said to ascend or descend in regard of the manifestation of his presence,
either by the effects of his presence, or by visible species or shapes, which
appearing or disappearing, he is said to ascend or descend. Although men might
look upon his descension as having re^erence to his incarnation* Yet

(4) There is another descension which we shall rather expound this of: the
distillations of his grace, and spiritual blessings upon his Church. These
indeed are glorious descensions. When Christ lets fall the influences of his
grace, then does he come down in a glorious manner. Every drop of grace is a
Metaphorical descension. Christ does spiritually come down, when he lets any
spiritual virtue drop down in his Ordinances upon the souls of his people. Of
this kind of descension the Church speaks, Esaias 64. 1.

Like the rain. (...) Some think our English word water comes from this Hebrew
word matar, because they are so near in sound one to another. Rain is the
distillation of a moist cloud, which being dissolved by the heat of the Sun*
and by the collision of other clouds, sends down its water to the middle Region
of the air. The reason why it falls down by drops, and does not come like a
torrent, is because the cloud is not dissolved all at once, but by little and
little.

Upon the mowen grass. Detondere, (...) from (...) The Hebrew word used here
has a double signification. It signifies a shorn fleece of wool, and it
signifies a meadow newly mowen. This has occasioned diverse readings; some
read it, He shall come down like the rain into a fleece of wo^ll. So the
Septuagint: they that follow this reading make it an allusion unto the dew that
fell upon Gideons fleece, Judge 6. 37, 38, 39. when all the land beside was dry,
and again upon the rest of the land when the fleece was dry* (...) read it
according to our translation. He shall come down like the rain upon the mowen
grass, This seems to be more agreeable to the meaning of the Holy Ghost;
especially because of the clause following, which is added by way of
Explication. As the showers that water the earth.

As the showers. (...). Rain and showers differ only as less and more; rain
signifies smaller showers, and showers signify greater rain, Deuteronomy. 32. 2.
Rain falling in multitude of drops is called a shower.

That water the earth. (...) The word Zarziph, which is here translated water,
is only used in this place in all the Bible; it signifies to water by
dispersion, to water by drops. The showers are dispersed in drops all over the
face of the earth, in a very regular and artificial way. God has divided
(says Job) a water course for the overflowings of waters, Job 38. 25. The
rain is from the cloud spouted out by drops after such a manner, that every
part has its share. Thus much for Explication.

The Observation is this.
Doct. Jesus Christ is to his Church as the rain to the mowen grass, as the
showers of rain that drop down upon the earth. Jesus Christ is the spiritual
rain of his Church. Jesus Christ is a mystical shower to the hearts of his
people. When God gave Christ out of his bosom, he did then, if ever, rain a
golden shower upon the world. The Prophets do use this Metaphor in their
predictions of Christ, Esaias 45. 8. Drop down ye heavens from above, and let the
skies pour down righteousness, etc. Though it be expressly a prediction of
that great return of the Church from their captivity. Yet as Calvin well
observes, it relates to the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, when all this should
be completely fulfilled; The heavens did never drop down salvation, they never
rained righteousness so abundantly, as when they rained down him who is the
Lord our righteousness. In the handling of this Doctrine I shall open three
things.

1. What that is which in Christ may be compared to the rain. 2. Wherein lies
the resemblance between Christ and rain. 3. Wherein lies the disproportion:
there I shall show how Christ excels all other rain.
For the first This Metaphor of rain does relate to three things of Christ.
It respects three particulars.

1. It has relation to his Doctrine. It is usual in Scripture for Doctrines to
be compared to the rain. My Doctrine (says Moses) shall (...) at the rain,
my speech shall distill as the dew, (...) Ordinarily the preaching of the
Prophets Deuteronomy. ^^. ^
^^ c^lled Dropping, Ezekiel. 20. 46. Drop thy word ^oward the south, and
Prophecy, Ezekiel. 21. 2. Drop ^^y word toward the holy places, Prophecy against
the land of Israel. I find diverse Expositors interpreting that Text of Christ's
Doctrine. Says Chrysostom, the coming down of the rain upon the grass, or
upon the fleece of wool, as he renders it, signifies the preaching of Christ in
the Synagogue. And certainly Christ's Doctrine (if ever the Doctrine of any
person) may be well compared to the rain. His Doctrine is from above, and it
has all the properties of rain. The Prophet makes the comparison, Esaias 55.
10, 11.

2. It has relation to the spiritual Government of his Kingdom. The
administration of judgment is many times set out by the descending of the
rain. Job speaking of himself as a Magistrate, uses this Metaphor, Chap. 29.
22, 23. My speech (says he) dropped upon them, They waited for me as for the
rain, and they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain. Evil
Governors are compared to a parching drought whereby the estates of the
Subjects are withered, they are like those destroying Gardeners that pluck up
the very roots of the herbs, but good Governors are like Gardeners that do
daily water the flowers, and so cause them to thrive. Jesus Christ is such a
Governor as seeks the wealth of all his Subjects, he drops down rain upon
them, whereby they are multiplied and increase. The Prophet speaks of this,
Hos. 6. 3. His going forth is prepared as the morning, he shall come unto us as
the rain; as the latter and former rain unto the earth. Christ's government
tends not to the impoverishing, but to the enriching of his Subjects. In his
days shall the righteous flourish, verse after the Text. Jesus Christ is not a
waster, but a waterer of the spiritual estates of those that are under the
Government of his Scepter. The Psalmist compares his Scepter to dew, Ps. 110.

3. It has relation to the influences of his Spirit. The influences of Christ's
Spirit are compared to the rain. The Prophet uses this Metaphor to set out
the distillations of his Spirit upon his C^u^^h, Joel 3. 18. It shall come to
pass in that day that the mountains shall drop down ^^to ^i^e, and the ^ill^
shall flow with milk, etc. When Jesus Christ h^d communicated* his Spirit to
the Church* See wh^t she says, Cant. 5. 5. I opened to my beloved, and my
hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers with sweet ^^^^lling myrrh upon the
handles of the lock. Christ did there come down as the rain; by the secret
virtue of his Spirit, he caused many precious drops to fall upon the soul of
his Church. Calvin expounds this Text of the secret distillations of Christ's
grace upon his people; so that whether we respect Christ's Doctrine, or his
spiritual Government, or the secret influx of his Spirit; in regard of all
these does he come down as the rain upon the mowen grass, and as the showers
that water the earth. This is the first thing. Qui respectus.

For the second, Quae propo^tio, Wherein stands the resemblance between Christ
and rain. I shall mention three particulars.

1. The rain is the immediate and proper work of God The Scripture does by
this put a difference between the true God, and Idols, Jer. 14. 22. Man can
neither set abroach the vessels of heaven to cause rain, nor can he stop them
when God has set them abroach. The key of the rain hangs at Gods girdle. Man
may speak long enough to the clouds before they give a drop of moisture, but if
God do but lift up his finger they are dissolved. As he brings forth the wine
our of his treasures, so does he draw the rain out of his Cellars. Jesus
Christ comes down like the rain in this respect, for he is the immediate and
proper gift of God. This rain had never fallen from heaven, if God had not of
his own accord bestowed it; had all the Angels of God been convened in an
Assembly, how to restore lost man, they could never have found out this way.
The Scripture attributes the whole work of giving Christ to God alone. My
Doctrine is not mine, Joh. 7. 16. but his that sent me. His Doctrine is from
God John 12. 49 His Scepter is from God, Psalm. 110. 2. His King he is called,
Psalm. 2. 6. He prepared him a body, Heb. 10. 5. This rain has no Father but
God alone.

2. The rain is very useful to the earth. Jesus Christ is very useful to his
Church. Consider this in five particulars

(1) The rain has a cooling virtue. When the air is heated through the
scortching beams of the Sun, the rain does refresh and cool it; we find a
great cooling after one nights rain, even in the heat of Summer. Jesus Christ
has a cooling virtue, when the soul burns with lust, when it is scortched
with fiery temptations, one shower from Jesus Christ cools it again. Jesus
Christ by the droppings of his Doctrine, and by the secret distillations of his
grace, quenches the unholy heats of the soul. God complains of his people;
that they are as an Oven heated by the Baker, Hos. 7. 4 The best of Gods
children find in themselves such inordinate heats. Sometimes they burn with
worldliness, sometimes they are hot with envyings, sometimes they rage with
passion and distempered anger. Jonah had a flame of anger in his soul, when he
fell so foul upon God, Chap. 4. init. There Is no way to extinguish such
burnings, but by the cooling drops of Jesus Christ; he sends down a shower upon
the heart, and ^o brings it to its own temper again. How did Christ cool Paul
when unconverted, Acts 9. 1, 3, 4.

(2) The rain has a mollifying nature. When the earth is like iron under our
feet by long droughts or hard frosts, a few good showers supple it, and make it
tender, Psalm. 65. 10. David speaking of the earth, says, Thou make it soft
with showers. Jesus Christ has a softening virtue; sometimes the heart is
hardened by the deceitfulness of sin. The soul is like the frosty earth, no
hammers will break it, no judgments will dissolve it; at such a time a few
drops from Jesus Christ will soften it. The heart of Peter was once grown as
hard as a stone, he denies Christ, forswears Christ, curses himself if ever he
knew him, Luke 22. 55, 56, etc. no sooner does Jesus Christ open the cloud, and
rain upon him, but he melts into tears, v. 61. The heart of the Church was
once frozen very hard. Christ comes and knocks, she sleeps, he continues
knocking, she gives him a scornful answer, Cant. 5. 2, 3. no sooner had he let
fall some drops of mirth, but she is softened, v. 4. Before, her bowels were
troubled at his knocking, but now her bowels are more troubled that she made
him knock twice. Christ's Word and his Spirit have a softening power and virtue;
the unconverted hardness of the heart is moll^fied by this rain. If Christ
would but now drop a few drops from heaven, the veriest flint in the
Congregation would be turned into a fountain of waters. How comes the stony
heart to be turned into an heart of flesh, but because these showers fall upon
it? One good shower of this rain upon the heart of a Judas would make it like
melting wax. And then,

3. The rain has a cleansing virtue. A good shower makes the very channels
clean, store of rain makes the very sinks sweet. You observe the fields have
a sweet perfume after rain. Jesus Christ has a cleansing and sweetning virtue.
Those hearts that are as filthy as sinks, those souls that are as nasty and
stinking as your common shores, after a good shower of this rain, are both
clean and fragrant. Mary Magdalen was a very sink of sin, she was full of
devils; yet when this rain fell powerfully upon her, how clean was she? See
what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. What a company of filthy creatures
are these? Fornicators, Idolaters, etc. yet v. 11. one good shower washes
these clean. Christ has a cleansing virtue. Let the soul be never so leprous
or filthy, a few good showers from him will make it clean; The Prophet calls
him a fountain for sin and for uncleanness, Zech. 13. 1. And then,

(4) The rain has a fructifying virtue. The feed which is sown does not
thrive, the grass in the pastures does not grow, if God withhold rain. All
the labor of the husbandman comes to nothing, if either the former or the
latter rain be denied. The Psalmist sets out this virtue of the rain, Psalm.
65. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. want of rain brings a famine upon the earth. Those
three years of famine, which followed one after another in the days of David,
were occasioned by want of rain, 2 Samuel 21. 1. compared with v. 10. The sons
of Saul were to be hanged, till God by sending rain, did signify that he was
appeased. The rain is the very life of the fruits of the earth; the clouds are
the sucking-bottle of the fruits of the earth; they dwindle if these bottles
continue for any space stopped up. See Jer. 14. 4, 6. There is in Jesus Christ
a fructifying virtue. He makes the barren soul bring forth, and be a fruitful
mother of children. See v. 16. after the text, John 15. 5. He that abides in
me and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit. The Word of Christ is a
fructifying word. The Spirit of Christ is a fructifying Spirit; the Church is
acquainted with the fructifying virtue of Christ, therefore she goes to him,
Cant. 4. 16. if Christ do not rain, there will be no fruits: but if Christ
will drop down his dew, the pastures will be green. All the labor and pains
of the spiritual husbandman will come to nothing, if the rain come not down
from Christ. And if he please to pour down showers, let not the Eunuch say, I
am a dry tree. Though your heart be as dry and withered as the rod of Aaron
was; yet if Christ will rain upon it, it shall both bud, and blossom, and
bring forth Almonds. The husbandman uses to say of his corn in a time of long
drought, that it is stocked, yet that corn when the rain comes, will shoot
up. Grace is sometimes stockt in the soul; yet if Christ rain plentifully upon
it, i^ will get up and gather strength again. David's grace was stockt, when he
lay sleeping in his blood, and uncleanness, for so many months together; yet
when God opened this cloud and poured moisture upon him, he revived.

(5.) The rain has a recreating (...). It causes a gladness and
cheerfulness in the heart^ of men, and it begets a kind of brisknesse in the
sensitive creatures: the birds chirp, the beasts of the field rejoice in their
kind: yea, there is a kind of joy in the very inanimate creatures. The
Prophet speaks of this in Psalm. 65. 13. The pastures are clothed with flocks,
the valleys are covered over with corn: they shout for joy, they also sing.
When rain comes after a long drought, there is melody made by all creatures in
this lower world. Jesus Christ has a cheering virtue, he does fill the soul
with joy when he comes down into the soul. The heart that was dead, and dull,
and heavy, is made pleasant and joyful, when these showers fall upon it. When
Jesus Christ comes to the soul, he brings joy to the soul, Esaias 9. 3. They joy
before thee, according to the joy in harvest, and as mon rejoice when they
divide the spoil. When the Eunuch had his soul bedewed with this rain, He
went on his way rejaycing, Acts 8. 39. The ground of his rejoicing you may see,
v. 32, 33, 35. Philip had acquainted him with Christ, and Christ upon Philips
preaching had rained down a soaking shower upon his soul, that created a holy
gladness in his heart. Christ is the only cheerer of the heart. He can remove
spiritual melancholy, he can take off spiritual heaviness, and put unspeakable
joy into the soul. It Is true, many of the members of Christ want spiritual
joy. This arises either from the restraining of this rain, or from their not
discerning of this rain. When ever the distressed soul shall come to the
feeling of these showers, it will rejoice and be no more sad. The Doctrine of
Christ is a cheering Doctrine. The whole Doctrine is called (...) a Doctrine of
good tidings. All the Ordinances of Christ are cheering Ordinances. I will make
them joyful in my house of prayer. God has planted Jesus Christ as a root of
joy to his people. As he is a plant of salvation, so he is a plant of
consolation, no joy is either real or lasting, which is not bottomed upon Jesus
Christ. That soul that has received this rain into his heart shall have some
joy here, and he shall have everlasting, full, soul-satisfying joy in Christ,
and with Christ, and from Christ in the other world. This is the second, Christ
is like rain in respect of usefulness.

3. Christ is like the rain, if we consider the manner of its descending.
There is a great similitude between the manner of Christ's descension upon the
soul, and the descension of the rain upon the earth. I shall instance in seven
particulars.

First, The rain comes down successively and gradually, now a little and then
a little. The rain does not fall down all at once; but it comes now a shower,
and then a shower, as the earth stands in need of it. God pierces now one
cloud, and then another in a pleasant succession. Jesus Christ comes now a
little and then a little, as the condition of the soul requires. A drop in one
Ordinance, and a drop in another Ordinance. A shower falls in this Sermon, and
a shower at another Sermon. This is that which the Prophet mentions, Esaias 28.
10. Precept must be upon precept, line upon line, here a little and there a
little. Now one comforting influence comes down and then another; now one
quickening impulsion, then another; now one promise is rained down, then another.

(1) Jesus Christ would have his people in a constant dependence on himself.

(2) He would have them wait constantly upon every Ordinance.

(3) He would not have them surfeit, either upon his Doctrines or comforts,
therefore he observes a succession in his distillations of good things upon
them.

(4) He would have every Doctrine, and every comfort soak into their hearts,
Luke 9. 44.

(5) Christ would have nothing lost, which he is pleased to bestow.

(6) Christ would endear every drop of his grace to his people.

(7) The souls of his people are like narrow mouthed vessels, they cannot
receive much at once without spilling.

(8) We are such bad husbands, that Christ dares not trust us with much at
once. For these and such like reasons, does he cause all he gives, to distill
in a way of succession. Jesus Christ does in a way of wisdom, parcel out all
the good which he raines down upon the souls of his people.

Secondly, The rain comes down irresistibly. When God does by his Word of
command speak to the cloud to distill its moisture upon the earth, it is not in
the power of all the creatures in heaven and earth to hinder its falling down.
As the clouds cannot open their own veins till God give the word, no more can
they ^^^^ch themselves when God sets them a bleeding. Jesus Christ comes down
upon the hearts of men with an irresistible power and efficacy, whether we
understand it of his Doctrine, or of his Scepter, or of the influences of his
Spirit, he does descend with a forcible and mighty power. His Word is called a
powerful Word, Heb. 4. 12. The Word of the Lord is quick and powerful, (...).
His Scepter is called a Scepter of strength, Psalm. 110. 2. The Lord shall send
the rod of thy strength out of Sion. His Spirit is a Spirit of might, and its
said to work mightily in the hearts of his people, Col. 1. 29. (...). Let
Pelagians and Arminians talk what their wild fancy dictates, of the
res^stibility of grace; the Scripture mentions no such thing: the rain will
come down whether men will or no; and let the earth be never so hard, it will
soak into it. When Christ by his Word and Spirit descends, it is with a mighty
power, that the soul is not able to resist it. I shall show the power of
Christ's Word, Spirit and Scepter, in three great works;

Conviction, Conversion, Consolation. To speak particularly to these.

1. For Conviction. When Christ comes down with an intention, thoroughly to
convince the conscience, of sin and righteousness; the soul though it may
stand out for a time, yet it is through the mighty smitings of Christ's Word and
Spirit so powerfully overruled, that it cannot but yield: we have an instance
of this in Paul, Act. 9. 6. Jesus Christ does with such an invincible evidence
come upon his conscience; that though he was in a violent motion carried on in
a contrary course, yet he yields up himself as a prisoner into his hands,
crying out, Lord, what will thou have me do? He has no strength to stand out
any longer, nay not so much as to dispute it with Christ. Of this convincing
power the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. Jesus Christ, when he comes down
with a purpose to bridle the conscience, does deal so effectually, that the
proudest sinner is brought upon his knees, and made to pass sentence against
himself. Yea, with such a mighty power does he come down upon the soul, that
even those who are not savingly brought in, have their mouths stopped, and are
unable to say any thing for themselves. Thus it was with those that brought the
woman taken in the act of Adultery, to Christ, John 8. 9. They were so mightily
convicted by the Word and Spirit of Christ, that they were not able to abide in
his presence, but shrunk away one by one as men self-condemned. Thus it was
when Christ descended in the word of Stephen, Acts 6. 10. Though they would not
yield, yet they were so powerfully convinced, that they could not resist the
Spirit by which he spoke. Christ does so demonstratively smite the conscience,
that carnal reasoning has no door of evasion. Of this powerful conviction we
may understand that of the Prophet, Esaias 11. 4. Where speaking of Christ he
says, that he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips shall slay the wicked. When Christ sets upon the work of
conviction; he comes with so much efficacy; that he smites some to submission,
all to silence.

2. For Conversion. When Christ descends upon the soul in the work of
Conversion; what strength does he put forth? the strong holds of sin are
battered down, every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
Christ, is brought into captivity, to the obedience of his Scepter, 2 Cor. 10.
4. Devils are cast out of the possession which they have kept for many years
without the least disturbance. Strong lusts are mortified, and the very
constitution of the soul is changed. What aileth thee O thou sea, that thou
fleddest, thou Jordan that thou wast driven back? ye mountains that ye skipped
like rams, etc. Ps. 114. 5, 6. The Prophet speaks those words of the powerful
entrance of the children of Israel into Canaan. The like is done by Christ in
the conversion of a sinner. Jordan is driven back, the whole course of the soul
is altered, The mountains skip like rams; There are many mountains in the
soul of a sinner, as p^ide, unbelief, self-conceitednesse, Atheism,
profaneness, etc. These mountains are plucked up by the roots in a moment, when
Christ begins the work of Conversion. See how the Prophet does allegorically
set out the powerful descension of Christ in this work, Esaias 11 6, 7, 8. The
wolf shall dwell with the lamb, etc. All the woolvish, ravenous and brutish
qualities and affections of the soul are powerfully subdued and brought under.
All that have known a person before, wonder at the great change which is
wrought, and he wonders more at himself then all others can do. Christ put his
bridle of power into his lips, and turned the current of his soul he scarce
knows how. When Christ came upon the heart of Elisha, what a mighty power was
put forth, 1 Kings 19. 19, 20, 21. Elijah casts his mantle upon him, the Spirit
of Christ descends in that action, and see how the man is changed. He left the
oxen and ran after Elijah, forsakes all his friends to wait upon the Prophet.
When Christ by his Word and Spirit descends upon the heart of the Jailer, what
a strange work is wrought upon him! Acts 16. 33, He takes the Apostles the very
same hour and washes their stripes. Had any one that had overnight seen him
beating the Apostles so cruelly as he did, told him, well, before the
morning-light thou shall wish that all those stripes had been upon thy own
body, thou shall before the Sun arise wash those bloody stripes with thy
tears; would not he have thought him mad? and yet all this came to pass. Jesus
Christ comes down with so much power, that though the will would stand out
against him, yet it cannot resist. Many a person comes to Church, perhaps with
an intention to laugh at the Preacher; Christ poures down a shower upon him,
which has so much power, that he that came a scorner, departs a mourner.
Zacheus is upon the Sycamore tree, Jesus Christ lets a few drops upon him, and
he is so powerfully subdued, that he comes down speedily at the first call,
Luke 19. 5, 6. Matthew sits at the Excise-office gathering tribute* Christ
raines down but one shower, and that has so much power, that the man leaves
all and follows him, he cannot stay to take one man's money more, he arises
from his profitable seat, and runs after Christ, Matthew. 9. 9, 10. Peter and
Andrew are busy (as Christ passes by) mending their nets: Christ distills a few
drops upon them in that call of his, Follow me and I will make you fishers of
men, and how mightily are they overpowered! they will not stay one tide more,
yea they will not give another stitch, but arise and follow him, Mat. 4. 18,
19, 20.

3. For Consolation. When Christ comes down with a purpose to comfort a sadded
heart, he comforts it with power. See the promise, Esaias 66. 13. I will comfort
you, and ye shall be comforted. The Consolations of the Word and Spirit of
Christ come with such efficacy, that the soul cannot shut them out, the
mourning is presently turned into dancing. The Consolations of Christ are
called strong consolations, Heb. 6. 18. not only in regard of the matter of
them, but in regard of the reception of them; where ever they come, they come
with strength. Hannah is in bitterness of Spirit for a time; Jesus Christ does
but, as she is at prayer, pour down a few fresh drops upon her; and she goes
away, and is no more sad, 1 Samuel 1. 18. Mary Magdalen stands at the Sepulcher
full of sorrow, she weeps many a brinish ^eare, John 20. 11. Jesus Christ does
but open the cloud and drop a few drops upon her, and what j^y is in her heart?
Take the most melancholy and persive sinner: though he be like Rach^l that
would not be comforted, yet one promise of Christ rained down upon him, and set
on by his Spirit, will make him lay aside his mourning garments. Though
Ministers cannot answer the objections of sorrowing Christians, ye^ Christ can
answer them so powerfully, that the soul shall have nothing to answer again.
This is the second particular.

Thirdly, The rain comes down voluntarily, undeservedly. The Prophet tells us
how the dew and showers fall; They tarry not for man, nor wait for the sons
of men, Micah 7. 5. The rain does not expect any humane concurrence or
causality. Though it come down upon us, yet it comes down without us. The rain
descends for our advantage, but not for our deserving. The distillation of
Christ comes down undeservedly on our part. The soul meets with many a shower
from Christ, when it deserves no such thing. The good either of Christ's
Doctrine, or his Scepter, or his Spirit are not merited by us. Should we have
no rain from Christ till we did deserve it, we should suffer an eternal
drought. The first grace of Christ is preventing grace. I am found of them that
sought not after me, Esaias 65. 1. And all the after-grace of Christ, is
undeserved grace. We do as little to deserve the influences of Christ, as we do
to deserve the distillations of the clouds. All that Christ does for us is
only from the mere motion of his own grace, Esaias 55. 1. Of his own will begat
he us by the word of truth, James 1. 18. We must say, Grace, grace to all the
soul-fatning drops that come from Christ. He forgets that Christ comes down as
the rain, that dreams of merit. All the sons of men want Christ, but none of
the sons of men can deserve Christ.

Fourthly, The rain comes down unexpectedly. Sometimes when the sky is black
with clouds, the wind rises and drives them away without so much as a drop:
At another time the rain falls plentifully when no shower is expected. Jesus
Christ comes down upon the souls of his people many times, when they look for
no influences from him; the Church observes this, Cant. 6. 11, 12. I went down
into the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, and to see whether
the vine flourished, and the pomegranates budded. Or ever I was aware, my soul
made me like the chariots of Aminadab. Here a shower fell upon her head when
she did not look for it. The soul sometimes comes to an Ordinance full of
misgiving thoughts, expecting no good; and before it depart, it is wet from top
to toe with the distillations of Christ's Spirit. The Church found it so, when
she had the least reason that could be to expect it, Cant. 5. 5. She might have
expected to have found flames of brimstone in regard of her dealings with
Christ, and behold she finds the droppings of sweet smelling myrrh. Sometimes
in the night-watches Christ raines upon the soul, when it, never expects any
such thing. David made his bed to swim, Psalm 6. 6. he could not have watered
his couch with his tears, if Christ had not first watered his heart with his
grace. Sometimes the soul comes to the Throne of grace parched with hardness,
perhaps as dry as the rock in the Wilderness, and Christ suddenly sends down a
shower, that it goes savour^y weeping from his presence. Did not our hearts
burn within us, while he talked with us by the way? Luke 24. 32. Jesus Christ
did des^end suddenly upon them while they were in conference with him.
Sometimes a servant of God takes the book of God into his hand, when his soul
is dry and withered, and before he has read half a Chapter, he finds the
clouds melting, and his soul bedewed with a shower of grace, never did a shower
comedown so suddenly, as the grace of Christ has sometimes comedown upon the
soul.

Fifthly, The rain comes down not for its own benefit, but for the benefit of
the earth. What advantage has the cloud by all the moisture that drops down
from it? It empties it self that it may enrich the ground. Jesus Christ does
by his Word, and Spirit, and Scepter, descend for the benefit of men. His
Doctrine, the influences of his Grace, are for the enriching of his Elect.
Christ came down at first in his incarnation for our sakes, 2 Cor. 8. 9. and
all his other descensions are for our good. For the filling of our empty
souls, for the quickening of our dead souls, for the comforting of our
straightened and distressed souls, it is that Christ comes still down into the
world. His preaching, his knocking, his striving is only and merely for our
benefit. What profit is it to God, that thou are righteous? Job 22. 3. Christ
has no more advantage by all the drops he sends down upon thy soul, then the
clouds have for all the showers they let fall upon the earth.

Sixthly, The rain comes down variously sometimes after a more stormy manner,
sometimes after a milder manner. Christ comes down sometimes by promises,
comforts, enlargments in a way of mildness; sometimes he descends in a way of
severity, by rebukes, threatenings. The Church has as much need of stormy
showers as milder showers, of cold rain as of warmer drops. Christ's more angry
drops are as useful for his people, as his more pleasant drops. His chiding and
frowning distillations make his comforting droppings more sweet. His milder
showers comfort us, but his stormy showers try us more; If Christ should not
rebuke us as well as comfort us, he would indeed lose us. The great rain of
his anger keeps us from straggling, when ^he small rain of his love occasions
us to wander.

Seventhly, The rain comes down plentifully. Not a drop or two, but whole
showers. Though it come not down all at once, yet as much comes down as is
useful for the earth. Jesus Christ comes down plentifully, he does not scant
the soul, he does not give one comfort, but many comforts. Eat O friends, drink
abundantly, Cant. 5. 1. He has enough in him to give. The soul wants more then
a little. He is not niggardly, but bountiful, therefore he gives plentifully;
and then as the rain falls down in many places at once, so does Christ. All
the earth for many miles together is sometimes rained upon at o^e and the same
time; the rain waters many fields at once. Jesus Christ comes down abundantly;
he can, if he please, water many souls, yea many Congregations at once. So
many Churches, so many Fleeces; so many Congregations, so many Pastures. Christ
can rain upon this Congregation, and he can water other Congregations at the
same time. Jesus Christ, if ^e please^^ an send down such a shower as shall
water every Congregation, yea every soul in the world a^ one and the same time.
As the drops of a shower cannot be numbered, no more can the drops which fall
from Jesus Christ upon his Church. If we receive not plentifully from Christ,
it is because we ask not plentifully.

For the third particular. Quae disproportio? And here I shall show the
excellency of Christ above all material rain, in six particulars.

1. Christ comes down from the highest heavens. The rain descends from the
visible heavens. Philosophers divide the air into three Regions; the highest,
the middle, and the lowest Region. Now they all hold that the rain descends
only from the middle Region: there it is generated, and from thence it
descends upon the earth. But now Jesus Christ comes down from the invisible
Heavens. There he sits at the right hand of God, Acts 5. 31. and from thence
does every drop which distills upon the hearts of men descend. This is that
which Peter tells the Jews, Act 2. 33. Being by the right hand of God exalted,
and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he has shed
forth this which now ye see and hear. All the good of his Word, of his Scepter,
of his Spirit, comes down from the Heaven of heavens. There the royal throne
is, and from thence does the rain fall. You must look above the highest Region
of the air, yea above the highest star in the firmament, if you expect any
drop from Jesus Christ.

2. The rain that descends upon the earth, does first ascend from the earth. A
cloud which is the womb of the rain, is a cold and moist vapor exhaled by the
heat of the Sun, out of the earth or waters, into the middle Region of the
air, where it is by the cold condensed, and there hangs, till by the heat it
be dissolved into a shower. So that the showers which do drop upon the earth,
are first drawn out of the earth, Psalm. 135. 7. But now all the drops which
distill from Christ, are generated in heaven. Jesus Christ is not beholden to
the earth to furnish him. What ever he distills, either in his Word, or by his
Spirit, is originally in and from himself. Out of his fullness have we all
received, and grace for grace, John 1. 16. Christ does not exhale vapors from
the earth, but sends down vapors from himself to the earth. All his materials
are in himself, and from himself; if Jesus Christ could not rain upon us till
we did furnish him with materials, we should be out of hopes of receiving one
drop from him to the day of our death. We can furnish him with materials for
fire and brimstone, but the ingredients of his comfortable rain are from
himself alone.

3. The rain is not necessary at all times. There are seasons when the
husbandman craves no rain. He is sometimes afraid of showers, and wishes for
Sun shine rather then showers. As snow in Summer and rain in harvest, so
honor is not seemly for a fool, Prove. 26. 1. But now Jesus Christ is never
unnecessary. This rain can never faill unseasonably. There Is no time but the
drops of Christ's doctrine come welcome to the soul. There Is no moment wherein
the influences of Christ's Spirit are not grateful to the soul. That day that
is not a rainy day, is a mournful day. The earth may be too full of rain, but
the soul can never be too full of this heavenly moisture. Si dixisti sufficit,
periisti.

4. The rain is s^metimes hurtful to the earth. Immoderate rain is as
prejudicial as immoderate drought. A poor man that oppresses the poor, is
like a sweeping rain that leaves ^^ food, Prove. 28. 3. As parching heat does
sometimes dry up the fruits of the earth: So excessive rain does often drown
the fruits of the earth. Sometimes men and cattle are drowned; sometimes houses
with their inhabitants are swept away by overflowing showers. But now Jesus
Christ is never prejudicial to the soul. If ever this rain do any annoyance to
men, it is by accident, because it is not received or improved. The
distillation of Christ's Doctrine is sometimes the savor of death, 2 Cor. 2.
15. but this is only because men are not bettered by it. The Scepter of Christ
does break many in pieces, Psalm 2. 9. but this is because men do not submit
to it. The influences and strivings of Christ by his Spirit, are sometimes the
occasion of the hardening of men's hearts, and so consequently of their
destruction: but this is, because they do resist and oppose them. This rain
has intrinsecally no hurtful destructive property in it. If it ever prove
destructive, it is because of some evil quality in them upon whom it falls.

5. The rain is no distinguishing Argument between good and bad. It falls
promiscuously upon the righteous and unrighteous. This our Savior tells us,
Matthew. 5. 45. The rain indeed sometimes falls in one place, when it does not
fall on another, Amos 4. 7. but on whatsoever City or Village it falls, it
comes down equally on all. As fat drops fall upon the sluggards field, as upon
the field of the most diligent man. But now this spiritual rain is more
distinguishing. Though all where the Gospel is preached have the same common
Doctrine, and all have some common influences of Christ's Spirit, yet there are
special drops distilled upon the Elect, which others never partake of. Some are
hardened, others are softened; some are rained upon to conversion, others are
rained upon for obduration; some are melted and dissolved, others are stiffned
and enraged. The peculiar drops of special grace are not communicated to all
alike from Jesus Christ. Arminians may talk of Universal grace, that Christ
does no more for Peter then for Judas; but the Scripture speaks of peculiar
grace which is not communicated to all. Why is it that thou will reveal thy
self to us, and not unto the world. John 14. 22. There is hidden Manna which
Christ never intended to bestow on all. There are secret drops which Christ
lets fall on one soul in a Congregation, and does not distill upon others. This
rain falls with a most exact distinction. He has mercy on whom he will have
mercy, (says the Apostle Rev. 2. 17.
) and whom he will he hardens, Romans 9. 18. Christ has excluded some from the
benefit of his prayers, John 17. 19. And they that are shut out of the benefit
of his prayers, are excluded from the saving merit of his blood. His
propitiation is not extended further then his mediation, 1 John 2. ^, 2. The
peculiarity of the descending of this rain is clearly showed by our Savior in
the answer he gives to that question of his Disciples, concerning his preaching
to the people in Parables, Mat. 13. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Though the rain of
Christ's Doctrine fall down indifferently upon all, yet the special grace of
understanding, applying and improving that Doctrine, is not given unto all.

6. The rain can make nothing spring where nothing has rooted. The showers are
able to make both grass, and corn, and other plants grow up; but if either
the earth be barren, or if there be no foundation of roots, the showers can do
nothing; the rain can make nothing grow up out of rocks. It cannot make wheat
grow where none was sown. But now Jesus Christ does not only make seed grow
where seed is sown, but he makes seed grow where none was sown. Christ by the
drops of his Doctrine, and by the influences of his Spirit, makes the rocks
bring forth fruit. He does not only cause plants to spring in good soil, but
by the dropping of his grace, turns a barren soil into a fruitful soil; one
good shower from Christ will make the barren Heath as good ground as the
fruitful valley. The Word of Christ is called seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23. it does not
only make seed grow, but it is seed it self. Christ by raining down, turns
the Thorne-tree into an Apple Tree. He changes the thistle into wheat. Other
rain brings up something where something was, but this rain brings up
something where nothing was. Other showers bring forth figs from Fig Trees, but
these showers bring forth figs from thistles. Other rain brings up a crop
where a crop was sown, but this rain brings forth a crop where none was sown.
Those three thousand you read of Act. 2. 37. had not one root in them when
Peter began to preach; but before he had done raining upon them, their hearts
were a nursery of all living plants.

The Uses of this Point.
1. How justly may Christ expect fruitfulness from his people. My beloved
(says the Prophet) had a vineyard planted in a very fruitful hill. And he
fenced it, and gathered out the stones, etc. and he looked that it should bring
forth grapes, Esaias 5. 1, 2, 3. It is but equal that they that live under
Christ's Doctrine and Scepter, and under the influences of his Spirit, should
bring forth both good fruit, and plenty of fruit; the people of God are
compared to a tree planted by the rivers of water, which brings forth his
fruit in his season, Psalm. 1. 3. Christ is spiritual rain, he is both
cleansing rain and fatning rain. They that live under such droppings, will be
one day found inexcusable, if they be not very fruitful; those pastures that
are manured every year, if they have seasonable Sunshine and showers, are laid
open to the wild champion if they be not fruitful. Remember seriously that of
the Apostle, and lay it well to heart, Heb. 6. 7, 8. No Argument can be used to
plead for those that live under these fat showers without abundance of fruit.

2. Behold the necessity of Christ. Is not rain necessary for the ground? are
not seasonable showers necessary for the fields and pastures? can any plants
live long if they be not watered? No more can any plants that are in the soul
live without continual supply from Christ. The Doctrine of Christ is not
unnecessary, the Scepter of Christ is not unuseful, the influences of Christ's
Spirit are not in vain. Christ in all these respects is as necessary to the
soul, as the rain and dew are to the earth. He is either blind, or proud,
that does not see an absolute necessity of Christ. Egypt is fruitful though it
have no rain; the yearly overflowings of the river Nilus is instead of
showers. Jesus Christ is as the river Nilus to our Egypt: did not he by the
overflowing streams of his grace water our hearts, they would neither bud nor
blossom, nor bring forth; He is both the husbandman that plants our fruits, he
is the soil that bears them, and he alone is the rain that waters them. Never
think of the need the earth has of the rain, but meditate of the need your
souls have of the droppings of Jesus Christ.

3. How blind and wicked are they that are offended at the Doctrine of Jesus
Christ! When Christ was on earth, many were scandalized at his Doctrine. And
there are many still even amongst Christians, that are offended at it. He is to
this day a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense, to them that stumble at
his Word, Romans 9. 33. Men find out many ways of stumbling at the Doctrine of
Christ. To instance in a few.

(1) Some are offended at the strictness of his Doctrine. Christ by his
Doctrine does condemn, not only the outward acts, but the inward motions of
sin in the heart, Mat. 5. 28. He commands the plucking out of the right eye,
etc. Duri Sermones durioris Magistri, have some said of these Precepts, which
are indeed the commendation of Christ's Doctrine.

(2.) Some are offended at the simplicity of his Doctrine. Thus the wise Greeks
were offended at him. The Apostle mentions this, 1 Cor. 1. 17. 18. They were of
opinion that Tully and Demosthenes did far excel the Doctrine of Christ for
eloquence.

(3) Others are offanded at the spirituality of his Doctrine. They think his
Doctrine is too mystical and sublime. This was that which made many take
offense at him, John 6. 51, 52, 60, 61. They thought it was a strange kind of
Doctrine, that Christ should give them his flesh to eat.

(4) Others are offended at the Divisions which follow upon his Doctrine.
Though the Doctrine of Christ be in it self a Doctrine of peace, yet
accidentally meeting with the corruptions of wicked hearts, its an occasion of
division, Luke ^2. 49. I am come to send fire on the earth, and Matthew. 10. 34,
35. Think not (says our Savior) that I am come to send peace an earth. I am
not come to send peace, but a sword, etc. These accidental divisions which
follow upon Christ's Doctrine, cause many to be offended at him; And if any can
receive his Doctrine, yet they are offended at his Government. This is a
general offense, Psalm. 2. 2. 3. Let us break their bonds asunder, etc. His
Scepter is too strict, too severe, etc. Let all that are offended with Christ
any way, know that these are groundless offenses. They are Scand^la accepta,
not scandala data. For Christ comes down not as poison to destroy men, but as
the rain to preserve and nourish men. Take heed therefore of being offended at
Christ; remember he comes down, both in his Doctrine and Government, not for
the ruin, but for the salvation of men. Christ has all the good properties of
the rain, but none of the bad properties. Whosoever is offended at him, is
offended at his own mercy.

4. Lay your hearts open to receive the distillations of Christ. When any of
this rain descends, let the vessels of your souls be set wide open to receive
it. When Christ drops in his Doctrine, when Christ distills upon you by his
Spirit; let your hearts be in a readiness to drink it in. The rain does no
good unless it be taken in. All the drops of Christ will do you no good, if you
do not take them in. When men are beleaguered in a City and want water, they
set out all their vessels, when a shower comes, that no drop may be lost. Gods
children are in this world as in a besieged City; you want rain, O let not one
drop of Christ fall besides you. Open your mouths wide, that you may take in,
yea take down all the pleasant drops of Christ. Two things are necessary for
those that would have this rain. First, they must get under the cloud. The
public Ministry is the cloud by which the rain droppeth, Esaias 5. 6. abide
where you see these clouds gathering thickest. And when Christ drops down
thorough these clouds, be sure your vessels be set out uncovered to receive
whatever falls.

5. What a miserable condition is it to be without Christ! It Is made the top of
all misery, Ephesians. 2. 12. He that is without Christ is as parched land without
rain. The Scripture threatens with*holding of rain as a sore judgment, Amos
4. 7. I have withheld the rain from you, when there were yet three months
to the harvest. It Is threatened as a judgment against them that came not up to
keep the feast of Tabernacles, that on them there shall be no rain, Zech. 14.
17. If it be so sore a judgment to want the natural rain; what is it to want
this spiritual rain? Pity such as want Christ, more then you pity those that
want other rain.

6. When ever you see a shower fall down upon the earth, meditate on Jesus
Christ. For this reason does Christ resemble himself to all these things, that
we might have remembrancers every where to put us in mind of him. Let every
drop of rain be a natural preacher, to put some serious thought of Christ into
your hearts.

1 PET. 2. 6. Behold, I lay in Sion a chief corner XVIII. SERMON. at Mary
Wolnoth. Lon. December. 19. 1652.
stone, elect and precious.
THe Apostle at the second verse of this Chapter, does earnestly entreat the
scattered Jews, to whom he writes this Epistle, that they would as newborn
babes receive the sincere milk of the Doctrine of the Gospel. He presses this
by many Arguments; As

1. God had appointed this to be the souls nourishment. The milk of the
mothers breast was not more nourishing to the newborn Ver. 2.
infant, then the Doctrine of the Gospel is to the souls of regenerated
Christians.

2. God had sanctified these to be the means of their spiritual growth. As the
child grows by sucking the milk of the breast, so do Christians grow by
drinking in the Doctrine of Ibid.
the Gospel.

3. The Doctrine of the Gospel contains in it the sweetness of the love of
God and of Jesus Christ toward them that believe, he that has tasted of this
sweetness cannot but thirst after Ver. 3.
it.

4. By receiving into their hearts this doctrine, they should have the closer
communion with Jesus Christ. To whom coming as to a living stone, ye as lively
stones are built up, etc. This he confirms by an argument taken out of the Old
Testament, which is here cited and improved to illustrate the thing in hand.
This is in the Text, wherefore it is contained in the Scripture; Behold I lay
in Sion, etc.

Two things are considerable in the Text.

1. The denomination or little given to Christ. A chief corner stone. 2. The
Explication of this Title by the properties of it. These are two.
1. He is an Elect or chosen stone. 2. He is a precious stone.
I shall first begin with the denomination, A chief corner stone. The sum is
this.

The Church of God is here compared to a spiritual edifice, or building; Every
true believer is compared to a mystical stone in this building; And Christ is
here resembled to the Corner stone. The Note from that first particular will be
this, viz.

Doct. That the Lord Jesus Christ is the chief Corner stone of the spiritual
structure of Gods Church Both Prophets, and Apostles, and Christ himself, give
ample Testimony to this truth.

1. The Prophets which were before Christ do bear witness to this. See Esaias ^8
16. From this Testimony my Text is borrowed. Behold I lay in Sion f^r a
^^undation a stone, a tried stone, a preciou^ corner stone, a s^^^e foundation.
And the Prophet David long before him, Psalm 118. 22. speaking of Christ has
these words, The Stone which the builders refused, i^ (...) b^ Headstone of the
Corner.

2. The Apostles which succeeded Christ, they concur with the Prophets. See
that famous Testimony which is given before the greatest of Christ's
adversaries, by Peter and John two of his Apostles. Though Peter was the only
spoke^man, yet does John also agree with him, Acts 4. 10, 11. Be it known to
you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the Name of Jesus of
Nazareth, does this man stand here before you whole. This is the Stone which
was set at naught by you builders, which is become the Head of the Corner. Hear
also the Testimony of Paul, which is both full and clear to this purpose, Ephesians.
2. 20. Ye are built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief Corner stone.

3. We may add to these the Testimony of Christ himself, hear it from his own
mouth, as it is recorded by three of the Evangelists, Mat. 21. 42. Mark 12. 10.
Luke 20. 17. Jesus said unto them, did you never read in the Scriptures, the
Stone which the builders refused is become the Head of the Corner? In the mouth
of all these witnesses is this truth fully established. Two things I shall here
open.

1. In what respects Christ is compared to the Corner stone. 2. How he excels
all other corner stones.
1. For the first. Christ is called the Corner stone in four respects.

1. In regard of sustentation. The corner stone does uphold the whole building:
if the corner of the house fall, the whole structure comes to the ground. The
Holy Ghost speaking of the slaughter of Jobs children, says, There came a
wind from the Wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it
fell upon the young men, and they are dead, Job 1. 19. Some stones may drop out
of the middle of the building, and yet the building may stand, but if the
corners or foundation shrink, the whole fabric is dissolved. Jesus Christ is
the susteiner and upholder of his Church. Therefore he is called the foundation
stone, as well as the corner stone, Esaias 28. 16. He is the great pillar that
bears up his Elect. The Churches peace, the Churches grace, the Churches
comfort, the Churches salvation are all upheld and maintained by him. Solom^n
reared up two pillars of brass in the Porch of the Temple, the one he called
Jachin, that is, he shall establish; the other Boaz, that is, strength, 1 Kin.
7. 21. These two Pillars amongst other things did typifie the invincible
stability and strength of the Church, whereof the Temple was a sign and figure.
The Lord Jesus Christ is to his Church, both Jachin and Boaz; he is both the
establishment, and the strength of his Elect; he is that golden pillar that
bears up all. The Poets have a fictitious conceit of Atlas a great Astronomer,
that he bears up the heaven upon his shoulders; That Is but a fable, the great
body of the heaven is a burden insupportable to any creature. Jesus Christ is
really the great Atlas, that bears the whole burden of the Church with all its
concernments upon his shoulders. Eliakim was in this a type of Christ, the
Prophet says of him, Esaias 22. 21, 22, 13, 24. that he shall be fastened as a
nail in a sure place, and he shall be for a glorious throne to his Fathers
house; And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his Fathers house, the
offspring and the issue, all vessels of small quantity, from vessels of cups
to all vessels of flagons. This Eliakim was a figure of Christ, for Rev. 3. 7.
that which is here promised to him, is attributed to Christ; These things says
he that has the key of David, he that opens and no man shuts, and he that
shuts and no man opens. He is that golden nail, upon whom all the
concernments of the Church both small and great do depend. From vessels of cups
to vessels of flagons, all hang upon him. The Prophet Esaias foretelling his
birth, does attribute this to him, Chap. 9. 6. When he says, that the
Government shall be upon his shoulder. God has devolved the whole care and
weight of his Church upon him, and upon him must we roll it.

2. In regard of Union. The corner stone is that Medium by which the walls of
the house are united into one building. Pull out the corner stones, and the two
sides of the house are separated one from the other. Jesus Christ is he and he
alone that does unite the several stones of the spiritual building one to
another. This may be considered two ways.

(1.) In reference to the uniting of the Jews and Gentiles. Before Christ, the
Jew and Gentile were divided and separated one from another. This separation
did commence and begin after the return of the Israelites out of Egypt into
Canaan, which place was assigned unto them by lot, as we read in the book of
Joshuah. Then were the Jews in a more conspicuous manner formed into one Polity
or Commonwealth, and from that time the separation began. That which made this
separation was the Ceremonial worship which God established in that Church or
Nation, according to which they and their posterity were to worship God. This
separation continued from that time, until the death and resurrection of
Christ. During all this long tract of time, there was a manifest separation
between the Jew and the Gentile, But now Christ has as a corner stone made a
firm union between these two, so that the Jew and Gentile are brought together
under the same worship. This is done by the abolition of the Ceremonial Law.
Christ has taken down this wall of separation, and so made both one Church.
The Apostle treats largely of this, in Ephesians. 2. 13, 14, 15, 16. He is our peace
who has made both one, and broken down the middle wall of partition between
us, etc. The Jew and the Gentile are now made one house by the death of Christ.

(2) In reference to the spiritual union of beleeleevers one with another. We
read often in Scripture of spiritual fellowship and communion between
believers. The Apostle, Phil. 2. 1. speaks of the fellowship of the Spirit, and
Phil. 1. 5. He makes mention of their fellowship in the Gospel. So 1 John 1. 7.
says the Apostle, If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another. This spiritual communion or fellowship does
consist,

First, In mutual affection one to another. One Saint loves another, though
they have never seen the faces one of another.

Secondly, In participation of the same graces and privileges. They are all
like one another: They partake of the same gifts, of the same Graces; the same
Reconciliation, the same Adoption, the same Sanctification; the same Salvation
that belongs to one, belongs to them al. This is that which the Apostle
mentions, Ephesians. 4. 4 5, 6. From hence it is that the Scripture calls the
salvation of the Elect, Common-salvation, Jude 3. because it is common to all
the Elect. The same graces which are wrought in one Saint, are wrought in
another, though perhaps different in degree.

Thirdly, In the performing of mutual offices one to another. They pray one for
another, they give thanks for the good of one another, they grieve for one
another evils, they bear one another burdens, they rejoice in one another
comforts, they supply one another wants, both outward and inward as far as
they are able. The Apostle speaks of these mutual offices, which believers by
virtue of that fellowship which is between them owe one to another, in that, 1
Cor. 12. 26 Now it is in and through Christ, that union and communion of Saints
one with another is made. Our communion with Christ is the foundation of our
mutual communion which we have one with another, John 17. 23. I in them and
thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one. It Is this uniting corner
stone that brings every particular stone of the building into one. For our
mutual union one with another, is in him who is the head of the union. The
Apostle speaks fully to th^s, in Ephesians. 1. 10. That he might gather together in
him all things, both which are in heaven, and which are in earth. The Greek
word is very significant, (...), to gather to a head. All the Saints of God
that are, were, or shall be, both those that are gloriously triumphing in
heaven, and those that are yet militant on earth, are gathered together to a
head in Jesus Christ. Membership with him is the foundation of mutual
membership which we have one with another. This is the second.

3. In regard of Direction. The corner stone is that which gives the builders
direction, how to lay and place all the other stones. If the several stones of
the wall be not laid level to the corner stone, the whole building is spoiled.
He that would build right, must have his eye to the corner stone. Jesus Christ
is a believers Direction and Rule in all spiritual things, that which is not
done by Christ's Command, or example or by some direction from him, is not well
done. Learn of me (says our Savior) for I am lowly, and meek-hearted* and ye
shall find rest to your souls, Mat. 11. 29. Jesus Christ is the believers
pattern. His Word and his example we must have an eye continually upon, if we
would not miscarry. He that says he abides in Christ, he ought so to walk as
he walked. 1 John 2. 6. Lay all things level to Christ, and then act
vigorously. I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to
you, John 13. 15. Nothing will either be lasting or comfortable, which does not
run parallel with the line of Christ.

4. In regard of Beauty. Skilful builders place the strongest stones in the
corner, because of bearing; and the fairest stones, because of beauty. If the
corner stones be graceful, the whole building is the more comely, Psalm. 144.
12. More Art is bestowed on the corner stone, then on any other part of the
building. Jesus Christ is the beauty of the spiritual building. If this one
stone were taken away, the whole building would be an uncomely heap. One Christ
has more b^auty in him then ten thousand Sain^s. Psalm. 45. 2. Thou art fairer
then the children of men. The fairest Saint is but an Ethiopian, if compared
with Christ. He is in respect of his beauty compared to the Lily and Rose,
which are the most beautiful of all flowers, Cant. 2. 1. The blind world
looked upon him as deformed, Esaias 53. 2. There is no form nor comeliness in
him, but those that know him, admire his beauty. Look upon him in his Divine
Nature, and so he is more beautiful then the Sun. Look upon him as man; and
so he is exceeding beautiful. No doubt but his body, for the outward feature of
it was very comely. It Is a Rule which Divines have. That which God does
immediately, he does most exactly. And for his soul, that had more grace in it
then is in all the sons of men laid together. His soul was unsoyl'd by sin,
and it was richly furnished with all grace. God showed more of his Art and
skill in Jesus Christ, then upon all the stones of the building besides. The
beautiful Angels are black, if compared with Christ. This is the first
particular.

2. For the second. Christ differs from all other corner stones in five
respects.

1. He is a living stone. The corner stones of all material buildings are
inanimate. But Christ has life in him, 1 Pet. 1. 4. He has life in himself,
and he communicates life unto the whole building. From him all the stones of
the spiritual house are called lively stones, ver. 5. Ye also as lively stones
are built up a spiritual house.

2. He is a stone of Gods immediate laying. God himself did both polish and
place this stone. Other corner stones are fashioned and laid by men, but this
is fashioned by God himself. This is in the Text, Behold I lay in Sion a chief
corner stone. He is therefore called by the Prophet, Dan. 2. 34. A stone cut
out of the mountain without hands; that is, without the hands of men. There
was no humane help for the polishing of this stone, God himself is the chief
and only Architect.

3. He is a Corner stone that can never drop out of the building. Other corner
stones will in time loosen and fall: the corner stones of that Temple did at
last fall, but this corner stone can neither fall, nor be weakened. Christ
sticks as fast now, as he did the first day he was placed.

4. He receives no strength from the other stones. All material corner stones,
as they strengthen the building, so they receive strength from the building.
The other stones are some defense to the corner stone: but Christ receives no
strengthening from any stone of the building. What need has Christ of support?
If he had, what can weak Saints do to support him? The Saints help to
strengthen one another, they contribute no strengthening at all to him.

5. Christ is a Corner stone that reaches from the bottom to the top. In other
buildings there are many corner stones, because no one is large enough to serve
for all: But Christ is so large that there is no need of any other. The
building is a carrying on every day, and will be, till all the number of the
Elect be brought in: but let it rise never so high there will not need one
corner stone more. If there were but one corner st^n^ in other buildings, the
whole structure would be spoiled. This spiritual structure would he spoiled, if
there should be one corner stone more. One Christ supplies the need of the
whole Church.

1 PET. 2. 6. A chief corner stone, elect, precious. XIX. SERMON. at Mary
Wolnoth. Lon. December. 26. 1652.

I Proceed to the Application, which is for Information. which is for
Exhortation. which is for Consolation.

1. For information. It teaches seven lessons.

1. The perpetssity of the Church. The Church of Christ is a stable building;
it may shake, and totter, and be ready to fall, but it cannot utterly fall. The
Church of God may err both in Doctrine and manners. The best of men are but
enlightened and sanctified in part, there is a remainder of blindness and
ignorance in their mind, and of rebellion and stubbornness in their wills and
affections, therefore they may err both in Doctrine and manners. The Church of
Ephesus is charged by our Savior, that she had left her first love, Rev. 2. 4.
The Church of Galatia is said to be removed to another Gospel; And that which
befalls Chap. 1. 6.
one or two Churches, may befall an hundred Churches. Our Divines prove against
the Papists, that general Councels have erred. The Church of God may sometimes
he hid under persecution, it may want the public preaching of the Word, with
the public Administration of the Sacraments. Our Divines prove against the
Papists that the Church of God is not always so apparently visible as they
would have it. In the days of the Prophet Elijah, the Church of God was under
a great eclipse. See what he says, 1 King. 19. 10. The children of Israel have
forsaken thy Covenant, etc. The Church was very low, when so intelligent a
Prophet could not find one besides himself that cleaved to God, yet what
answer does God give him v. 18? Yet have I left me seven thousand in Israel,
all the knees that have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth which has not
kissed him. Hear what the Prophet Azariah says to King Asa to this very
purpose, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. For a long season Israel has been without the true
God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law. As the Sun and Moon do
not always visibly shine out to the world, but sometimes suffer an eclipse, so
does the Church of God; yet nevertheless the Church of God can never be
utterly exterminated. If we consider the nature of the thing, the Church may be
abolished, and cease to have a being in the earth; but if we consider the
Decree of God, so the Church can never cease. God ever had since the promise
made to Adam in Paradise, a Church in the world, and he ever will have a Church
in the earth, till all the members thereof be made triumphant in heaven. The
gates of hell shall never prevail against it, Mat. 16. 18. It may be brought
low, but it cannot be thrown down. These material fabrics, where the Church of
God meet for holy worship, may be thorough the fury and covetousness of men be
taken down, that one stone shall not be left upon another. See how the Church
complains of the havoc made by those Sacrilegious invaders, Psalm. 74. 7, 8.
The Church was not destroyed, though the Temple and Synagogues were destroyed.
This spiritual building of the Church shall stand, though all other structures
fall. The great reason is, because Christ is the foundation and corner stone.
Other buildings may fall though the foundation stand; but this building cannot
fall, unless the foundation be destroyed.

2. That the Church of God is a very glorious building. Amongst many other
titles which are given to the Church, this is one; it is called a glorious
Church, Ephesians. 5. 27. It shall be glorious when it comes to heaven, of which that
Text is properly to be understood; And it is glorious even here on earth. I am
black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the
curtains of Solomon, Cant. 1. 5. A glorious and high throne from the beginning
is the place of our Sanctuary, Jer. 17. 12. All the Edifices and Palaces on
earth, are but ugly cottages, it they be compared with this spiritual building,
the Church. The Temple of Solomon was the most excellent fabric that ever the
earth carried, Its called a glorious and beautiful house, Isa. 64. 11. and yet
that was but a type of this building. See how it is described in the
Revelations, chap. 21. 10, 11, etc. It must needs be glorious, because all the
stones are living stones. Every stone has the glory of God on it, and then
besides, which makes it beautiful indeed, Christ himself is the corner stone.
How gloriou^ must that building be, where Christ himself lies as the foundation
stone! To be the least stone in this building, is far better, then to be the
greatest pillar of any material building.

3. The Believers union with Jesus Christ. The Scripture does frequently tell
us the mystery of the spiritual union of Christ and Believers. They are not
only one by participation of gifts and graces; they are not only one in will
and affection, as the members of the Primitive Church are said to be, Acts 4.
32. but there is a real spiritual union between them. ^in them, and thou in me,
John 17. 23. This Privilege is proved, as by other express Scriptures, so by
this Metaphor; As the corner stone, and the superstructories are united in one
building; so Christ the corner stone, and all the living stones built upon him
are made one mystical house. The Apostle mentions this from this very
similitude, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. Christ and believers are made one holy Temple;
only there is this difference between that union, which is between Christ the
corner stone and the living stones, and the corner stone and superstructory
stones of material buildings: Every believer is as nearly united to Christ as
any believer. In other buildings some stones are more nearly united to the
foundation then others are; but in this building every Believer is equally
united to Christ the corner stone.

4. The horrible pride of the Papists. They are so intollerably proud, as to
apply this Title to the Pope, making him the corner stone of the Church. They
apply that in Esaias 28. 16. to the person of the Pope, as if he were the
foundation of the Universal visible Church. They say that the Pope is in the
Church as the Sun is in the firmament, and that the ruining and shaking of the
Pope, would be the shaking and ruining of the whole Church. The Scripture
teaches us a better foundation. Both Prophets and Apostles were ignorant of
this Romish foundation; they built not on the Pope, but on Christ, Ephesians. 2. 20.
The Pope is the corner stone of the Apostatical Church, not of the Apostolical
Church, He is the foundation stone of the adulterate Church, not of the chaste
Church; he is the foundation of the Synagogue of Satan, not of the Spou^e of
Christ. The Church would be sure to fall, if it had so weak and so wicked a
foundation as that man of sin is Christ did not say, upon thee Peter, but
upon this rock will I build my Church, Mat. 16. 18. Peter, whose successor the
Pope boasts himself to be, did publicly preach Christ, not himself the corner
stone, Acts 4 11. It is no honor, but a great disgrace to be a stone of that
building, whose foundation stone is the son of perdition.

5. Behold from this Text the truth of the two natures of Christ. The
Scriptures teach that Jesus Christ is both God and man. Both these natures are
asserted in this Text. The Divinity is confirmed from the close of the verse,
He that believes on him shall not be confounded. If Christ were not God, it
were idolatry to believe on him. No mere creature is without sin, to be relied
upon without sin. And then the truth of his humanity appears from hence, that
he is the corner stone of the spiritual building. He could not be a part of the
spiritual house, if he were not of the same nature with the other stones of the
building, so often as you read faith in Christ required, believe his Godhead,
and as often as ye hear him called the corner stone of the Church; believe the
truth of his manhood.

6. The greatness of Christ's strength. The Scripture does attribute Almighty
power to Christ as well as to the Father. His name shall be called the mighty
God, Esaias 9. 6. The strength of Christ appears by the great works he has done
and does do. He set up the world by his power, Without him was not made any
thing that was made. John 1. 3. He does by his powerful providence govern the
world; Providence belongs to Christ as well as to the Father; My Father works
hitherto, and I work, John 5. 17. And then his power appears in this, that he
is the chief corner stone that upholds the Church; if there were not Almighty
power in him, such a burden would break him to pieces. Next to the bearing of
his Fathers wrath; no such heavy burden, as the susteining of all the
concernments of the Church. Consider what a vast fabric the Church is, it is a
very huge building. And then consider what potent enemies it has, a world of
wicked men, legions of powerful Spirits; and then consider how weak every stone
is in it self. And then consider the multitude of its concernments, and it will
appear, that he that bears up this building, must needs be a person of vast and
infinite strength. Thou have laid strength (says the Prophet) on one that is
mighty, Ps. 89. 17.

7. The nearness of Christ to his Church. The Name of the Lord is called
Jehovah Shammah, Ezekiel. ult. ult. Christ has promised to be with it for ever,
Mat. 28. ult. He seems sometimes to be far off, to try how his people will
carry themselves in his absence; the nature and ingenuity of the child is best
seen in his Fathers absence. But though he seem to be at a distance, yet he is
near; he may be out of their sight, but he is never out of their call; The
Lord is near to all them that call upon him. This Metaphor shows this, the
corner stone is not far off from the roof, and yet Christ is nearer to his
people, then the corner stone is to the next stone of the building. He is not
only with them, but in them, John 17. 23. Thus much for Information.

2. For Exhortation. It commends these four things to all us Christians.

1. Take heed of building upon any other foundation. The Evangelist makes
mention of a double foundation, which our Savior speaks of at the close of his
Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 7. 24. 26. The rocky foundation is only one,
namely Jesus Christ, or which is all one, faith in Christ. The sandy foundation
is manifold.

Some build their hopes of salvation on their good works. This is the
foundation of the Papists. They hope to be saved by their doing. They may do
well to consider what the Scripture says of this foundation, Luke 17. 10. And
Romans 9. 30, 31, 32, 33. building on works is not a divine, but a humane
foundation.

Some build upon outward profession. This is the foundation of carnal
professors. They may do well to consider what our Savior says, Luke 13. 26,
27.

Some build upon their good meanings. They have as good a heart to God as the
best. This is the foundation of ignorant Protestants. Whatsoever foundation of
salvation, grace or comfort, besides Christ, is laid, is a sandy foundation,
and will appear to be so at the day of judgment. The Apostle cuts off all
other foundations besides this, 1 Cor. 3. 11. He did not speak ignorantly, for
he says, v. 10. that he was a wise Master Builder. They are not wise
Master Builders, but ignorant botchers that build, or teach others to build,
either hope of comfort, or of salvation upon any other foundation. In one word,
all foundations of salvation besides Christ, how spacious soever they be, will
prove at last foundations of damnation, Arminian, Socinian, Popish
corner-stones will moulder.

2. Acknowledge upon whom all your spiritual good does depend. All your graces,
all your comforts, all your privileges are bottomed on Christ. Christ lies as
the foundation of all. The Scripture affirms all our good to be bottomed on
Christ.

Our Election, Ephesians. 1. 4. Our justification, Ephesians. 5. 1. Our Adoption, Ephesians. 1.
5. Our Salvation.
He is called not only a Savior, but salvation in the abstract, Esaias 62. 11.
say ye to the daughter of Zion, behold thy salvation comes. What ever good we
have, or hope for, it is for Christ and from Christ. He is made to us of God
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption, as the Apostle says, 1 Corinthians. 1. 30. that you sink not, it is from Christ alone.

3. Cast the care and burden of all your concernments by faith on Christ.
There are two Texts of Scripture enjoining this duty; the one is in the Old
Testament, the other in the New. That in the Old Testament is in Psalm 55. 22.
Cast thy burden on the Lord, and he will sustain thee. That in the New
Testament, is in 1 Pet. 5. 7. Casting all your care on him. Those two words
Burden, Care, take in all our concernments whatsoever. There are many
burdens, as, a burden of sin, a burden of duty, a burden of suffering, a
burden of loss, a burden of success, issues and events are a heavy burden
sometimes. Lay all this on Christ. And then how many cares is a believer liable
unto? A crowd of cares comes in daily. Cast these by an act of faith on Christ.
He is the corner stone, he has undertaken to bear the burden of all. You
honor him, as well as ease your selves, by casting all on him, the stresse of
all.

4. Be stable. Steadfastness is often commended to Christians, as 1 Corinthians.
15. ult. Be steadfast, unmovable, and 2 Pet. 3. 17. Let those stones totter and
shake, that have a shaking foundation. The instability of believers is some
disparagement to Christ, the corner stone on which they are built.

3. For consolation. This may comfort believers.

1. Against their own weakness. Who that knows his own heart, but finds his
graces weak? Every temptation shakes him, as if it would shake him to pieces.
Remember to thy comfort, Christ is the corner stone of thy grace, as well as of
thy salvation. He has strength though you be weak.

2. In case of the totterings of the Church. Such blasts arise sometime to
threaten its ruin. Remember the corner stone; yea he is the corner as well as
the corner stone.

1 PET. 2. 6. Christ the chief corner stone, elect, and XX. SERMON. at Mary
Wolnoth. ^ond. Jan. 16. 1652.
precious.
I Proceed to the properties of this Cornerstone, First, it is an Elect stone.
Secondly, it is a precious stone.

For the first, Elect. This word has a double signification. It signifies
choice, excellent. And it signifies elected, or chosen. Gerhard thinks (...),
in this place is used not participially for elect or chosen, but nominally for
excellent and precious. But I rather conceive that it is here used
participially, for elected or chosen. This signification have our Translators
given it. I am induced to think it is so used here for two reasons.

1 Otherwise this and the next word (...), would signify one and the same
thing. And it is not probable that the holy Ghost in such short speeches should
use two words to signify the same thing.

2. Because ver. 4. of this Chapter, where the same words are used, this word
signifies not choice, but elected o^ ch^^^n, for so it is said (...). Now this
Text is but a recapitulation of what is there said. It refers to the act of God
in choosing Christ for the corner stone of the Church. The point is this.

Doct. That Jesus Christ is chosen by God for the corner stone or foundation of
the Church. God the Father has elected him for this service.

Here are two things to be opened.

1. What this election has reference to. 2. Why Christ was thus elected.
1. For the former. This election referres to four of acts God concerning
Christ.

1. To his eternal designation of Christ to this work. The everlasting
determination of God was, that Christ should perform this office in and for his
Church. Of this our Apostle speaks, in 1 Pet. 1. 20. (...).

2. To his public mission. As he was foreordeined before all time, so he was
publicly sent in the fullness of time, Gal. 4. 4, 5. The Scripture often
mentions the mission of Christ, Esaias 61. 1. he has sent me, etc.

3. To the divine unction. God has anointed the humane nature, filled it with
all grace and with abundance of grace for this work. The Prophet speaks of this
unction, Esaias 61. 1. and more fully, Esaias 11. 2, 3, 4. This is that which our
Savior calls, Gods sealing of him, John 6. 27. This sealing refers to two
things.

First, the solemn appointment of God. God has authorized him publicly under
his broad seal for this work.

Secondly, God has furnished him for the work, by communicating to him the
fullness, the unmeasurable fullness of his Spirit. For the Spirit is not given
to him by measure, John 3. 34.

4. To the public testimony given by God to Christ. God has given very solemn
Testimony and approbation to Christ.

(1) By audible voices from heaven, once at his baptism, Matthew. 3. 17. A
second time at his tranfiguration, Mat. 17. 5.

(2) By serious recommendation of him in the Gospel to men, that they should
rely upon him. The Evangelist makes mention of this 1 John 5. 10, 11.

2. For the latter. The great moving cause is, his mere mercy to his Elect. No
other was able, Christ was sufficient to discharge this great work. Out of his
rich love did God choose him, upon this hinge all turns, John 3. 16.

But if the reasons be demanded why Christ should have such solemn election,
etc. These may be considered.

1. The offices which Christ undertook, did call for this divine Election; he
was to be Prophet, Priest, King, fit therefore it was that he should be thus
solemnly set out. Prophets must be sent, else they are none of Gods, Ier. 23.
21. Christ was a Prophet, therefore he would have a formal Authorization from
him whose Prophet he was, Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Christ was a King Psalm 2. 6.
Therefore fit he should be sufficiently authorized, hence is that, Psalm 110.
1. Christ was a Priest, therefore he must be lawfully consecrated, Heb. 5. 4,
5, 6. no man takes this honor, etc.

2. Else that which Christ did would not have been accepted of God, nor would
it have been meritorious for his Church. It would have been sacrilege for
Christ to have made himself a corner stone, if God had not chosen him for the
work. This is my well beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, Matthew. 3. 17.
God would not have been well pleased with Christ, if he had not elected him for
the work he undertook. And then

3. For the comforting of Christ, in undergoing that which he was to suffer for
the carrying on of this work. He must endure the wrath of God, the
contradiction of sinners, before he could be the corner stone. Divine
appointment comforts a man in the hardest sorrows, Genesis 31. 9. Thou said,
return to thy country. The consideration of this, strengthened and comforted
Christ in all he suffered, John 18. 11.

The Uses of this.
1. The Father and holy Ghost have a hand in the work of man's salvation, as
well as Christ, we scarce take notice of the Father in the work of redemption,
as if he only did look on and approve what Christ did, he acts in it as well as
Christ; he chose Christ, he sent out Christ, he fitted Christ for this great
work. Though the second person was he that was incarnate, yet both the first
and third person concur and contribute to the work. The divine election is
the first wheel that moves in this work.

2. That the work of our salvation by Christ, is not a rash work. It Is not a
work of inconsideration, or precipitancy, but a serious work. There was much
deliberation, and consultation about it. Here is mention of electing Christ.
It Is a work of infinite and unsearchable wisdom. The mystery of godliness the
Apostle calls it, 1 Timothy 3. 16. The manifold wisdom of God, Ephesians. 3. 10. here
is depth of wisdom in this work.

3. That the Elects salvation by Christ is a work well pleasing to God. It Is
called the pleasure of the Lord, Esaias 53. 10. It is a great contentment to God
to see it carried on; it cannot be otherwise, when he himself has elected
Christ to it. That which a man chooses and contrives, he is pleased when it is
carried on. God that has chosen Christ for the foundation, will carry on the
work in his hand.

4. Why Christ is called Gods Elect and Gods Servant, Esaias 42. 1, 2. not as if
he were inferior to God in regard of his divine nature, Zech. 13. 13. Phil. 2.
6. but because he is chosen of God to be the foundation; He is chosen to be the
head of the Election, all the Elect are chosen.

5. Let us with confidence cast our selves on Christ. Can we choose better then
God has chosen? It Is an undervaluing, not only of Gods love, but of his
wisdom to choose another foundation. God will take it ill if we reject his
choice. Adventure on him you may. Believe and trust in him without doubting. He
that has elected Christ, will not reject those that accept and rely on
Christ. The Election of God will mightily aggravate the refusal of Christ.
Encourage faith by this, He that believes in him shall not be ashamed.

6. Very great comfort to them that have built on Christ. God does not choose
mouldring stones, but firm stones. If God have any wisdom to choose, Christ is
sufficient to bear all their weight. He has laid help on one that is mighty,
Psalm 89. 19. Let what blasts will come, this Elect stone will hold.

1 PET. 2. 6. XXI. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon. Febr. 13. 1652.
(...) Precious.
I Go on to the second property of this corner stone, as it is laid down in
this word (...), precious. The word here used (...), signifies that which is of
great worth or value in it self, and that which is much prized and esteemed by
another. A thing and a person may be valuable in it self, and not valued by
others. And then a thing may be highly in it self esteemed, which is of no
great worth; but this word signifies both, That it denotes the worth of things
or persons, you may see, Luke 14. 8. When thou art bidden to a wedding, sit not
down in the highest room, lest a more honorable man then then be bidden of
him, (...). That it signifies the valuation, or high esteem of things or
persons appears from Phil. 2. 29. The Apostle writes to the Church about
Epaphroditus that they would receive him, and (says he) hold such in
reputation, (...); make much of such, let them be deer to you. It Is opposed to
(...), which signifies one of no esteem or account amongst men. The
Observation is this.

Doct. That Jesus Christ the chief corner stone of the Church is exceeding
precious. As he is a stone of Gods choosing, so he is a choice stone. He is
therefore precious because he is of Gods choice. Christ is a corner stone
precious in himself, and it is our great sin, if he be not precious unto us.
Christ is not only (...), precious, but he is (...), of very great price,
Matthew. 13. 46. What is that pearl of great price, but Jesus Christ himself,
for the obteining of whom a wise Merchant will readily part with all that he
has. Nothing is worth a man's All, but Jesus Christ. But in comparison of him,
all things (even the best) are nothing worth. Jesus Christ is a precious stone,
as well as an elect stone.

In the handling of this Doctrine, I shall open two things for Explication.

1. In what respects Christ is precious. 2. Why he is so meanly esteemed by the
greatest part of men.
1. For the first. Christ is precious in four respects.

1. He is precious in the account of God. Jesus Christ is the delight both of
the Father and of the holy Ghost. God values him as a pearl of great price.

(1) He is in Scripture called the Son of his bosom. The only begotten Son
who is in the bosom of his Father, John 1. 18. As men and women show their
esteem of jewels and pearls by wearing them at their bosom, so does God
testify his high esteem of Christ by laying him in his bosom. The Son of
God never was, never will be out of the bosom of the Father.

(2) The public testimony which God gave from heaven to Jesus Christ at his
baptism, is an evidence of the high esteem he has of him, Mat. 3. 17. This
is my well beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

(3) He is so precious in Gods account, that the Father will accept of none but
through him, nor will he reject any, whom he recommends to him.

(4) The great design of God in the Gospel is to put honor upon Christ. He
commands all men to honor the Son as they honor the Father. All the good he
bestows upon men is in Christ and through Christ alone.

(5) The Father would never have put such a trust into his hands, as the
redeeming and saving of the Elect, if he had not been of precious account in
his sight.

(6) His present session at Gods right hand in heaven, is a full and manifest
proof how dear he is to him. God has set him there as a testimony of the
highest account of him, 1 Pet. 3. 22.

2. He is precious in the esteem of the Angels. The Angelical host did him
honor at his birth, Luke 2. 13, 14. They tuned their instruments and sang with
a loud voice, Glory be to God in the highest. As God has commanded them to
worship him, Heb. 1. 6. so they do continually worship him. They are ready at
his beck to do his will. They do ascend and descend upon the Son of man, John
1. 51. Not as if they ministered to Christ alone, but because out of respect to
Christ, and to do him honor, they do at his command go forth to serve his
Church as he gives them charge. The Angels worship the Son with the very same
aderation wherewith they worship the Father. Christ is very high in their books.

3. He is precious in the esteem of the Saints. Whether ye take it of the
Saints triumphant, or of the Saints militant; for the Saints triumphant, see
how they adore him, Rev. 5. 8, 9. And the Saints militant, they have an high
esteem of him. They glory and triumph in him. They venture their whole
salvation upon him. They disesteeme all other things in respect of him. I
account all things (says the Apostle) but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil. 3. 7, 8. They are joyful when they can
have communion with him. See what follows in the verse after the Text, unto you
that believe he is precious; he is but a nominal believer that does not account
Christ precious. See how the Church speaks of him, Cantiles 5. 10. He is white
and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousands.

4. He is precious in himself. This I shall show you in these three particulars.

1. In the glory of his person. Never did such a person appear in the world as
is Jesus Christ. He is truly God, and truly and properly man. The Divine and
humane Nature never hypostatically met in any person, besides the person of
Christ. The Apostle says of him; that he is the brightness of his Fathers
glory, and the express image of his person, Heb. 1. 3. He is the head of
principalities and powers, Col. 2. 10. The highest and most glorious of the
Angels being compared to Christ, is but a dark and a fullied creature. He
excels the Angels in the glory of his person, far more then they do the meanest
of men. All the Divine attributes are appropriated to Christ as he is the Son
of God, as well as to the Father. He is eternal, Micah 5. 2. His goings forth
are from everlasting. He is immutable as the Father is; Heb. 1. 12. He is
omniscient, Heb. 4. 13. He is omnipotent, Esaias 9. 6. In one word, he is as God
every way equal to the Father, Phil. 2. 6. There are such mysteries in the
person of Christ, as shall be matter of admiration both to men and Angels to
all eternity. There is in Christ (...), though not (...), identity of person,
and diversity of natures, and these united without composition and confusion,
both natures reteining their distinct properties, and yet both making but one
person. This is the first.

2. In the glory of his qualifications and endowments. Jesus Christ is endued
with such rare gifts and graces as never any before. See how the Scripture
expresses it, Psalm 45. 7. God even thy God has anointed thee with oil of
gladness above thy fellows, Col. 2. 3. In him are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, Col. 1. 19. It pleased the Father, that in him all
fullness should dwell. The fullness of grace in Christ excels the fullness of
all other persons in these three respects.

1. In him are all kinds of fullness. He has not only the fullness of parts,
but the fullness of degrees also. The best of the Saints have only the
fullness of parts. There may be additions made to their fullness. But in Christ
is fullness of degrees. There can be no additions made to his fullness. The
Spirit which is given to others in measure, is given to Christ without measure,
John 3. 34. And then

2. In Christ there is the fullness of redundancy as well as the fullness of
sufficiency. All other persons have only a fullness of sufficiency. The Angels
albeit they want nothing which is agreeable to their estate, yet they have no
overplus to redound to others. But now in Christ is the fullness of redundance;
he has not only the fullness of the vessel as others have, but he has the
fullness of the fountain, whereby he is able to communicate unto others, Zech.
13. 1. A fountain shall be set open for sin and for uncleanness. He has the
fullness of the root, the fullness of the heap, the fullness of the Sun.
Hence it is that men are invited to him, to be made partakers of his fullness,
Esaias 55. 1. All the fullness that is in the Saints, is communicated from him to
them, according to that of the Evangelist, John 1. 16. Of his fullness have we
all received, and grace for grace.

3. All this fullness which is in Christ, is in him after a peculiar and
special manner. The Apostle sets this out by that phrase of dwelling, Col. 1.
19. That expression notes a threefold difference in fullness, as it is in
Christ, from fullness, as it is in the Saints.

(1) It Is in him originally. That fullness which is in the Saints, is in them
derivatively. They have it from another, Christ has his fullness from
himself. The Divinity does fill and replenish the humanity with all kinds of
grace.

(2) It Is in Christ essentially. As he is God, his fullness is his essence.
Therefore does the Apostle say, that the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him
(...), bodily, Col. 2. 9. that is, personally and essentially.

(3) It Is in him unchangeably. It is maintained constantly at the same height.
It does not abate, nor is there any potentiality of abating. It Is always high
tide with Jesus Christ. That fullness which is in the Saints, is the fullness
of a dish, which is abated, if one drop be taken away; but the fullness of
Christ is as the fullness of the fire, which though it kindle hundreds of
sticks, yet is not abated; or as the fullness of the Sun, which though it
send down its beams continually upon the world, yet the light of it is not
darkened. Never any person endowed with so many excellencies in such a measure
after such a manner as Jesus Christ. No perfection can be named or imagined,
which is not to be found transcendently in Jesus Christ; wisdom, beauty,
meekness, patience, heavenlinesse, etc. All Christian virtues are called the
virtues of Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 9. (...), both because they were all eminently in
Christ, and because as they are in the Saints, they are communicated from
Christ. This is the second.

3. In the worth of his sufferings. The Scripture calls the blood of Christ,
(...), 1 Pet. 1. 19. It Is precious, not only because of the dignity of the
person who shed it, called therefore the blood of God, Acts 20. 28. but because
of the great value and merit of it, and because of the precious effects of it.
By the virtue of this blood which Christ shed, remission of sin is purchased,
the redemption of the Elect is perfected, Romans 3. 25. Heb. 9. 12. By his own
blood he entered once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption
for us. By the preciousnesse of this blood is God and man reconciled, Col. 1.
20, 21, 32. By this blood is the conscience sanctified, Heb. 9. 14. By this
blood is the way to heaven opened for all the Elect, Heb. 10. 19. The
sufferings of Christ are so precious, that if ten thousand worlds were, there
would be redundancy of merit in Christ to save them all. This is the third.

2. For the second. Christ is so meanly esteemed of by men, of the greatest
part of men, because of three things, viz. Ignorance, Pride, Prejudice.

1. They are ignorant of him. The greatest part of the world is quite blind in
spiritual things, 1 Cor. 2. 14. As in other spiritual things, so in this of the
worth of Christ. A blind man can see no more excellency in a precious stone
then in a common stone. A blind Christian can see no more worth in Christ,
then in another person. This you may see from that question, which is
propounded by the daughters of Jerusalem, Cant. 5. 9. What is thy beloved more
then another beloved, O thou fairest among women? etc. Their very question
bewrays their ignorance; had they known any thing of him, they would not have
said, What is thy beloved? The wisdom of the Gospel, whereby Jesus Christ is
made known, is hidden wisdom, It Is wisdom in a mystery, 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8. which
none can understand but those that are savingly enlightened. This ignorance of
Christ under which the greatest part of men are held, arises

(1) Partly, from the negligence and slothfulness that is in men. They are
idle and will not take pains to study the Word of God, which sets out Christ.
They cast the Scriptures from them. Our Savior says, John 5. 39. That the
Scriptures testify of him; men do not search this blessed book as they should;
either they read not at all, or else they read superficially; they do not pray
that God would discover Christ to them in and by the Word. Hence they are
ignorant of him.

(2) Partly, from their Atheistical unbelief of what they hear reported by
others. Though they cannot but hear sometimes the reports of Christ in the
public Ministry, yet they will give no ass^nt of faith to them, but oppose and
reject them as the fancies of men. This is that which the Prophet alleges,
Esaias 53. 1. Who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? Ex iis qui Evangelicum audiunt vix centesimum quemque fidelem fore,
says Calvin upon the place. Scarce the hundredth part of those that hear the
Gospel do yield a cordial assent to the Gosspel.

(3) Partly, from a judiciary hand of God upon them. God usually punishes
voluntary blindness with a penal and judiciary blindness. This is that which
the Prophet is taught of God, Esaias 6. ult. Go and preach to this people,
saying, Seeing, ye shall see, and not perceive; and hearing, ye shall hear,
and not understand, etc. The Apostle makes application of this Text, to the
unbeleeving Jews, who would not receive what he had with so much clearness
proved concerning Jesus Christ, both out of Moses, and out of the Prophets,
Acts 28. 23, 24, 25, 26. When men that live under the Gospel shut their own
eyes, God does ratify it by an act of his justice, and says, Be thou blinded
for ever. When a man hardens his own heart, God is pleased to ratify it in
heaven, and says, Let that heart never be softened. See that of our Savior to
this purpose, John 12. 37, etc. Now because men neglect the study of the Gospel
which shows what Christ is, because they refuse to assent to, and close with
what the Ministers of God report out of the Gospel concerning Christ, because
God punishes the voluntary blinding their eyes, with a judicial blinding,
therefore do they remain ignorant of the preciousnesse of Christ. And because
they are ignorant of him, therefore they disesteeme him.

2. Their pride. The greatest part of men, even of those that live under the
Gospel, are puffed up with arrogance and self-conceit. They dream that they are
in so good a condition already that Christ cannot make them better. They are
full of vain confidences; some fleshly boasting or other they have in their
hearts; some carnal City of refuge they erect for themselves besides Christ,
and this makes Christ less precious to them then he would otherwise he. We are
the circumcision says the Apostle, which worship God in the Spirit, and
rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh, Phil. 3. 3. He
that creates any fleshly ground of confidence to himself (and all confidences
are fleshly which are not bottomed on Christ;) such a man will not much rejoice
in Christ Jesus. Now there are in the minds of men abundance of false
confidences and carnal imaginations; the Apostle hints at them, though he do
not expressly name them, 2 Corinthians. 10. 4, 5. There are many significant words
used by the Apostle, (...), munitions, fortifications, strongs holds, (...),
reasonings. Abundance of fond reasonings are in the minds of men; they reason
themselves into heaven upon very poor and slender premises. (...), strange
heightnings of themselves have men in which they rejoice, which will be found
groundless another day, (...), Swarms of foolish thoughts have men by nature,
which they bandy up and down in their souls. One man makes wealth his strong
hold; Another reasons himself into heaven because of some Church Privilege; A
third is mightily heightened upon his civil righteousness; A fourth thinks all
is well with him, because others have a good opinion of him. Every man by
nature abounds with some or all of these. Therefore is Christ so mean and
inconsiderable in their esteem.

3. They are prejudiced against Christ. Though no man has any reason or good
Argument against Christ, yet have they many prejudices which they take up
against him. And these prejudices lay him low in their hearts. What those
prejudices are, I shall name when I come to handle that in the eighth Verse,
where Christ is said to be a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense. I shall
show what prejudices men have against his Doctrine worship, followers, etc. And
while prejudices lie against Christ, he will never find that esteem which is
meet. A man can never think highly of any person or thing against which he has
taken up a prejudice, though they be never so deserving. Ahabs prejudice
against the Prophets of the Lord, would not suffer him to hear them, 1 Kings
22. 8.

1 PET. 2. 6. XXII. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon. Febr. 20. 1652.
(...) Precious.
I Proceed to the Uses which are 1. Information. 2. Examination. 3. Exhortation.

1. For Information. This teaches a twofold lesson.

1. The exceeding great glory of the Church of Christ. The Scripture tells us
that the Church of God is a glorious body. Though the Church (taken in its more
large acception, as it contains all visible professors) be in many respects
less glorious, because o^ the mixture that is in it, it being a field, wherein
is both wheat and tares; Mat. 13. 24 25. Mat. 3. 13. Mat. 13. 48.
a barn floor, wherein is both good corn and chaff; a net, in which are fishes
good and bad; yet the Church of God, more strictly taken for the number of them
that are effectually called the invisible Church, is a very glorious society;
The Apostle calls it a glorious Church, Ephesians. 5. 27. (...). It Is glorious as in
regard of the holiness of the members, so chiefly in regard of Christ the
glorious foundation. A house whose corners are laid with precious stones, and
whose superstructory stones are all lively stones, must needs be glorious.
Never such a building in the world as the Church of God is. See how the
Evangelical Prophet describes it, Esaias 54. 11. O you afflicted, tossed with
tempests and not comforted, behold I will lay thy stones with fair colors,
and lay thy foundation with Saphires, etc. It Is much like that description
which is made of it, Rev. 21. 10, 11, 12 etc. Every thing which is in the
Church makes for the glory of it. Glorious in its members, who are clothed
with the glory of God; glorious in regard of the worship which is there used,
and of the Ordinances there dispensed, in regard of the Doctrine there there
maintained. Calvin I remember, understands by those precious stones mentioned,
Esaias 54. 11, 12. The variety of the gifts and graces of God to his people. Paul
understands by the same precious stones the doctrine taught in the Church, 1
Cor. 3. 11. The Church is glorious, both in respect of the doctrine, and of the
various gifts and graces of God dispensed amongst the members of it. But the
great glory of all lies in the foundation-stone, Jesus Christ. That must needs
be a precious building, which has its foundation on such a precious stone as
Jesus Christ is, who it as far above all precious stones, and a great deal
more, then they are above common stones. For the setting out of this, consider
how Christ excels all other precious stones.

1. He excels them in largeness. Other precious stones are but of a small
dimension, and of a very little weight. You may put many of the largest, that
ever were seen, into a small Cabinet, but Jesus Christ is very great. As God,
he is infinite without dimension, filling heaven and earth with his presence.
See how the Prophet speaks of the infiniteness, and incomprehensiblenesse of
Christ in regard of his divine nature, Esaias 40. 12, 13. Who has measured the
waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted out the heaven with a span? and
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in
scales, and the hills in a balance. That all this is spoken of Christ,
appears from verse 11. where he is prophesied of, as the Shepherd of his flock.

2. He excels them in duration. Other pearls and precious stones are of a
perishing nature, they may be defaced, broken, dissolved; they may lose their
beauty. There Is a day coming when they shall be melted away into nothing.
Cleopatra dissolved a pearl of very great worth, by the Art of Chemistry, and
drank it at one draught to her Antonius. But Jesus Christ is a durable precious
stone. Neither time nor eternity will be able to dissolve this stone; His
beauty cannot be lost or dimished; He never will have any flaw, or crack, or
spot in him, in the eyes of those that are able to judge aright of him. His
brightness is an unfading brightness. The heavens and the earth fade, and wax
old like a garment, but Jesus Christ is still the same, and his years have no
end, Heb. 1. 11, 12. And

3. He excels them in the multiplicity and perfection of his properties. There
is not any precious stone that has all excellencies and virtues in it. Some
excel in one property, some are excellent for another virtue. Whether their
medicinal virtues be considered, or their other excellencies, as their color,
their form, their roundnesse, etc. One excels most in this kind, another in
that. But the virtues and excellencies of all pearls and precious stones meet
in Christ. Whatsoever perfection is to be found in any created stone, the same
is to be found in Christ. The properties of the Sapphire, the Diamond, the
Chrysolite, the Sardonix, the Amethist, and of all other stones meet in Christ
alone. And then they are all in him in a far more transcendent manner then
they are in any of these. His brightness is above the brightness of the
Diamond, his whiteness far exceeds the whiteness of the Pearl. The medicinal
and physical properties that are in Christ, are far more excellent then those
that are in other precious stones. Some Pearls, they say, do strengthen the
heart; others clear the sight; others remove the vertigo or dizzinesse of the
head, and many other useful properties are recorded by learned men; but none of
them are so excellent in any of these kinds as Christ is, for he removes and
heales the distempers of the soul and mind, as well as of the body; he cures
the spiritual eyesight, Rev. 3. 18. He cures the troubles of the conscience,
which no other precious stone can do, being never so artificially used. He
being rightly applied and taken, cures the soul of sin, removes guilt, which
none other precious stone can do. The necklace of pearl cannot cure the wounds
of conscience, the girdle of diamonds cannot remove tremblings from the spirit;
the costly jewel in the bosom cannot quiet the heart, throbbing for sin or
Gods departure; all this Christ can do. And

4. He excels them in this, that he has no hurtful qualities. Other precious
stones have a killing quality, powder of diamonds they say is poysonful, put in
the bowels or throat, takes away life presently. But Jesus Christ has no
destructive quality. He is occasion of hurt to none, but to him that refuses
him. Put all these together, and it will appear, that the Church of God which
is erected upon, and united unto such a precious foundation, must needs be a
glorious Church.

2. The great riches of true believers. A member of Christ, how poor soever he
is in regard of outward riches, yet he is the richest man in the world, for he
does possess Christ, who is a stone of invaluable worth. If you knew a man had
an estate worth all the precious stones in the world, you would account him a
very rich man. A believer has one precious stone in his possession, which is
of greater worth then all the precious stones, which now are, or ever were in
the world. When other men boast of their jewels, do you boast of your Christ.
When others tell you what rich sparkling diamonds they have, do you bring out
this precious stone and lay it before them. When you hear other men speaking of
the costly foundation of their houses, do you think what a glorious foundation
your souls are built upon. He that wants Christ is the truly poor man,
whatever he enjoyes. He is rich, we say, whom God loves, he is rich that
inherits Christ; if thou had thy house full of diamonds, thou would
judge thy self a wealthy man. If Christ be thine, thou have much more. I
counsel thee to buy of ^ne Gold that thou may be rich, Rev. 3, 18. It Is not
the gold of the earth, but Christ's gold that makes men rich. Though thou have
no house to put thy head in, not a footbredth of land to tread upon, though
thou have not one penny in thy purse, yet if thou art a true believer, thou art
more wealthy then the greatest Emperor or Monarch in the world, that has not
Christ for his portion. Thou have a precious stone which will serve to spend
upon to eternity, and never waste nor diminish. Thus much for Information.

2. For Examination. Let us try whether Jesus Christ be precious to us. Many
are deceived in their thoughts about Christ. Abundance think they esteem him
to be a precious stone, who do indeed account him but an ordinary stone. It
will be necessary therefore to lay down some notes to distinguish a true
esteem of Christ from a false esteem. I shall name these four, viz.

1. Whether you are willing to part with every thing you have, that you may
enjoy Christ? Our Savior lays this down as an evidence of a real prizing of
Christ, Mat. 13. 46. he went and sold all that he had and bought it. Not as if
Christ were our purchase, for he is the Fathers free gift, John 3. 16. but the
meaning is, that he that esteems Christ as a pearl of price, will let nothing
stand in the way between him and Christ; he will part with every thing, rather
then go without him. By this the Apostle Paul evidences his esteem of Christ,
Phil. 3. 7, 8. What things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ,
etc. He that esteems Christ aright, will leave all his sins for Christ. He
will leave his honors and preferments in the world, when he cannot keep them
and Christ together: as that noble Marquess (...) did, he will part with all
his morality, civil righteousness, rather then not enjoy Christ. No terms are
hard, no conditions difficult, so that Christ may be possessed. He that will
not let every thing go that hinders him from Christ, does not esteem Christ
truly precious. That young man in the Gospel did declare that Christ was not
precious to him, because he would not part with his riches to enjoy him, Luke
18. 23. He went away sorrowful, for he was very rich.

2. What desire have you of fellowship with Christ? He that esteems Christ
precious indeed, thinks he has never enough of Christ. The Church testifies
her dear esteem of him, by her passionate desire of communion with him, Cant.
1. 13. Abundle of myrrh is my welbeloved to me, he shall lodge all night
between my breasts. The breast is the place of affections. There the heart is,
that shall be Christ's Chamber; precious stones that are valued, are laid up in
the safest Cabinet. Where Christ is valued aright, he is laid up in the best
Cabinet, the very heart. The soul that values him aright, is never weary of his
presence. He will neglect no opportunity, he will miss willingly no meeting,
where he thinks Christ may be found. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where
thou feedest! Cant. 1. 7. Jesus Christ is much in the thoughts of him that
truly esteems him; he is never at ease, but when Christ lies with him; he
likes no discourse so well as that that has Christ in it. He is a man even
swallowed up with the meditations of Christ.

3. Is every thing of Christ precious to you? He that has right appreciations
of Christ, does account him every way precious. His precepts are as precious as
his promises; his life is as precious as his death; his holy steps are as
precious as his blood. Many men think they account very highly of Christ, who
do indeed account meanly of him. They cry him up in his sufferings and
satisfaction, and cry him down as much in his obedience. The promises of Christ
are sweet, but the precepts of Christ are bitter. His meritorious death is
highly extold; but his exemplary life is but meanly accounted of: his Priestly
office is glorious to them, but his Kingly and Prophetical offices are
contemptible. They would have Christ to save them, but they desire not Christ
to sanctify them. They do indeed cry up Jesus, but they cry down Christ. They
prize his blood, but they despise his graces. They like Christ's intercession,
but they do not like his Sovereignty; they would have him glorify them in
heaven, but they will not allow him to command them on earth. All such partial
prizing of Christ is no prizing of Christ. As the right receiving of Christ is
to receive him wholly, so the right prizing of Christ is to prize him wholly.
He is not prized at all, if he be any way despired. The Apostle tells us, that
Christ is made unto us of God, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
redemption, in 1 Cor. 1. 30. He that does esteem him aright, must esteem him in
this latitude; he is to be honored as much as he is a Sanctifyer, as he is to
be honored as a Redeemer. The Church values Christ wholly, Cant. 5. 11, 12,
etc. His head, his lock^, his eyes, his hands, his lips, etc. Many do much
value the hands of Christ by which he gives rewards, but they do not value the
lips of Christ, by which he gives commands. A true prizer of Christ esteems
his mouth as much as his hands, yea he esteems the precepts of his mouth as
well as the promises of his mouth.

4. What opinion have you of those that are like Christ? It is an eternal
truth, that whosoever has a right esteem of Christ, cannot but value those
that are like him, and that merely because they have his image. Hear what the
Apostle says expressly to this purpose, 1 John 5. 1. Every one that loves him
that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him. He that says he looks
upon Christ as precious, and hates them that are like him, is a liar, and the
truth is not in him. God will set such men down not for the prizers, but for
the despisers of Christ. Thus much for examination.

3. For Exhortation. This may commend several duties to us all.

1. Bless God for this precious stone. The more excellent Christ is, the more
should our hearts he enlarged to bless God for him. How exceeding great is his
love to his Church, that has laid for their foundation such a precious stone
as Christ is; had he not greatly and dearly loved you, he would not have parted
with this precious stone out of his bosom. He had given you nothing, if he had
not not given you Christ, and now you have Christ he will not deny you any
thing. The Apostle argues strongly, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own
Son, etc. how shall he not together with him also freely give us all things?
God has taken away all ground of questioning other things, from them to whom
he has given Christ. He that gives a man freely his best jewel, will not stick
with him for a few common stones. Let not a day go over your heads without
praises to God for Jesus Christ.

2. Let this encourage every one to build on him. We have encouragement enough
to build on him, because he is elected of God; and encouragement also, because
he is so precious. Build not your salvation on those rotten stones of merit, or
free will, etc. but upon this precious stone Jesus Christ. He undoes himself,
who leaves this precious cornerstone for any mean coner-stone which God has
never designed. He is an unwise Christian that refuses a foundation of
precious stone to build on a sandy foundation.

3. Whatever has reference to Christ, let it be precious. The Apostle speaks
of precious faith, 2 Pet. 1. 1. Faith is precious, because it lays hold on so
precious a Christ, and on so precious promises, and because it works such
precious effects, etc. We should have a care that that faith which has to do
with Christ be actively precious. It Is precious when its right bred, and when
it is active, when it is of the best sort. So love Christ with a precious love,
not with ordinary, but with choice affection. Fear Christ with a precious
fear. Obey Christ with a precious obedience, that is, obedience of the best
kind. Worship Christ with precious worship. It will be another character that
Christ is precious to us, when we have a care that every thing that refers to
him be choice and precious. Cursed is the deceiver, says the Prophet, Man. 1.
14. that has a male in his flock, and sacrifices to God a corrupt thing: for
I am a great King; that is the reason rendered. Gods greatness should make men
offer of the best they have. Christ is a very precious stone. Whatever relates
to him, its fit should be precious as he is precious.

4. Esteem more highly of him then you have done. Let your thoughts of him be
raised and sublimate. Consider three things. 1. The more you prize him, the
faster you will stick to him. He is easily seduced from Christ, that has low
thoughts of Christ. High appreciations will help us much against seduction. 2.
The more you prize him, the better you will obey him. The esteem of a person
makes service done with more freedom of Spirit and readiness of mind. 3. The
more you prize him, the more cheerfully will you suffer for him; respect of the
person for whom we suffer, makes hard and heavy burdens light. Amor meus
crucifixus. No reproaches will damp that soul to whom Christ is precious.

1 PET. 2. 8. A stone of stumbling, and a rock XXIII. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth.
Lon. March 13. 1652.
of offense.
THe Apostle having in the former Verse declared what Christ is to believers;
does in this verse proceed to show what he is to unbeleevers; he is to them a
cornerstone, sanctified and appointed of God, to support and bear them up
against all shakings from within, and assaults from without; he is to these,
through their disobedience and incredulity, a stone of stumbling, and rock of
offense, upon which they dash themselves to pieces without recovery. Here are
two words used, but they denote one and the same thing, only they are doubled,
to show the certainty and reality of the thing threatened.

(...) do not much differ in this place. (...) may denote a single stone, (...)
a multitude of stones. And then for the other words,

(...) and (...), Though they do something differ in their Etymologies, yet as
to the sense and meaning in this place they do not differ, as is well observed
by Estius and other learned men.

(...) is from (...), to dash against a thing, it signifies a stone or any
other impediment cast in a man's way, against which he dasheth his foot, and so
stumbleth or falls. And then for the other word,

(...), it comes from (...) to halt, and is used for any thing which is an
occasion of rain. Stephanus observes, that it is a word peculiar to Scripture,
never used in any profane Author. It signifies properly, as learned men
observe the bridge in the trap, which by its falling down catches, the creature
in the snare, and so ruins it; and from thence is used to denote any thing
which is occasion to others of stumbling or falling in the ways of God.

Now, offense or scandal is twofold. It is either Scandalum Datum, or Acceptum.
Active, or Passive. Offense given, or offense taken.

1. Offense given, or Active scandal, is, when the error or fault is on his
part, which lays the scandal. This is twofold, Scandalum, Contristationis, Or
Lapsus.

Scandalum Contristationis. An offense or scandal of grief when any thing is
done or said which gives just occasion of sorrow unto our brethren. Of this the
Apostle speaks, Romans 14. 21. and v. 15.

Scandalum lapsus. An offense or scandal of falling is, when any thing is
spoken or done whereby an occasion of sinning is given to our brethren. Of this
the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 8. 9, 10, 11. This is done either by evil counsel,
Mat. 16. 23. Romans 16. 18. Rev. 2. 14. By evil example, Esaias 9. 16. Mat. 15. 14.
Or by abuse of Christian liberty, in the use of things indifferent, Romans 14.
and 1 Cor 8.

2. Offense taken, or passive scandal, is, when things or words which are both
good and seasonable, are by sinister and perverse malignity of mind made an
occasion of offense. Thus the doctrine of Christ's crucifying was an offense and
scandal to the Jews, 1 Cor. 1. 23. It was foolishness to the wise
self-conceited Greeks, and it was a stumbling block to the malignant Jews.

Now when the Apostle says, Christ is a stone of stumbling and rock of
offense. We are to understand it passively, not Actively. Christ Jesus, nor any
thing of Christ, is no just occasion of offense to any; he lived and died
without giving just offense to any. His counsel was good, his example was holy,
his whole conversation was so ordered, that none could justly be offended at
him. And yet through the wickedness of their hearts, many did then, and do
still, to their own ruin, take offense at him. The Observation is this, viz.

Doct. The Lord Jesus Christ is to wicked men a stone of stumbling and a rock
of offense. Though Christ be in himself a precious cornerstone of Gods own
appointment and choosing, yet do wicked men make him to be unto themselves a
stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense. It Is very common and ordinary for
wicked men to be offended, and to stumble at Jesus Christ. Many places of
Scripture do make mention of the offense which the wicked should take at
Christ. See Esaias 8. 14, 15. Though these words be not spoken directly, yet they
are spoken typically of Christ. Adumbratus fuit Christus, qui non instar arcis,
sed offendiculi potius Israelitis futurus erat, says Calvin upon the place.
Though Christ be in himself a Sanctuary, and be so to the elect, yet to the
ungodly and carnal, he is both a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense. As,
many are gathered and saved by him, so shall many be broken, and snared, and
taken because of him. To this agrees that old prophecy of Simeon concerning
Christ, Luke 2. 34. Behold, says he, this child is set for the fall and
rising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which shall be spoken against.
And as it was foretold of him, so we read in the Gospel, that it was fulfilled
concerning him; many were causlesly offended at him. In the handling of this
point, I shall open these two things.

1. What it is in Christ at which men stumble and take offense. 2. Whence it is
that they do take offense.
We shall show first the matter of the offense. Secondly, the occasion of this
causlesse offense.

1. For the first. There are many occasions of offense which men take at
Christ, I reduce all to these three heads.

First, some stumble and take offense at his person. I mean the meannesse of
his person. This was the great stumbling block of the Jews. They looked for a
Messiah of noble birth and Parentage, that should sway the Scepter of David
with much outward pomp and glory. They expected that all those prophesies,
which speak of the glory of Christ's person, should have been literally
fulfilled, therefore they took offense at him. His birth was mean, his
parentage low and ordinary, his attendance small, his education and breeding
contemptible, this made them stumble. The Prophet foretells this of the Jews,
Esaias 53. init. he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, etc. There is no
form nor comeliness in him that we should desire him. They looked for outward
splendour, and because they did not find it, they were offended. The Evangelist
speaks fully of this, Mat. 13. 54, 55, 56, 57. Is not this, say they, the
Carpenters son, etc? They did not consider that the Son of man came not to be
ministered unto, but to Minister, that he came to be a servant, that he was made
under the law, and therefore were scandalized at his meannesse. We may add to
this his shameful and ignominious death which he suffered, this was a great
offense to the Jews. They do to this day upbraid Christians with that curse,
Jer. 17. 5. Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm.
Christ crucified is to this day a stumbling block to the Jews.

Secondly, some stumble at his Doctrine. The Doctrine which Christ preached,
and which by his appointment, is published, is very glorious, yet it is an
occasion of offense to the world. The Arians are offended at the Doctrine of
his Divine nature. The Manichees at the doctrine of his humanity. The Socinians
are offended at the doctrine of his satisfaction. The Papists at his doctrine
of justification by faith alone. The Pelagians and Arminians are offended at
his doctrine, of nullifying the power of nature in things supernatural. The
Antinomians stumble at his doctrine of the ratification of the moral law, etc.
The Pharisees were offended at his doctrine against tradition, Mat. 15. 11, 12.
But to come to particulars.

1. The strictness of his doctrine is a stumbling block to many. The doctrine
of Jesus Christ is very strict, it condemns not only actual sin, but the
very sinful risings of corruption in the heart. He that looks upon a woman,
says our Savior, to lust after her, has committed adultery with her in his
heart, Mat. 5. 28. so v. 29. If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out, and
cast it from thee, etc. Duri sermones durioris Magistri, have some said of
these words. They are hard sayings of a hard master. If we consider the duties
of the Gospel, they are not only barely to be performed, but they are to be
performed cordially, sincerely, else they are not accepted. Thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind,
and with all thy strength. Corrupt nature would have full swinge and liberty,
the Doctrine of Christ will not allow it, therefore is offense taken at it.

2. The spirituality of his Doctrine offends others. The Doctrine of Jesus
Christ in the Gospel is a very spiritual doctrine, John 6. 63. The words which
I speak to you, says Christ, they are Spirit, and they are life. It Is the
honor of Christ's Doctrine, that it is not fleshly, but spiritual, and they
that are spiritual love it, because of its spirituality. You may see the
spiritualnesse, and efficacy of the Word, Heb. 4. 12. it is quick, and powerful,
and mighty in operation, sharper then a two edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, etc. Now because men are carnal, they are
offended at a spiritual word. The Apostle calls it (...), James 1. 21. A carnal
heart does not love the word should be an engraffed word. They are contented it
should come into their ears, but they do not love it should sink into their
hearts, therefore are they offended at it.

3. The mysticalnesse of his Doctrine, is a stumbling stone to others. The
Doctrine of Christ in his Gospel is a doctrine very mysterious, 1 Timothy 3. 16.
It Is in many things above reason. The Doctrine of the Trinity of persons in the
unity of essence, is above reason that God should be one, and yet three. The
Doctrine of the the two natures in the person of Christ. These and many others
are above reason. The doctrine of self-denial. The doctrine of losing a man's
life to save it, the doctrine of regeneration, of the resurrection of the body,
these are very mysterious. And because they are so, offense is taken at them,
read John 6. 51, 52. how were the Jews offended, because he had preached that,
except men did eat his flesh and blood, they had no life in them? They strove
among themselves, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat? nay, not
only the Jews, but many of the Disciples also were offended at this doctrine,
v. 60, 61. The mysticalnesse and height of the Gospel, and doctrines of it do
offend now to this day.

4. The simplicity of his doctrine is an offense to others. The Doctrine of
Christ in the Gospel is laid down with great plainness. Though the Gospel be
sufficiently Rhetorical, yet it is written with much plainness. The penmen of
Scripture did purposely avoid the entising words of men's wisdom, lest they
should corrupt the hearts of men from the simplicity that is in Christ. It Is
the excellency of the Gospel, that it is set down in plainness and simplicity.
Painting is fitter for harlots then for chaste women. Naked truth is best; if
other dresses be put upon it, it is corrupted. The wise Greeks stumbled at this
stumbling stone. They thought Tully and Demosthenes were more eloquent then the
Apostles and Prophets. The Apostle speaks fully to this, 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18, 22,
23. Many are to this day offended at this very thing, they think there are not
those strains of wit in the writings of the Apostles as are in other writings,
when as the truth is, the highest eloquence, is the eloquence of God in the
Scriptures.

5. The severity of his Doctrine is a stumbling stone to others. The Law and
Gospel do both threaten damnation for disobedience, and impenitence. The axe is
laid to the root of the tree, says John, Mat. 3. 10. Every tree that brings
not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. He that believes
not is condemned already, Mark 16. 16. Many are greatly offended at this. They
would have smooth things, but they love not this severity. They do not consider
that as the Gospel is severe against sin, so is it exceeding full of comfort
to all penitent sinners. And then,

6. The consequences of his Dactrine is an offense to others. I shall only
mention two things which do ordinarily follow the doctrine of the Gospel, they
are these.

First, reproaches and persecutions. Seldom do men receive the Doctrine of
Christ in power, but the devil and his instruments raise persecution less or
more against them. You may trace the Gospel by the blood of those that have
professed it. They gnashed upon Steven with their teeth, says the story, Acts
7. 52, 54. and at last stoned him with stones, that he died. Quid est predicare
(says Luther) nisi furorem populi in se derivare? To preach the Gospel, is to
draw the fury of the world upon a man's self. And to profess the Gospel in
sincerity and zeal, is to make a man's self a prey to the wicked. This offends
many. Our Savior foretells this. See two texts, Mat. 13. 21. and Matthew. 24. 9.
10. The presecution which has followed upon Christ's Doctrine, has made
thousands scandalized at Christ.

Secondly, Divisions and contentions. Though Christ be the Prince of peace, and
his Gospel the Gospel of peace, yet accidentally, by reason of men's corruptions
it causes great divisions, Luke 12. 49. I am come, says our Savior, to send
fire on the earth, and what will I, if it be already kindled? so Mat. 10. 34,
35. These are not the effects, but the consequence of the Gospel, it meets with
men's corruptions, which, because they will not have destroyed, they are
enraged. This offends many. Hence some have profanely wished that the Bible
were burnt, they have looked upon it as the great makebate, and incendiary of
the world. Thus is the Doctrine of Christ made a stone of stumbling, and a rock
of offense.

Thirdly, Some stumble and take offense at his Kingdom. I mean not only at
his internal Administration of his Kingdom by his Spirit in the heart, but
also at the external administration of it. I shall reduce all I have to say to
these two heads.

1. The government of his Kingdom. 2. The subjects of his Kingdom.
1. For the government of his Kingdom. Multitudes are offended at this. The
Officers by whom he has appointed to administer this Kingdom. Men do take
much offense, though causlesly at these, decrying, reviling them as if they
were not of God. Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi? all the Lords
people are holy, Numb. 16. 3. All men are Ministers, all may preach; there is no
such office as Minister in the Scripture. There Is no such thing as Ruler in the
Church. The censures they also give offense to many. Admonition, Suspension,
Excommunication, men are greatly offended at all these. The government is too
strict, too severe, it is tyrannical, these are the bitter words of men. The
holy Ghost foretold how men should stumble at the government of Christ's
Kingdom, Ps. 2. 2, 3. Let us break their bond^ asunder, and cast away their
cords from us. Christ's government is a general offense.

2. For the subjects of his Kingdom. Men are offended at Christ, because of his
subjects many ways. Consider these four things.

1. Many are offended at their paucity. Though Christ's subjects be many simply
considered, yet comparatively they are but few. Narrow is the way that leads
into everlasting life, and there are very few that find it, Mat. 7. 14. Satan
has a hundred servants to Christ's one. Caleb and Joshuab only entered into
Canaan of all the men that came out of Egypt. This causes many to stumble at
Christ. Shall we be wiser then others? This one man came in to sojourne, and he
will needs be a judge, say those sons of Belial concerning Lot, Genesis 19. 9.
It Is a great scandal that so few come in.

2. Many are offended because of their meannesse and poverty. Few of the great
men of the world submit truly to Christ. Not many wise, not many noble, not
many mighty has God chosen, says the Apostle, but the foolish things of the
world, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27. Our Savior did foresee that this would be an
occasion of stumbling to men, therefore he lays in a caveat against it, Matthew.
11. 4, 5, 6. Go and tell John, says he, what you have seen and heard. The
blind receive their sight, etc. and blessed is he that shall not be offended
in me. The rich and wealthy oppose and reject Christ. Silk and Scarlet, Gold
and Silver do very rarely follow Christ. This offends many, John 7. 48. say the
Pharisees, have any of the Rulers believed in him, but this people that knows
not the Law is accursed.

3. The miscarriages of which they are guilty. The best of Christ's subjects
being but sanctified in part; and having such a subtle devil to assault, do too
frequently miscarry and fall into sin. This causes many to be offended.
Wicked men though they never observe the holy actions of the godly, yet they
will observe their infirmities. One sin is more talked of then an hundred
acts of holiness. This is a stumbling block to the wicked. See what God says
of David's sin, 2 Samuel 12. 14. They that would learn nothing by David's piety,
did take offense at his sin. Though it be unreasonable that men should be
offended at Christ for the failings of his servants, yet it is ordinary.

4. The sad Apostasy of those that have professed subjection to him. There are
in Christ's family many rotten-hearted professors. The falling of these is an
occasion why many are offended at Christ. Our Savior speaks of this, Matthew
26. 56. The fall of such hardens the hearts of many against Christ and his
Religion, John 6. 66.

Thus much for the first particular, the occasion of this offense.

1 PET. 2. 8. A stone of stumbling, etc. XXIV. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Land.
March 27. 1652.

SEcondly, Quae causa? How it comes to pass that so many are offended at
Christ? The Reasons are such as these, viz.

1. Ignorance of Christ. Blindness is one great cause of natural stumbling,
John 11. 9, 10. If any man walk in the night he stumbleth, because there is no
light in him. The spiritual blindness of the mind is one principal reason why
the world stumbleth at Christ. They know not the glory of his person, they know
not the excellency of his Doctrine, they know not the nature of his Kingdom,
therefore they take offense at him. This is that which the Apostle mentions, 1
Cor. 2. 8. This ignorance of Christ arises partly from want of studying his
Word. They do not search the record which is given to Christ in the Scriptures;
partly, from their infidelity, they will not believe the report given of him,
by such a have the knowledge of him. The Prophet speaks of this, Esaias 53. init.
The worlds blindness is the cause of the worlds offense. Consult those two
texts, and the trath of this will appear. The one is, Prove. 3. 21, 22, 23. The
other is Mat. 15. 14. The blindness of the Pharisees did arise from the gross
ignorance of the Pharisees.

2. Precipitancy and rashness. Though a man have eyes to see, yet if he be
heedlesse and rash, his foot may stumble in a plain way. A careless eye
occasions a stumbling foot. The greatest part of men are heedlesse in spiritual
matters, They rush on as the horse rushes into the battle, Jer. 8. 6. The
Scripture speaks of pondering the steps of our feet. It Is the Wise-mans
counsel, Prove. 4. 25, 26. Most men neglect this counsel in the things of
Christ. They walk at all adventure, turning their eyes, now this way, now that
way, and through their carlesnesse and indiscretion in not examining things,
they take offense and fall. The Apostles advice is, to try, and prove all
things, 1 These. 5. 21. Advisednesse and deliberation in the matters of God is a
special virtue. Most men are of a hurrying spirit, and this makes them stumble.

3. Heart distemperednesse. A man that has either un intoxicated head, or a
diseased body, soon stumbles. Wicked men have hearts full of distempers. There
are many unmortified lusts in their hearts, which they are not willing to part
with, pride, passion, uncleanness, etc. These are indulged. These they will
not part with. They love some sin better then Christ, and because they cannot
have Christ and their sins, they are offended. This is hinted to u in the
text. Such as stumble at the Word, are said to be disobedient. He that allows
any sin unrepented of in his heart, will sooner or later stumble at Christ.
See Luke 16. 14. The Pharisees who were covetous, derided Christ. Our Savior
tells them they could not serve God and Mammon, and they being given to
covetousness were scandalized, and derided him, (...), they snuffed at him as
the word signifies. Walking in uprightness, and being without offense are
joined together, Phil. 1. 10. An bypocritical and profane heart will be a
stumbling heart. He that walks up to the knees in mire may easily stumble.
Wicked men walk up to the very loins in the mire of sinful distempers, and
this causes them to be offended at Christ. The way of the righteous (says
Solomon) is made plain, Prove. 15. 19. It Is raised up as a Causey. Godly men
walk in plain even ways, wicked men walk in rough, uneven, myry ways,
therefore they stumble at Christ. They are burdened with the load of sin,
therefore they stumble.

4. Hatred of Christ. Hatred will take offense at every thing done or said by
the person hated. As love does interpret all to the best, so hatred interprets
all to the worst. Ahab hated Micaiah, and therefore took offense at every thing
he said. You may read the story, 1 Kings 22. 8. Now wicked men have Christ with
a perfect hatred. There is dissimilitude between Christ and them, and because
of that cruel hatred. They are impure, Christ is pure; they are unholy, Christ
is holy. As similitude breeds love, so dissimilitude creates hatred. You read,
Luke 19. 14. that Christ's own Citizens hated him. Christ is hated not only by
foreigners, but by them of his own household. Where there is hatred, there will
be offense, Mat. 24. 10. Many shall be offended and they shall hate one
another. Till the soul lay aside its hatred it will not cease to stumble at
every thing of, etc.

5. Unbelief. Infidelity is the cause of stumbling. This may be gathered
clearly from the text compared with the foregoing ver. unto you that believe he
is precious, but unto them that are unbelievers he is a stone of stumbling.
Most men walk by sense, and not by faith* they see the outside of Christ in his
Gospel, but they do not see the beautiful inside of Christ, they see that in
Religion which appears unpleasing and bitter; but they want faith to see that
which is sweet and lovely, therefore they are scandalized.

6. The bad example of others. Examples have a very great efficacy and
operation, whether they be good or bad; good examples are great strengthnings
to them that are good; and bad examples are great provocations to them that are
bad, the Apostle speaks of this 1 Cor. 8. 10. Asahels lying dead in the way
occasioned a stop in the march of others, 2 Samuel 2. 23. One wicked man eyes the
example of another, and because he sees that such and such were offended at
Christ, especially if they be learned, wise, etc. he upon that very example
takes offense likewise. Thus much for the explication.

The Uses are for Information. Exhortation.

For information. It teaches us these four lessons.

1. This may fortify us against being dejected because of the offense which
wicked men take at as causlesly. It is too frequent to see wicked men
scandalized at the people of God even for their holy actions. They are offended
with you for your prayers, for your non compliance with them in their sinful
ways, for their strict observing of the Sabbath, etc. The Apostle mentions
this, 1 Pet. 4. 4. The best actions of the godly are occasions of stumbling to
the wicked. Well; this text may greatly help the people of God against being
offended, so as to despond because of such causlesse offense. If Christ was a
stone of stumbling is it any great matter if we be stones of stumbling? If they
were offended at Christ, will they not be offended at us? It is enough for the
Disciple that he be as his master. Gods people should take care that they give
no occasion of stumbling to the worst of men; but if they will take offense at
the holy practices, Gods people should set but very little by such offenses,
Mat. 15. 14. especially considering the close of the text; whereunto they were
appointed.

2. How unfit and incompetent Counselors are wicked men in the matters of
Religion? They may be Oracles in and about civil and worldly things, but for
the things of Christ they are of no judgment or understanding. Christ is to
them a stone of stumbling, they dash themselves in p^eces upon him. They reject
him, they despise him both in his person and doctrine, and therefore are not to
be consulted much less followed in their advice abort these matters. Artifice
in su^ art consul^^^^on. It Is a vain thing to ask advice from men about those
things wherein they have no skill. Wicked men have no spiritual true skill in
the matters of Christ. They are more like to seduce us then ^n direct us in
these matters. It Is unsafe to make them our Counselors who are ^o prejudiced
against the things of God. Who would put himself under the conduct of a blind
man, especially in a way which he had never traveled? The mischief of a wicked
heart.

3. There is nothing so good but a wicked heart will turn it to its own
detriment. As there is no thing so bad but a gracious heart will suck some good
out of it, so there is nothing so good, but an ungracious heart will suck some
hurt out of it. A wicked heart is like a spider, it will contract poison out of
the sweetest Rose. Nothing better then Christ, and yet a wretched sinful heart
will make him a stumbling stone; Word, Ordinances, Promises, Mercies of all
sorts are made pitfals and snares by a naughty heart. A wicked heart undoes it
self more by the mercies it receives then by all its evils. Its a fearful
imprecation of David against the wicked, Psalm. 69. 22. Let their table become a
snare, etc. A wicked heart is of sinful ingenuity and wittiness to undo it
self by the best things.

4. This may be some relief to the poor Ministers when they see men scandalized
and enraged against their persons or doctrines. Its a great grief to their
sp^rits to think how the truths they preach fall under contempt, the
administrations of Ordinances divine quarreled at: well, it was so with Christ,
his person that was b^tter then ours, his doctrine that was purer then ours,
his administrations that were more glorious then ours were. If God will have
his Ministers lie as stumbling blocks upon which sinful men shall fall so as to
destroy themselves, they must be content if God will have them preach, men
judicially to impenitency and hardness of heart, as Esaias did Chapter 6. 10. they
must bear it. Christ hardly preached a Sermon or made a prayer or dispensed any
Ordinance but the greatest part of them that were present, were scandalized at
him. He was set for the fall of many in Israel, as well as for their rising,
Luke 2. 37. If God will have his Ministers to be so to any, it is not strange,
especially because they are, and shall be a sweet savor to God, both in them
that perish, and in them that are saved, 2 Cor. 2. 15.

2. For Exhortation. First, to the godly; and Secondly, to the wicked and
ungodly.

1. For the godly.

First, Bless God that Christ is not a stumbling stone to you. That neither
his person, nor his doctrine, nor his Kingdom do offend you. The time was when
you were off^nded with Christ as much as any; and if God should leave you to
your selves, you would stumble upon him again. That you are enabled to close
with his person, to embrace his doctrine, to submit to his government without
offense, is a mighty mercy, especially now, when so many are scandalized, Mat.
11. 6.

Secondly, Labor so to carry your selves, that ye may not occasion others to
be offended at Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 32. Paul was very careful of it himself, Acts
24. 16 The sinfulness of Professors will make men take offense at Christ. The
doctrine of Christ the government of Christ will be stumbled at, if you have
not care of your ways more then ordinary. If you take not heed to your selves,
both in matter of opinion and practice, you will pave a way to make many fall
upon Christ himself. Your miscarriages refl^ct dishonor both upon Christ's
person and doctrine. Give no offense says Paul to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.
3. That the Ministry be not blamed; Christianity will be blamed, yea, Christ
himself will be blamed, if you be not careful to avoid miscarriages. And
besides you will be instrumental to damn the souls of your brethren for whom
Christ dyed. Remember that of our Savior, Mat. 18. 7. Woe unto that man by whom
the offense comes.

2. For the wicked. Take heed of making Christ any longer a stumbling stone.
It Is a very sad thing to stumble at Christ. Let me show it you in these five
particulars.

1. It Is a very sinful thing. The sinfulness of it appears in this.

(1) It Is a charging of wickedness upon Christ. He that takes offense at
Christ, what does he but say, that there is something in Christ which is matter
of exception? To make Christ a stumbling stone, is either to profess that
Christ is blame worthy, or that thy self art foolish. What a high sin is it
to asperse Christ the holy one with any miscarriage? he was holy harmless,
undefiled separate from sinners, Heb. 7 26 And

2. Its the inlet to other sins. It hinders the soul, 1. From loving Christ
with that love that love that is meet. 2 From obeying Christ. 3. From believing
in Christ. 4. From recommending him to others. 5. From being thankful for
Christ. 6. It turns the soul upon the sin of blaspheming and reviling
Christ. 7 I^ hinders the soul from suffering for Christ. He that stumbles at
Christ is in the highway to all kind of sin against Christ; he may easily be
persuaded to set up another Christ.

2. It Is a very dangerous thing. It Is dangerous in these two respects.

For first, It makes all that Christ has done or suffered of no effect to us.
He that stumbles at Christ cuts himself off from all the merits and benefits of
Christ's death, Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession. We may say of such a one,
as Paul does of circumcision, Gal 5. 4.

Nay, secondly, It makes Christ, damnation to a person. That of our Savior is
a dreadful Text, Mat. 21. 44. To turn salvation into damnation will be a
double damnation; better to have been damned without a Christ, then to be
damned with a Christ; better a thousand times to have been destroyed without a
Redeemer, then to be destroyed by a Redeemer; better to die without a Savior,
then to die by a Savior.

What should be done that we may stumble no more? 1. Get a clear knowledge of
Christ. 2. Be acquainted with those that embrace him. 3. Be truly offended at
sin. 4. Pray that God would root out of your hearts all occasions of offense.
5. Remember what Christ has done for you, and what he is still a doing for
you; His doctrines, his offices, his government; All that at which offense is
taken, is for your benefit and salvation. 6. To take offense at Christ, is to
stumble at Gods wisdom, mercy, goodness in giving Christ, and in fitting
Christ.

MAL. 4. 2. The Sun of righteousness shall arise XXV. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth.
Lon. April 10. 1653.
with healing in his wings.
THe Prophet Malachy has in this book many contests with the Jews for several
impieties which raged amongst them. At the thirteenth verse of the former
Chapter he contends with them for their Atheism and blaspheming of the
providence of God. Your words have been stout against the Lord, and ye have
said, it is in vain to serve the Lord. They that work wickedness are set up,
and they that tempt God are delivered. Amongst other answers which the Prophet
gives to this blasphemous charge; he tells them there was a day coming, when
Gods dealings shall be manifest, that they themselves should discern a clear
difference between them that served God, and them that served him not, ver. 18.
This difference which should be made between the godly and the wicked, is
amplified in the first verses of this Chapter; for, Behold the day comes, etc.
His dealing with the wicked and disobedient, is set down fully, ver. 1. The day
of the Lord comes, that shall burn as an oven. This day, though it be
particularly meant of the day of Christ's first coming, as is clear by the
context, ver. 5. which is by our Savior himself interpreted of John Baptist
his forerunner, Matthew. 11. 14. yet as some good inte^preters think, it may have
a further reference, namely, to the day of his second coming, when all this
shall be fully accomplished. His dealing with the godly is set down, verse 2.
3. In which are two things.

1. The great happiness which the godly should enjoy in these own persons,
verse 2.

2. The conquest they shall obtain over the wicked, verse 3. Ye shall tread
down the wicked, etc.

In the happiness which is promised to the persons of the godly, as it is set
down, in this Verse we have these three things observable.

1. A description of their persons, unto them that fear my Name This is an
ordinary and usual description whereby the people of Go^ are distinguish^d from
all others, Mal. 3. 16. Eccl. 8. 12. Isa. 50. ^^.

2. The author of their happiness. The Sun of righteousness.

3. The nature of their happiness. This is set down two ways. 1. Generally, he
shall arise upon you. 2 Particularly, This is let down three ways. T^ere are
three great blessings which they should enjoy by the rising of this Sun upon
them.

(1.) Spiritual healing.

(2.) Spiritual freedom. Ye shall go forth.

(3.) Spiritual increase. Ye shall grow up as calves of the shall.

I shall wave the description which is here made of the persons of godly men.
And proceed to the Author of their happiness, which is said to be, The Sun
of righterusnesse, for it is to open this expression that I have now chosen
this text; in the handling of which I shall have occasion to open the
particular benefits which should accrue to the godly, healing, freedom,
growth, The Sun of righteousness. The Sun is used in Scripture in a double
sense.

1. Properly. For that creature which God has set in the heavens, and called
by that name, Psalm. 136. 8.

2. Metaphorically, or improperly; and so it is used for several things, which
carry some similitude to the natural Sun. And thus its used several ways.

First, for Gods special favor, Psalm. 84. 11. The Lord God is a Sun and
shield.

Secondly, for comfort, Job 30. 28. I went mourning without the Sun, that is,
without comfort.

Thirdly, for prosperity and settled peace. Esaias 60. ^0. Thy Sun shall no more
go down, neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self.

Fourthly, for eminency and height of condition and state, Rev. 16. 8. The
fourth Angel poured out his vial upon the Sun, which Mr. Mede makes to be the
Germane Empire, the Papal Sun of the heaven.

Fifthly, for Christ himself. So it is used in this text, he that is called the
Messenger of the Covenant, chap. 3. 1. is here called the Sun of
righteousness. The Observation is this.

Doct. That the Lord Jesus Christ is the Sun of righteousness. Zacharias the
father of John Baptist gives him a name parallel to this, Luke 1. 78. (...),
The dayspring from on high has visited us. In the handling of this Doctrine,
I shall by way of Explication open these three things.

1. In what respects Christ is called the Sun. 2. Why he is called the Sun
of righteousness. 3. How he does excel the natural Sun.
1. For the first. Christ may be compared to the natural Sun in three respects.

1. In respect of his own person. The natural Sun has a shadow of two
excellencies which are in the person of Christ. As,

(1) His glory and Majesty. Of all the visible works which God has made, there
is not any so glorious as the Sun; it is full of splend or, and glory: The
Sun is Anima munds, the very soul of the world. The brightness of the Sun
is so transcendent that the weak eye of man is dazzled with the beholding of
it. See how David describes this creature, Psalm. 19. 5. He is as a bridegroom
coming out of his Chamber. Never was any bridegroom, no not the greatest
Prince in the world, in such attire on his wedding day, as the Sun is every
morning at his coming out of his Chamber. So glorious is the Sun, that he
draws all the eyes of men to look upon him at his appearing. The Lord Jesus
Christ is a glorious person. The Sun is but blackness if it be compared with
Jesus Christ. His face is ten thousand times brighter then the Sun when it is
clothed in its best apparel. He is the bright shining of his Fathers glory,
and the express image of his person, Heb 1. 3. When he was transfigured upon
the mountain in the sight of his Disciples, the text says, His face did shine
as the S^nne, and his raiment as white as the light, Matthew. 17. 2. Could we but
see the face of Christ as it is now shining at the right hand of God, we should
say the Sun were but like sackcloth in comparison of it; how much more bright
is he in his Godhead? this is so glorious, that no man can see it and live. The
face of Jesus Christ is that which makes and constitutes the very glory of
heaven. And then.

2. His omniscience. The Sun in the firmament travels up and down, and
beholds every part of the world. David says, there is nothing hid from the
heat of it, Psalm. 19. 6. Jesus Christ as he is the Son of God is perfectly
omniscient. The Apostle speaks of his omniscience, Heb. 4. 13. There is no
creature that is not manifest in his sight, etc. Yea, he sees every thing not
by moving up and down as the Sun does, but by one fixed and constant view.
There can be no fence made to keep out the sight of his eye, he does simul and
semel, together and at once behold all creatures with all their motions,
thoughts, and imaginations. This is the first.

II. In respect of his effects and workings upon his people. There is a great
resemblance between the Suns effects upon the creatures, and Christ's effects
upon his people. I shall instance in eight particulars.

1. The Sun has an enlightening virtue. The Sun is the great luminary which
God has appointed and made to carry the light abroad to the inhabitants of the
earth. The presence of the Sun makes day. The Sun is the great torch of
heaven, by which men and other creatures see what to do, and where to go, Genesis
1. 14, 16. By his light we see it and all other things: Jesus Christ has an
enlightening power, and does actually enlighten the hearts of men. The soul is
by nature in darkness, and never sees till Christ beam down his light upon
it. All men by nature in regard of spiritual light, are as that blind man was,
John. 9. 1. without any spiritual sight. They see neither sins, blackness,
nor their own misery by reason of sin. They see not Christ's beauty, not
graces excellency till their eyes are opened. They have thick skales upon their
eyes, as Paul had before his conversion, Act. 9. 18. Therefore they are called
darkness, and their state a state of darkness, Ephesians. 5. 8. Now Christ gives
them light. When he rises upon them savingly, then, and not till then do they
see their condition, and the way out of it, Ephesians. 5. 14 As the Sun is speculum
munds, the worlds looking glass; so is Christ speculum Animae, the souls
looking glass. All spiritual light which is given to the soul, is in and
thorough Jesus Christ. So the Apostle tells us, 2 Cor. 4. 6. The Gospel is the
vehiculum lucis, the great chariot that carries this light abroad, but the
fountain of it is this bright Sun of righteousness Jesus Christ. Spiritual
illumination is Christ's work. This is that which the Evangelist says, John 1.
9. John Baptist carried the ^orch, but Christ himself was the light. Till this
Sun be up, the soul lies in gross darkness, but when it appears then light
comes Presently, Esaias 60. 1. When the glory of the Lord is risen upon the
soul, then is darkness expelled, and the soul shines forth. The heart that is
as dark as any dungeon; when the beams of this Sun are darted down into it,
is as light as a Paradise. Christ turns Egypt into Goshen. And then,

2. The Sun has a warming virtue. Though it be not formally hot, yet it is
hot in its effect. Psalm 19. 6. The beams of the Sun warm the earth and the
air, the bodies of the rational and irrational creatures. Experience teaches
that the Sun has a heating power; the light and motion of it causes heat.
The Lord Jesus Christ has a warning virtue in him. The heart that is as cold
as ye is heated and warmed by the influences of his Spirit into a good temper.
The lukewarm heart, when Christ shines upon it is set into a burning heat.
The beams which are cast from Christ in his Ordinances, put the cold soul into
a spiritual sweat. We have an instance of this in the two Disciples, Luke 24.
32. They were in a freezing temper till Christ overtook them, but when they had
continued a while in that spiritual sunshine, their hearts were put into a
violent flame. Did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us by the
way? The forerunner of Christ tells the Jews, that he that came after him, did
baptize men with the holy Ghost and with fire, Matthew. 3. 11. Christ can kindle
the sparks of grace which seem to be as dead, and put them into a burning
flame. Many a Saint has come to the Ordinances with his heart like the cold
earth, and before he has departed, Christ has sent him away like a burning
lamp; the cold water has been put into a vehement boiling that the heart has
run over again, eruct^vit cor meum, Psalm. 45. 1.
Peter grew cold at the high Priests fire when the beams of Christ were
withdrawn, but when Christ shone upon him his cold heart was heated, when
Elisha had lien a while upon the Shunamites dead child, his flesh waxed warm,
2 King. 4. 24. Though a soul be as cold as death, if Jesus Christ do but once
stretch himself upon it, it waxes warm. And then,

3. The Sun has a comforting virtue. The Sun is in Scripture put for
comfort, Job. 30. 28. To walk without the Sun is to walk without comfort; and
Solomon tells us, that it is a pleasant thing for the eyes to behold the Sun,
Eccles. 11. 7. Weak and sickly persons, when they are brought into the
Sunshine, find their spirits cheered by it. The Lord Jesus Christ has a
heart-comforting virtue. He is the first inlet of comfort into the soul. He is
the preserver of joy in the soul; and he it is that restores joy unto the soul
after dejections and droopings of heart. Noah was herein a figure of Christ;
see what his father Prophecies of him, Genesis 5. ^9. Jesus Christ is the true
Noah, the great comforter of his people in all the griefs and sorrows of this
world. Christ is the foundation of all true comfort to thy soul. Toll
Christum, toll sol^^^um, that reconci^iation which he has made between God
and man, is the very basis of all consolation. Whatsoever in God, in the
Scriptures yields any comfort to the soul, is so on^y in and through Christ.
that comfort which is not built upon Christ, is bastard comfort, which will end
in terror. The Spirit of God is called the comforter, John 15. 20. his office
is immediately to cheer the soul. How does he comfort but even by making
application to the soul of a sinner of that which is merited for him? All the
arguments whereby the spirit comforts the heart are drawn from Christ, he
seals up to the soul that Christ is his, and so fills it with comfort. And
then,

4. The Sune has a healing virtue, this is in the text. There would be no
health amongst men or any other living creatures, if there were no Sun. The
world would be a Hospital if the Sun were not.

First, the Sun dries up cold moistures, exhales vapors which would infect
the bodies of men and other creatures.

Secondly the Sun helps on the growth and vegetation of all healing plants,
and in both these respects has healing in his wings. The Lord Jesus Christ
has a healing virtue; he heals both as medicine and Physician. His blood is
the Physic that heals, and he himself is the Physician that applies it to the
soul. The Scripture speaks of Christ as a healer, Esaias 61. 1. He heals the soul
of the guilt of sin by the grace of justification, and he heales it of the
filthiness of sin by the grace of sanctification. The Prophet Esaias speaks of
this, chap. 53. 5. By his stripes we are healed. If Christ do but lay his hands
upon the diseased soul, it is cured whatsoever infirmity be upon it. The very
border of his garment, if it be but touched with a hand of faith, cures all the
bloody issues of the soul. You have a rare cure done by the touch of Christ's
garment, Mat. 9. 20. There are thousands of souls in heaven that have found
perfect cure of strange diseases under the wings of Christ. And then,

5. The Sun has a melting and softning virtue. Though it patch and harden the
clay, yet it softens the wax; the hot beams of the Sun melt the ye, and
mollify the ground when it is frozen into hardness. The Sun when it was up
melted the Manna, Exodus 16. 21. The Lord Jesus Christ has a melting and
softning virtue; if he do but send down one hot gleam upon the soul, it is
dissolved and melted like wax. We have an example of Christ's softning virtue in
Peter, Luke 22 61, 62. his heart was grown as hard as ye by his threefold
denial of Christ, and yet one beam from the eye of Christ thawed this ye into
tears. The Lord turned and looked upon Peter, and he went out and wept
bitterly. Christ's eyes are like a flame of fire, Rev. 1. 14. These heavenly
beams of Christ are able to turn the flint-stone into springs of water. Those
three thousand mentioned, Acts 2 37. were as hard as marbles, for they had
their hands in the blood of Christ, v. 36. yet when Christ did shine upon them
in the minstery of Peter, they are so soft that any frame may be put upon them,
Men and brethren what shall we do? The Jailer, a rough hardened sinner that drew
blood from the backs of the Apostles; yet when Jesus Christ did but spread his
hot wings upon him even at midnight, how is he softened? Acts 16. 29. 30. he
that was lately like a stone, is now like wax, any impression may be put upon
him. There is not the most stiff necked sinner in this or any other
Congregation, but if Christ put out his power, he can distill him into tears of
repentance. And then,

6. The Sun has a vegetative virtue, It does bring on the growth of plants
and flowers, and all vegetables. The Sun darws the sap from the root into the
branches, and makes it th^ust out into buds, blossoms, and fruit, and when the
fruit is knit, it ripens it and brings it on to perfection. This is mentioned,
Deuteronomy. 33. 14. To this Bildad alludes. Job 8. 16: He is green before the Sun,
and his branch shoots forth in his garden. Though the soil be never so good,
and the husbandry never so exact, yet without the Sun nothing comes to
perfection; the fruitfulness of the earth is to be ascribed to the Sun more
then to the Earth or Tillage. Jesus Christ has a vegetating virtue, he brings
on the spiritual growth of every grace in the soul; did not this Sun send
down his beams the spiritual plantation would come to nothing. The Scripture
attributes all Christian growth to Christ; he is the root which feeds grace;
All supply comes from him. God has stored all our nourishment in Christ, from
him to be communicated as we stand in need. The Apostle sets this out in two
texts, Col. 2. 19. Ephesians. 4. 16. And the Prophet in the text makes it one
effect of Christ's rising upon the Saints. They shall grow up as the calves of
the stall. You may thank Jesus Christ for the thriving of your graces, as well
as for the planting of your graces, John 15. 5. And then,

7. The Sun has a purifying virtue. When your garments are moldy, you hang
them out in the Sun; when your rooms are musty, you set open the windows to
let in the Sun that they may be sweetened. Jesus Christ has a purifying
virtue, he makes the heart sweet, and he keeps it sweet. See how this Prophet
describes him, Chap. 3. 2, 3. he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers
soap, etc. When the heart has gathered any defilement, when it grows moldy
and musty, there is no way to get the ill favor out; but to bring it under the
shine of Jesus Christ. And then,

8. The Sun has an elevating virtue. By the heat and power of the Sun are
many things exhaled and lifted up from the earth, which otherwise would lie
there; many meteors and impressions there are in the air, which are exhaled
from the earth by the power of the Sun: Jesus Christ has an elevating
virtue, he it is that does exhale and lift up the earthly hearts of men to
heavenly things and heavenly meditations. The heart of man naturally is so deep
buried in the earth, that if Christ did not by his heat which he sends down in
his ordinances lift it up; it would never have one thought of heaven: he has
an attractive power to draw up the hearts of men to himself, John 12. 32. It
is from Jesus Christ that ever you had one serious thought of heaven or
heavenly things. The Apostle applies our spiritual raisednesse to Christ, Col.
3. 1, 2. It is from Christ as the merit of it, and it is from him as the worker
of it in us; the power of our spiritual resurrection at first is from Christ,
and the power of Christ is that that helps us to raise our selves higher from
day to day; did not Christ send down his exhaling power, we should lie like
stones and never ascend, he descends and then we ascend.

III. Christ is called the Sun, to show the cleernesse of the Gospel worship,
in respect of the legal dispensation God used toward the Fathers. This is
Calvin's Note upon the text; God did never shine so clearly to the sons of men
in the person of Christ. The Ceremonial Law with all the appendixes thereof,
was but dark: Gospel worship is clear. The Apostle compares the Law to a
shadow, Heb. 10. 1. that was but Moon light or star light, Gospel worship is
Sun-light, 2 Cor. 3. 10. The Patriarchs saw Christ, and hoped in him, and were
saved by him as well as we, but it was more darkly: In the Gospel the heavens
were opened wider then ever. God did never manifest himself so fully and
clearly to the world as he has done by Jesus Christ. The Apostle speaks of
this Heb. 1. 1. (...), Hence is that of the Prophet to the Gospel Church, Isa.
60. 1, 2. 19. 20. All former light was but like the dawning light of the
morning in respect of this midday light of the Gospel. The Gospel Revelation
is full, and perfect. John 1. 18. God was declared before, but never so fully
as by Christ. The fathers looked for additions, but Christ brought to light the
whole will of God: No further Revelation is to be expected till we come to
heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

MAL. 4. 2. The Sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in his wings.
SEcondly, for the second, Christ is called the Sun of righteousness in two
respects;

1. In regard of himself. He is the holy and just one. He has not, nor ever
shall have the least spot of unrighteousness in his own person; he was born
righteous and innocent: That holy thing that shall be borne of thee, shall be
called the Son of God, so says the Angel to the Mother Virgin, Luke 1. 35.
(...) is more then (...). It has the force of the abstract. And he lived and
dyed righteous. The Apost^e speaks of him, Heb. 7. 26. As of one holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners. He was without spot and without
guile, made like unto us in all things sin only excepted. Satan himself, though
he be the father of lies, and full of bitter enmity against Jesus Christ, is
forced to give this testimony to him, that he is the holy one of God, Mark 1.
24. He could neith^r have redeemed himself from death, nor have saved us from
the wrath of God, if he had not been perfectly righteous.

2. In regard of his Elect; He is their righteousness: so the Prophet calls
him, Jer. 23. 6. Jesus Christ is the believers righteousness two ways.

1. He is their righteousness in regard of justification. It is thorough the
Imputation of his righteousness unto them, that they are made righteous in the
sight of God; God looking upon them as invested with the righteousness of
Christ, accounts them righteous. Of this the Apostle speaks, Romans 3. 21, 22,
25, 26. All ar unrighteous in themselves, and it is through him alone that they
come to be righteous.

2. He is their righteousness in regard of sanctification. Of this the Apostle
speaks, 1 Cor. 1. 30. where he tells us, that Christ is made unto us, of God
sanctification, as well as righteousness; Jesus Christ may be as truly called
our righteousness of sanctification as well as of justification. He is so in
four respects.

(1) He is the meritorious cause of it, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. Grace is as truly the
purchase of Christ as glory; he has brought holiness for us, as well as
heaven: sanctification is no less the price of Christ's blood then salvation.
We are 1 Cor. 1. 2. sanctified in Christ Jesus, propter Christum says
Piscator, i. e. propter satisfactionem illius.

(2) He is the material cause of it. It is by the blood of Christ that the
filthiness of the soul is done away. Christ's blood is the souls laver in
which it is washed and made white, Heb. 9. 14. And then,

(3) He is the exemplary cause of it. Our sanctification is according to that
copy or pattern of holiness which is in Christ himself. This is the meaning
of that speech of the Apostle, Joh. 1. 16. As the print which is made upon the
wall answers the engraving or stamp which is upon the seal; so does the
believers holiness answer our holiness of Christ, not in degree and measure,
but in kind and quality.

(4.) He is the efficient cause of it. It Is Christ that does by his spirit
through the Ordinances work holiness in his Saints. He stubs up the roots of
sin and sets the routs of grace in the soul. Of this the Apostle speaks 1
Cor. 6. 11. And it is he that does both preserve it and carry it on from one
degree to another til it come to perfection. So that both in regard of his own
person and in regard of his elect, he is called the Sun of righteousness.

This is the second particular. 3 For the third. Christ excels the natural Sun
in these eight particulars, viz.

1. The natural Sun shines but in one hemisphere at once. Though it circuit
about the earth in a little time, yet it does not sh^ne in all places at once.
Yea there are some parts of the world in which the Sun does not shine for
many months together. Though it be a great body, yet the wings of it are not
large enough to compass the earth all at once, when it rises to us it sets to
our Antipodes, But now Jesus Christ is able to shine over the whole earth at
once. Though there be many parts of the world in which Christ has never
appeared, yet his wings are large enough to overspread the whole earth. This
Sun of righteousness shines in England and in America and all the Christian
world over at the same moment of time. That which is said of the land of Judea
concerning the King of Assyria, Esa. 8. 8. That the stretching out of his wings
should fill the breadth of the land, is true of Christ in reference to the whole
world; The stretchings out of his wings are able to cover the breadth of the
whole world at one moment.

2. The natural Sun gives light but not sight. If a man want the benefit of
seeing, he has no more benefit by the Sun, in respect of seeing; then if
there were no Sun at all, but the Sunne-beames descend with never so much
power upon a blind Bartimeus his eyes will not thereby be opened. But now this
Sun of righteousness has a power to give sight as well as light, he did in
the days of his flesh open the eyes of many that were naturally blind you
read of one, Joh. 9. of two others, Mat. 20. 30. 34. And he does still open the
eyes of them that are spiritually blind. It was he that by Ananias opened the
eyes of Saul, Acts 9. 17. The truth is, no man does ever spiritually see till
the beams of the Sun descend upon him, he is the spiritual dayspring that
gives them power to see who are under the power of the gross darkness of sin
and iniquity.

3. The natural Sun has endamaging qualities as well as healing qualities.
It is many times offensive and prejudiced both to men and fruits.

(1.) It does fully and deface the beautiful countenance of men, Cant. 1. 6. If
the eye of the Sun do but look upon us directly, it changes the color of the
face into a sworthy hue.

(2.) The hot beams of the Sun do sometimes by their vehement shining make
men faint, when the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah, he fainted, Chapter 4. 8.

(3.) The fruits of the earth are many times scorched and withered to nothing
by the violent heat of the Sun, Mat. 13. 6. If God do withhold the rain, and
send out the burning heat of the Sun, the fruits of the earth mourn and
languish. But now Jesus Christ the Sun of righteousness has no hurtful
quality, his beams neither make the face black, nor the spirits faint. He
ripens the fruits of grace in the soul, but he never withers them, his beams
are destructive to none but to such as will not suffer him to shine upon them.
Those fruits that have no root, Christ withers, but where there is root and ^p,
the beams of Christ are never prejudicial. The Sun has a hardening virtue,
but Christ never hardens any, unless it be by accident, because they will not
suffer his beams to enter into their hearts. It Is rather the want of Christ's
beams, then the presence of them, that occasions hardening in any heart.

4. The natural Sun is the creature of this Sun of righteousness. Jesus
Christ as he is God, made this Sun that shines in the Firmament, and put into
it all the glory which is in it. For the Evangelist tells us, that all things
were made by him, and without him was not made any thing that was made, Joh. 1.
3. He gave it both the light and heat which it gives to us. He has set and
appointed it the course which it runs, and which it has run since its
creation, and he does by his providence order its setting and rising for the
good of the world. He is the light of all that light which the Sun has He is
the fountain both of the being and preservation of all that influence which the
Sun does cause to descend upon the world. The dependence of the Sun of
righteousness is upon himself, but the dependence of the natural Sun is upon
him.

5. The natural Sun does communicate his light and heat equally to all. He
shines as much upon the house and lands of the wicked as he does upon the
righteous. He does impart and dispense his influences alike to all, in the same
manner and in the same measure. This our Savior notes as an act of the bounty
of God, Mat. 5. 45. But now it is not so with Jesus Christ the Sun of
righteousness; He gives light and heat to one and not to another. Though all
that live under the shining of the Ordinances do receive so much from Jesus
Christ as is sufficient to leave them without excuse, yet does he cause
peculiar beams to fall upon the hearts of some which do not fall upon another.

He shines upon one only to conviction, on another to conversion. He shines
only upon the ears of some; He lets down hot gleames into the very hearts of
others, 2 Cor. 4. 6. We have an instance of this in Paul, and those that were
in company with him, Act. 9. 6, 7. They saw the light, and heard a voice too, a
confused voice which they did not understand, and therefore chap. 22. 9. Paul
says, they heard not the voice of him that spoke. They heard an inarticulate
sound or a confused voice, but they knew neither who spoke nor what was spoken,
therefore they heard the voice, and yet heard it not; but now Paul both heard
the voice and understood it, and was converted by it, which we do not find
recorded of any of the rest. Some common beams does Christ cast forth upon
all, but his special beams and influences are imparted to none but the Elect.
Nor is this any derogation to the freeness of the grace of Christ, or to the
fullness of it. The fullness and freeness of grace consists more in the
greatness of that he bestows, then in the multitude of them that enjoy what
he gives them: Read of hidden Manna, of a white stone and a new name which
Christ gives to some and not to others, Rev. 2. 17. This Sun of righteness
shines sometimes on one in a house and leaves the rest still in darkness.

6. The natural Sun is an inanimate thing. Though it be in some sense called
the fountain of life, yet it is in it self without life. It has neither the
rational, nor the sensitive, nor the vegetative life. And in this respect the
least-living creature is more glorious then the Sun; a living dog is better
then an inanimate jewel. But now Jesus Christ is a living Sun. This Sun of
righteousness has life as well as light and heat, Joh. 1. 4. All that
spiritual life which is in the soul is communicated from Christ, and preserved
by Christ, the soul is dead till it be imbreathened by Jesus Christ. And hence
it is that Christ is so often in Scripture called our life, as Col. 3. 3, 4.
because he gives and maintains both the natural and spiritual life. Yea the
brightest beam the soul ever had from Christ here, is but a little glimpse in
respect of what shall be in heaven. There he shall shine.

(1.) Perpendicularly. (2.) In all his strength. (3.) Without over-casting.
7. The natural Sun is the servant of men. It is called Shemesh in the
Hebrew, from a root that signifies to minister because it is the great servant
of the world in giving light. But now Jesus Christ is not our servant, but our
Lord, whom men and Angels must worship. It is gross Idolatry to worship the
natural Sun. Job vindicates himself from it, chap. 31. 26. Josiah demolished
all Sun worship in his reformation, 2 King. 23. 5. Its idolatry to worship
the Sun, but its gross impiety not to worship Christ, the very Angels of
heaven are commanded to worship him Heb. 1. 6.

8. The natural Sun is only useful for the time and state of this life.
Whether the heavens shall be abolished and annihilated at the day of judgment
or only renewed; is a great question amongst learned men. If they shall be only
renewed (as they probably will be) yet they shall not be useful to men in that
way they now are. The glorified bodies of the Saints have no need in heaven, of
the light of the Sun to shine upon them as now they have, Rev. 2^. 5. The
Saints in heaven shall be above the shining of Ordinances and above the shining
of the natural Sun? Every glorified body shall shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. They shall be farther above the Sun, then the Sun
is now above them. But the Sun of righteousness is useful in heaven; the
Saints shall have the benefit of Christ's shining upon them for ever and ever.
This Sun of righteousness shall cast his beams upon the soul and body
glorified for ever, Rev. 7. 17. All the glory of heaven is communicated to the
Saints through the Lord Jesus Christ.

The uses of these are Information. Exhortation. Consolation.

1. For Information, It teaches us these four lessons.

1. Behold from hence the glory of the Gospel. The Apostle calls it (...) the
glorious Gospel, or the Gospel of glory, 1 Timothy 1. 11. The Gospel is exceeding
full of glory; there is nothing in it but that which is very glorious. This is
enough to proclaim the glory of it, because in it the Lord Jesus Christ is
discovered; the Gospel is the Orb in which the Sun of righteousness
shines, it is the Chariot in which Christ rides. It is the Golden vessel which
carries this glorious light about the world. The Gospel is the true Bethshemesh
or house of the Sun: it is called the Word of Christ, Col. 3. 16. Because by
this Word Jesus Christ is discovered and manifested to the world. David does
admire the heavens for this, that in them God has set a Tabernacle for the
Sun, Psalm. 19. 4. The Gospel is that glorious Tabernacle which God has set
and established for this great Sun of righteousness. Where the Gospel is
not, Christ is not known, remove the Gospel, and Christ the Sun of
righteousness is totally removed.

2. The exceeding great glory of heaven. The Scripture makes mention of heaven
as of a glorious place. Amongst other things this shows the glory of it, that
this Sun of righteousness shines in it, Rev. 21. 23. and 22. 3 This will
further appear if we consider how far Christ's shining in heaven dazzels his
shining here on earth. I will instance in these three particulars.

1. In heaven Christ shines upon the soul immediately. There is nothing to
interpose between Christ and the soul; his shinings in this life are immediate
through the Ordinances, We see his beams in this life through the thick glass
of Ordinances, the Churh tells us the manner of his shining in this life, Cant.
2. 9. We have his beams here only by reflection, but in heaven they are
immediately darted down upon the soul. There is no Temple in heaven, Rev. 21.
22. Christ himself is the Temple. Now if the mediate beamings of Christ upon
the soul he so glorious? What abundant glory will there be in his immediate
shinings!

2. In heaven he shines with his full strength upon the soul. All have here on
earth but small beams of this Sun; A beam in one Ordinance, and a beam in
another, here a little and there a little, as we are able to bear it; the eye
of the soul while it is unglorified, is not able without dazzling to look upon
Jesus Christ shining in his full strength. Thou shall see my back parts, but my
face cannot be seen, Exodus 33. 22, 23. but in heaven the soul shall be able to
take a full view of Christ's face, 1 Cor. 12. 12. All that ever we have seen of
Christ in this world will be but darkness in respect of that full sight of his
glory we shall have in heaven.

3. In heaven Christ shines without intermission. The soul here does often lose
the sight of Christ's face, every day is not a Sunshine day. There are some
dark and gloomy days even to them that have the greatest interest in Christ,
Esaias 50. 10. but in heaven the Sun is always up. There are no clouds to
Eclipse the light of Christ's face in that region. There Is no night in heaven,
Rev. 27. 25. That which causes the soul here to lose the sight of Christ shall
not be in heaven. No sin enters into that holy place; if the immediate,
perfect, uninterrupted shining of Christ can make a place glorious, heaven is a
most glorious place.

3. The miserable condition of those that have no interest in Jesus Christ, The
Scripture makes it the top of all misery to be without Christ, Ephesians. 2. 12. This
text bears witness to it; How uncomfortable would the world be if there were
no Sun? If God had not made the Sun, the world would have been but an
uncomfortable prison. What a muse and astonishment are men put into when the
Sun is Eclipsed but for a few hours? How doleful is their condition upon
whom the Sun of righteousness has never risen! They have neither spiritual
light, nor spiritual warmth, nor spiritual healing, nor spiritual softness
that are without Christ. They want both the righteousness of justification,
and of sanctification that have not a saving interest in this Sun of
righteousness. There are no people upon the earth that stand in more need both
of your compassions and prayers then those that want Jesus Christ. And they are
so much the more miserable, because they want eyes to see their misery.

4. That there is no righteousness either of justification or sanctification
without Christ, he is called the Sun of righteousness in both these
respects, and therefore till he arise upon the soul, it has no righteousness
in either of these respects.

1. For the righteousness of justification. The Papists they teach and
maintain that a person must have in himself inherent righteousness to justify
him before Gods tribunal. They say that Christ's righteousness is not the
proper cause of justification, but that whereby God is pleased to accept of the
habits of righteousness in us, placing the matter of justification either in
something habitually inherent in us, or flowing from us. This Doctrine does
divest Jesus Christ of this name which God has here given him. He is called
the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. If he be our righteousness, then we
are not our own righteousness. I would not be found, says a good Divine, in
the righteousness of the best prayers I ever made at the day of judgment. To
take off men from this Popish doctrine, I shall lay down these Arguments
against it.

1. The righteousness of God and the righteousness of man are opposed in
Scripture as things inconsistent in the matter of justification, Phil. 3. 9. To
mingle these two together, were to wear a garment of linen and woolen, which
God forbade in his Law. He that submits to the one cannot submit to the other.
So the Apostle teaches us expressly, Romans 10. 3. he that trusts to the
righteousness of man cannot trust to the righteous* of God. Our righteousness
is that which we do in obedience to the Law, but Christ's righteousness is that
by which we are reckoned righteous in the sight of God.

2. If righteousness be by works then it is not of free grace but of due
debt. This is the Apostles argument, Romans 11. 6. The Papists answer this, by
understanding, by works, there the works of nature and unregeneracy only, and
not of works flowing from faith. But this is a mere falsehood; for the Apostle
proves, Romans 4. 2. that works flowing from faith cannot justify before God.
Abraham was regenerate, Abraham's works were works flowing from faith, yet were
not those works his righteousness but Christ apprehended by faith.

3. That righteousness by which and for which a person is justified must
exactly answer Gods justice. It must be so every way perfect, that justice it
self can require no more, but the best of our works are imperfect and
defective. They are so in our own sight, much more in the sight of God, Esaias
64. 6. Not only our righteousness, but our righteousnesses are a silthy ragge,
Psalm. 130. 4. David was a man after Gods own heart, yet does he acknowledge
that if God should weigh iniquity none should stand. Job had a very high
testimony from God, Chap. 1. 1. yet he durst not stand upon such terms, Chap.
9. 3. 15. 20. 30, 31. Nehemiah did many good works, yet he comes to a Psalm of
mercy, chap. 13. 22.

4. This Doctrine makes a man his own justifier, which is contrary to
Scripture. The Scripture ascribes the work of justification to God, Romans 3. 26.
and Romans 8. 33. To make man's works the cause of his justification, is to make
him a justifier, which is the work of God alone.

5. This Doctrine make^ the merit and sacrifice of Christ either needless or
insufficient. This is the Apostles Argument, Gal. 2. ult. To affirm either of
these is a great wickedness. To say it was needless, is to make God cruel to
his Son. Why should he pour out his blood if there was no necessity of it?
To say it is insuffi^ient, is to vilify his person, to contradict Scriptures
which says, he is able to save to the uttermost.

6. This Doctrine establishes boasting. Now the great design of God in the
justification of a sinner, is to exclude boasting, Romans 3. 27. The Law of works
lays a foundation of boasting, but the Law of faith excludes boasting.

7. This Doctrine robs the soul of all consolation, and leaves it unsettled and
perplexed. A man can never be free from troubles that builds the hopes of his
justification upon himself, Romans 10. 6, 7. The scope of the Apostle in that
place is to put a difference between the righteousness of the Law, and the
righteousness of faith. Amongst other this is one, the righteousness of faith
settles the heart; it says not, who shall ascend, etc? It knows Christ has
ascended and descended, that he has done all and suffered all, and so quiets
the conscience: He that trusts to his own righteousness can never be settled,
but will be still disputing. And therefore the Papists who cry up justification
by their own works, cry down assurance of salvation. And they cannot do
otherwise, for justification by our own righteousness and assurance of
salvation are inconsistent. Thus I have proved the righteousness of
justification to be from Christ.

2. For the righteousness of sanctification. This is also from Christ, he that
is without Christ, is without sanctification. Till this Sun be risen upon the
soul, there is no holiness in the soul. A Christlesse condition, is an
unsanctified condition. A man must prove himself interested in Christ, before
he can be able to assert his Sanctification; we are said to be sanctified in
Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 2. you must thank Christ as well for the righteousness of
sanctification, as for that of justification. Till these beams shine upon you,
you have no grace in you.

2. For exhortation.

1. To all in general. 2. To you that have no interest in Christ. 3. To them
that have an interest.
1. To all men in general; I would recommend two things.

1. Bless God for Jesus Christ. We have great cause to bless God for the
light of the Sun, innumerable are those benefits we receive by this creature.
It Is our guide, it is our life, by the influences of it nature is revived, the
body is cheered and all things useful for our life are refreshed; the world
had been an Egypt for darkness, a Wilderness for barrenness, an Hospital of
diseases; if God had not made the Sun: the beauty of the creation would have
been hid, the benefit of the creation would have been lost if this lamp of
heaven had not been hung out: much more cause have we to bless God for his
mystical Sun, Ephesians. 1. 3. This will be the work of heaven to all eternity, had
not this Sun from heaven visited us, our condition had been as miserable as the
condition of devils.

2. Never see the Sun but meditate on Jesus Christ. A spiritual Christian may
learn very much Divinity from the works of creation. Though the whole book of
Creation without that revelation of the Gospel could not have made Christ known
to the world: the Philosophers turned over every page of that great book, but
they could spell nothing of Christ out of it; Yet now, we that have the Gospel
may help our knowledge of Christ by the book of creation. Christ is resembled
to so many creatures that we can hardly see any creature, but it preaches
something of him, when your eyes behold the light of the Sun, when you feel
the warmth of the Sun, when you perceive the influential virtue of the Sun
upon the creatures, then think on Christ: the very Sun in the Firmament will
rise up in judgment against us that have Christ revealed in the Gospel as a
Sun, if we do not fill our hearts with daily thoughts of him.

2. To them that are without the saving beams of Christ. I have only one thing
to press upon them. That they would endeavor that this Sun may shine upon
them; yea, that it may shine into them be not contented to live without the
Sun. I know it will be said, what shall we do that Christ may arise upon our
hearts?

1. Be sensible of your want of Christ, he that sees and bewailes his own
darkness, will hardly dye without light. One reason why Christ does not shine
upon us, is, because we think we have light in our selves, we think we saw
Christ without the Sun, therefore we are suffered to walk in blindness
without the Sun. This our Savior declares expressly, Joh 9. 3^.

2. Stand in those places where the Sun usually shines. He that would have
the Sun shine on him, must not keep in dark Cellers and Vaults, but must come
into the open air. The ordinary place of Christ's shining, is where his Gospel
is preached; the preaching of the Gospel is the East where this Sun arises,
2 Cor. 4. 4. 6. The Gospel is the Orb of this Sun; be that constantly waits
here, will at l^st fee^ the warm beams of Christ coming down upon him,
especially if he make it his design to enjoy the beams of Christ in his Gospel.

3. Take heed of shutting your eyes when the Sun begins to appear. He that
shuts his eyes will never see the Sun, though it shine in all its
brightn^sse. Stand with your eyes open, yea, with your eyes fixed, looking for
Christ's appearing, and he will cause his beams at last to fall upon you. To
you on whom this Sun has arisen. I have things to recommend to you.

1. Do you w^lk as the children of the Light? Put away darkness, ignorance,
blindness, and be full of spiritual light. God may well expect much light from
those on whom Christ has shined. Stumbling in a child of God is wors^ then
falling in another man. If you be ignorant of Gods Will of your duty you are
inexcus^bl^ because the Sun of light is risen upon you, (...). ^ 1. Ephesians
4 17, 18, 19, 20

2. G^^ and keep (...) warmth in your hearts. The Sun^e has an heating virtue.
C^ldness^ of sp^^^t is a temper unbefitting a child of God. If a man be cold
in winter when the Sun is at a great distance, it is more excusabl^; but to be
cold when the Summer Sun shines hot upon him, argues great distemper. To be
lukewarm when Christ is risen upon you, is inexcusable. Christ expects heat
and fervency from you in all your duties, hot love, hot devotion, fervency of
spirit in the service of God is expected from you, R^m. 12. 11. you will shame
the beams of Christ, if you have not a holy warmth in all your services; My
heart (says David) was hot within me, Psalm. 39. 3. Ex omni part caluit igne
Dei, i. e. a-more Coelestium. A cold-hearted Christian shames the Sun.

3. Be very fruitful. The Sun has a fructifying virtue, it ripens every
thing. Christians must be careful that their graces be ripened: raw, lean,
weak graces shame the beams of Christ; you must be sure to grow in grace, to
perfect holiness, 2 Cor. 7. 1.

4. Keep your souls sweet. The Sun has a sweetning virtue. A moldy musty
heart disparageth Christ, you must be as the smell of a field which God has
blessed.

5. Be raised up in affection to heavenly things. The Sun has an exhaling
virtue. Christians must be higher then others, Revel. 12. 1.

6. Nourish spiritual softness. The Sun has a molifying virtue. A hard
frozen heart is a shame to Christ. David's heart was like melting wax, Psalm
22. 14. Josiahs heart was tender, 2 Kings 22. 19. A frown from God, an angry
word from God, must melt a Christians heart. If your hearts be hard, Christ may
justly draw his beams from you; if the Sun of righteousness does not melt
you, it is because you are clay, not wax

3. For consolation. Great comfort arises hence to godly men.

1. Against spiritual darknesses. Sometimes Gods people see neither Sun nor
Stars, Esaias 50. 10. Well, be comforted, Christ is the Sun of
righteousness, he will arise and scatter all those black mists that trouble
you; your Sun is not set, it is only eclipsed, the light of it will shine again.

2. Against all your own unrighteousness. The servants of God find much
unrighteousness and guilt in themselves: because of it they are cast down, and
go heavily. Well, remember Christ is a Sun of righteousness, he is as full of
righteousness as the Sun is of light, and his righteousness is for thy
benefit. It Is as much thine, as if it were thine own.

3. Against the want of sublunary comforts. Gods people have often but little
of these things. Well, yet the Sun is up, what folly is it to complain for
want of Moonlight or Starlight when the Sun shines! If God has clothed
you with the Sun, the want of Moon and Stars may well be endured.

CANT. 1. 3. Thy Name is as ointment poured XXVII. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon.
May 15. 1653.
forth.
THe scope of the Holy Ghost in this song is to discover the exceeding great
love that is between Jesus Christ and his Church. We may see here Christ and
his Church as it were striving who should express their love to each other
most. At the second verse in this Chapter, the Church does passionately desire
to be made partaker of further Communion with Christ, Let him kiss me with the
kisses of his mouth. Those who have once tasted of the sweetness of Christ's
love are exceedingly carried out after a further degree of his love. The reason
of this passionate desire is ver. 2, 3. namely, from the sweetness of his
love. This is set out by a double comparison.

1. His love is better then wine. v. 2.

2. Its more desirable then precious ointments. This is mentioned in the
beginning of the third ver. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, and
amplified further in the text, Thy name is as ointment poured forth. The words
are a proposition in which we have,

1. The subject. Thy Name.

2. The predicate. Ointment poured forth.

By the name of Christ, some would understand the Doctrine of the Gospel. So
Ainsworth, by his name (says he) is meant the Doctrine of grace, the Law of
faith. His Doctrine is sometimes in Scripture called his Name, as the Isles
shall wait for his Law, Esaias 42. 4. Which is expounded, in his Name shall the
Gentiles trust, Mat. 12. 21. And it is most certain that his Law is far more
sweet then the most precious ointment. But yet by his Name in this place we are
better to understand his person as it is set forth in the Gospel, his person is
often called his Name, as Mat. 10. 22. Ye shall be hated of all men for my
Names sake, and Act, 9. 16. I will show him how great things be must suffer for
my names sake, that is, for my sake.

The Observation is this.

Doct. That Jesus Christ is like ointment poured forth.

Jesus Christ is spiritual ointment. His Name both in the Hebrew and Greek
signifies anointing, or anointed. He is called in Dan. 9. 26. Messiah, which
the Septuagint render (...), anointing. The Prophet Esaias, chap. 10. 27. calls
him the anointing. It is reported by Historians, that at the birth of Christ in
Rome, a sudden fountain of Oil sprung up and flowed for a day and a night
together, our Annotatours mention it in their Exposition of this text. The
Oils or Ointments used in sundry cases under the ceremonial Law were some way
or other typical of Christ the true ointment.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall open these four things by way of
Explication.

1. In what respects Christ is compared to ointment.

2. Why he is compared to ointment poured forth.

3. How this ointment is poured forth.

4. How Christ excels all other ointments.

1. For the first.

1. Christ is ointment in regard of that divine unction wherewith he was
anointed by God. The Scripture makes mention of Christ's being anointed with the
graces of the Spirit as our Mediator. This was typified by the anointing of the
Priests under the Law, especially of the High Priest; you may read at large of
the holy ointment, and of the anointing of Aaron and his sons with it, Exodus
30. 23, 24, 25, 30. It was also typified by the anointing of Kings and
Prophets; ye may read much in Scripture of the anointing of these. Elisha was
anointed to the office of a Prophet, 1 Kings 19. 16. and Kings were also
anointed. We read of David's anointing, 1 Samuel 16. 1. of Solomon's anointing, 1
King. 1. 34. 39. All these were types of Christ, the great King, Prophet, and
Priest of his Church, the anointing Oil did typifie the graces of the Spirit,
the anointing of Aaron with that Oil did typifie Christ's anointing with the
Holy Ghost. Our Savior was anointed with the Holy Ghost, Esaias 61. 1. This
Peter mentions in his Sermon, Act. 10. 38. God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with
the Holy Ghost and with power. Now this ointment was shed upon the Lord Jesus
in such great plenty, that he may well be called by the name of ointment, Psalm.
45. 7. he had more of this spiritual ointment poured upon his humane nature,
then all the Saints, put them altogether. The Spirit was not given him by
measure, but above measure, Joh. 3. 34. He was from his conception filled with
the holy Ghost; He was full of grace and truth, Joh. 1. 14. He had not only
drops, but whole rivers of Oil poured upon his head; He may be denominated
ointment from that abundance of spiritual ointment wherewith he was filled; his
Godhead anointed the manhood with an unspeakable fullness, Col. 1. 19. And,

2. Christ is ointment in regard of the excellent virtues which are in him. He
has all the good properties of ointment. I name five, As

1. Ointment is very fragrant and odoriferous. Precious ointment yields a very
sweet small. When the woman in the Gospel had poured her box of ointment upon
the head of Christ, the text says, the whole house was filled with the odor
of it, John 12. 3. The Lord Jesus Christ is very odoriferous, he is sweet in
himself, and he is exceeding sweet in the nostrils of his Saints; the perfume
in the Law was type of him, Exodus 30 34. He does perfume all persons and places
where ever he comes. If there be but one drop of Christ poured upon the soul,
the whole soul is perfumed with the smell of it. When Christ had but put his
finger into the hole of the door, how was the hand of the Spouse perfumed as
with sweet smelling myrrh! Cant. 5. 5. That soul wants its spiritual smelling
which does not find a sweetness in Jesus Christ. Every thing in Jesus Christ
is very fragrant.

(1) There is a fragrancy in his person. He is a bundle of precious myrrh,
Cant. 1. 13. His life and holy conversation yielded a sweet smell in the world,
Psalm. 45. 8. All thy garments smell of myrrh, aloes and cassia. The graces of
the Spirit, of which his life was full: His righteousness, meekness, piety,
patience, what a sweet smell do they cast abroad in the Gospel to this very day!

(2.) There is fragrancy in his death. His death was a sweet favor unto God,
Ephesians. 5. 2. His dead body was enbalmed with sweet spices, John 19. 39. not that
he had need of any such; His body did never see corruption, Psalm. 16. 10. So
fragrant was the death of Christ, that he has perfumed the grave, and made it
as a bed of roses to all the Saints.

(3) There is a sweet fragrancy in his intercession The intercession of Christ
is so sweet, that it perfumes heaven it self. See how it was typified under the
Law, Lev. 16. 12, 13. The odours of the sweetest incense are not so fragrant to
the nostrils of men, as the odours of Christ's intercession are to God. So
fragrant is his intercession, that the services of his people, which are
unsavory in themselves, come up as a cloud of incense before the Lord. See this
Cant. 3. 6. It Is spoken of the Church because it is the feminine gender, Quae
ista? All this sweetness which is upon the Church and in her services, is,
because they are perfumed with the incense of Christ's mediation.

(4) There is a fragrancy in the word of Christ. The breath of Christ's mouth is
sweeter then any perfume in the world: this is that which the Church mentions.
Cant. 5. 16. His mouth or palate is (...) from (...) sweetnesses, so it is in
the original; all his promises, all his precepts are very favoury.

5. There is a fragrancy in all his Ordinances, Prayer, Sacraments, Preaching,
singing of Psalms are in themselves, and to a gracious heart, like sweet
smelling ointment. The Church mentions this, Cant. 2. 3. No such sweet air
blows under heaven as does in the Church of God, where the Ordinances of
Christ are dispensed in power and purity. In one word, there is nothing of
Christ but is more sweet then the best ointment that ever was compounded by
man. This is the first property of ointment, it is very sweet.

2. Ointment has an exhilarating virtue. It cheeres the spirits, and makes the
heart glad. This is observed by Solomon, Prove. 27. 9. Ointment and perfume
rejoice the heart. When Solomon exhorts men to a cheerful life, he makes
mention of ointment, let thy head want no ointment, alluding to the custom of
the ancients, who in their banquettings and feastings used such signs of joy.
And the Prophet expressing the jovialty of those Epicures, Amos 6. 6. says,
they anoint themselves with the chief ointments. The Lord Jesus Christ has a
cheering virtue. The heart of a sinner is never truly merry, till it be
anointed with the graces of Christ, and the comforts of Christ; Christ is the
only remover of spiritual heaviness. The ointment is the only cure for
spiritual melancholy, Mat. 11. 28. All spiritual refreshing is from Jesus
Christ. He was anointed with the oil of gladness, that he might work
gladness in the hearts of others. This work is committed to him by God the
Father, Esaias 61. 3. There Is not one drop of the oil of joy, but what comes out
of this great olive tree, the Lord Jesus; that gladness which does not proceed
from Christ, and which is not bottomed on Christ, is worldly madness, not true
joy. He is called the consolation of Israel, Luke 2. 25. He has laid the
foundation of Isreal's comfort, and he it is that does convey to them all their
comfort.

3 Ointment has a mollifying and suppling virtue If there be any hard tumor
or swelling upon the body, we use ointment to soften it. The holy Ghost alludes
to this, Esaias 1, 6. Where speaking of the state diseases, he says, they have
not been mollified with ointments. Jesus Christ has a mollifying virtue, let a
heart of Adamant be but once anointed with this ointment, and it becomes an
heart of flesh. It was by this ointment that the hard heart of Manasseh was
softened. God by his Spirit chafed this ointment into it, and it became tender.
And it is by the Application of this unction through the warm hands of the
Spirit of God that the stony hearts of sinners are softened from day to day.
Thou that have now a tender heart, would have carried thy stony heart with
thee to thy grave, if this precious ointment had not been spread upon it.

4. Ointment is of a shining nature. It has a brightning and beautifying
virtue. Those Virgins that were prepared for the Persian King, did use diverse
ointments to make themselves beautiful. Est. 2. 12. they used six months sweet
odours, and six months oil of myrrh. This oil, as those that write of it
say, had an abstersive virtue; it did help to get wrinkles out of the skin, and
so to beautify the face and make it bright; Naomi therefore bids Ruth, when
she sends her to Boaz to anoint her self, Ruth 3. 3. And David, speaking of
oil, says, it makes the face to shine, Psalm. 104. 15. Warriors of old, that
they might make their armor glister, and so render themselves formidable to
their enemies, used to anoint them with oil; the Prophet alludes to this, Esaias
21. 5. Arise ye Princes and anoint the shield. The Lord Jesus Christ has a
brightning virtue. As he is bright and beautiful in his own person, Psalm. 45.
^. so he makes his people beauti^ul. Christ is very bright in his own person.
There is no scar, no spot, no deformity in him. That which was said of Absalom,
is much more true of Christ, 2 S^m. 14. 25. Though men that are blind see no
beauty in him, as the Prophet complained long since, Esaias 53 2. yet in the eyes
of God, in the eyes of the Angels, in the eyes of the Saints he is singularly
beautiful; And as he is bright in himself, so does he beautify others. All the
wrinkles of sin, all the spots of the soul are done away by means of this
ointment. This ointment, if it ^e spread upon the soul, turns black^mores into
Nazarites. All the brightness of the Saints is from hence, Ezekiel. 16. 14. Thou
wast comely through my comeliness which I put upon thee. Hereby the old
wrinkles of original sin, which are as so many deep furrows (...) the soul,
hereby the latter spots of actual sin are taken away as if they had not been:
you may read much of the brightness and beauty of the Saints, Cant. 4. init.
Cant. 7. init. All this beauty i^ acquired by the application of this
beautifying ointment. Jesus Christ is the Churches Golden anointing-pot; he
that would have his spots removed, must daily drop this ointment upon his soul.
This ointment if it be applied by faith will fetch off the red spots of
cruelty, the black spots of discontent, the blew spots of envy, the heat spots
of passion; it will put a shining luster upon the soul.

5. Ointment has a healing virtue, the Samaritan poured into the wounded man
wine and oil, Luke 10. 34. Wine for cleansing and Oil for healing; your
Chyrurgions make much use of ointment search the Dispensatory for the truth of
this; Jesus Christ has a healing virtue. If the spiritual wounds of the soul,
though they have been of long continuance, be anointed with this ointment, they
are in a short time finely healed. Christ himself was that Samaritan, his blood
was the wine that cleansed, and the Oil that healed those desperate wounds.
There is no other balm in Gilead besides this ointment that can cure the least
sore upon the inward man, without the application of this ointment you will
certainly dye in your sins.

2. For the second. Christ is compared to ointment poured forth, in three
respects.

1. To show his communicativenesse, Jesus Christ is ready to make distributions
unto his people of all that grace and goodness which is in him, he does not
keep his grace and virtue within himself, but lets it drop down upon his
members; the ^o^ of ointment stands continually open that his Elect may take
out of it according as they stand in need; the ointment which was poured upon
the head of Aaron at his Consecration, ran down to the very skirts of his
clothing, Psalm. 133. 2. This was to typifie the communicativenesse of Christ.
Jesus Christ has received the ointment of the Spirit, not for himself, but
that he might anoint al his members; and he is very mindful of the trust
reposed in him; he received for his members, and he is willing they should
receive from him, Joh. 1. 6. Many are willing to have the patrimony of others
poured into their treasury, but they care not to pour out again; but Christ,
as he was willing God should pour out grace into him, so is he as willing to
pour it out upon us.

2. To show his exceeding fullness. Christ has so much that he can spare for
others. It Is poured out and yet it does not decay, there is in Christ an
undecayable fullness; he is like the widows cruse of oil, 2 Kings 4. 6. never
leaves running till the soul want a vessel to receive him.

3. He is compared to ointment poured forth, because the fragrancy and other
excellent virtues of ointment are best discovered in the pouring of it forth.
Ointment in the vessel does neither smell nor shine so as when its poured out;
the excellency of Christ lies in the using of him, when we come to pour out
his graces, then, and not till then do we find the sweetness of them. Taste
and see that the Lord is gracious, Psalm. 34. 8. the graciousness of Christ is
not apprehended till it come to be casted.

3. For the third, how Christ is (...) The great and ordinary way of (...) this
name of Christ, which is ^^ ointment. (...) Ordinances which he has appoi^ted,
Preach^^g, Prayer, Sacraments, these are the means ^f ^^^^ing forth Christ; the
Ordinances are as the ^^blaster Box wherein this precious ointment is kept; you
read in Zech. 4. Of a golden Candlestick with two Olive Trees standing by it,
etc. the Olive Tree is Christ, the Candlestick is the Church, the Lamps are the
several members of Christ, the pipes which convey the Oil to the Lamps are the
Ordinances of grace, Christ fills the pipes, and the pipes carry the Oil to
the Lamps. The Ordinances are the Golden Cruse in which the Oil is kept, and
by which it is defused to every particular Saint as he has need. The preaching
of the Gospel is called the bearing of his Name before the Gentiles, Acts 9.
15. When the Gospel is preached and the Ordinances dispensed, then is the
ointment poured forth. The Apostle gives testimony to this, 2 Cor. 2. 14.
Thanks be unto God which makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in
every place. He that would smell the savor of Christ's ointment, must wait
conscionably upon the Ordinances. The Ordinances are the consecrated pipes
through which the Oil runs. It Is true, the Spirit of Christ fills these pipes,
and makes them effectual to them that are saved; but yet the Ordinances are
the instrumental. Every Prayer; every Sermon, every Sacrament conveys a drop of
this ointment to the soul. He that turns away his face from the Ordinances,
makes himself incapable of tasting the ointments of Christ.

CANT. 1. 3. Christ is as an ointment poured forth. XXVIII. SERMON. at Mary.
Wolnoth. Lon. May 22. 1653.

FOurthly, for the fourth, how Christ excels other ointments; I shall open that
in these five particulars.

1. He excels all other ointments in worth and value. Some ointments are of
great value, but none ar^ comparable to Christ. That ointment which (...)
poured upon the head of Christ, is said to (...) ^^ry costly, John 12. 3. and
yet it was but (...) (...)
at three hundred Roman pence, v. 5. but (...) is ointment of invaluable
worth. All the ^^ld and silver on earth, all the pearls and diamonds in the
world are not worth the least drop of this ointment. He that has it would not
part with one drop of it for ten thousand rivers of oil, he that wants it
cannot purchase it for all the riches of the world; one drop of this ointment
is worth a sea of other ointments.

2. He excels all other ointments in duration. The virtue of other ointments
may be lost. Take the most fragrant ointment in the world, keep it with never
so much care, yet it will corrupt in time. Other casual accidents may fall out
which may corrupt it. You know what Solomen says, Eccles. 10. 1. Dead flies
cause the ointment of the Apothecary to send (...) savor. The best ointment
(...) compounded by the art of man; may lose its (...)* and be offensive, but
Jesus Christ is incorruptible ointment; he can never lose his savor, no time
can putrify him, no accident can corrupt him. This ointment has continued
ever since the promise made to Adam, Genesis 3. 15. yet the virtue of it in every
respect, is as precious as it was the very first day; his Name is as glorious,
as fragrant, as beautiful, as shining now as it was when the Ala^aster box was
at first poured forth. The Psalmist sp^^ks of this very expressly, Psalm. 72.
17. His Name shall endure for ever, his Name shall be con^^nued as long as the
Sun, and daily shall he be p^aised, all Nations shall call him blessed.

3. He excels all other ointments in his fullness. Other ointment is of a
waiting nature, take but one dram of ointment out of the largest vessel, and
there is an abatement; take but one drop out of a river of ointment, and there
is a drop less, but this ointment does not grow less by spending. Christ has
anointed thousands of his Elect in all the ages that are past, and yet the
vessel is as full, as if one drop had not been taken out of it. This Olive tree
has been emptying it self for many ages into the golden bowl, and yet it
continues running with as full a stream as it did the very first day.

4. He excels all other ointments in virtue and operation, this may be branched
out into six particulars.

(1) He anoints the soul as well as the body. Other ointments are poured only
upon the outward man; the soul, the conscience is not the better for the
multitude of ointments that are poured upon the body; the face of a person may
shine with ointment, and yet his soul be black and filthy; but this ointment
reaches to the conscience and inward man. Yea, this ointment is principally
for the inward man, the heart is the chief place on which this ointment is
poured, 1 John 2. 27. the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in
you. Other ointments are outward ointments, that abide upon us, but this is an
inward ointment which abides in us. It Is unctio spiritualis.

2. This ointment has the good properties of all ointments. Some ointments are
fragrant to the smell, but they are not healing; others are healing, but they
are not sweet: No one kind of ointment has all excellercies in it; but now in
Jesus Christ all excellencies meet together, the good properties of every
ointment do all center in Christ, he is equally excellent every way. You cannot
say in what respect Christ is best, he is so excellent every way.

3. This ointment does charge the very nature of the person upon whom its
poured. Other ointments cannot change a person from what he is. They cannot
make a sinner a Saint, they cannot alter the nature of a person. But Jesus
Christ changes the nature of persons. If this ointment be poured upon the head
of a sinner, he is presently turned into a Saint, if it fall upon a dead man,
he becomes a living man; if a drop of this ointment fall upon a weed, it is
presently turned into a flower When this ointment was poured forth on Soul, he
became a Paul, from a Persecutor of the Gospel, he was changed into a preacher
of the Gospel. This ointment turns a filthy Sepulcher into a curious garden,
(...) an into a Nazarite as white a^ show.

4. This ointment upon whomsoever it is poured* does abide upon him for ever. A
person may be anointed with material ointment, and in a short time lose all the
sent and savor of it, as if he had never been anointed; but whosoever has
been once anointed with this ointment, will smell of it as long as he lives. If
Jesus Christ do but drop one drop of this ointment upon the soul of an infant,
he carries the savor of it with him to his grave, 1 John 2. 27. The unction
which ye have received of him, abides in you. The scent of this ointment may
be very weak in the children of God, but it can never quite be lost. David once
by his sin had brought such an ill savor upon his soul, that the smell of
the holy ointment was almost quite lost. My wounds stink and are corrupt
through my foolishness, Psalm. 38. 5. yet after a while his old savor did
return again, the fragrancy of his oyment did ovecome the ill savor of his
sin. The soul and body may be separated, but Christ and the soul cannot be
separated.

5. This ointment has a present efficacy upon the soul. The effects which are
wrought by other ointments are not so suddenly done. Ointment heales, but not
in a moment; ointment makes the face smooth and clear, but it must have some
convenient time: the Virgins which were to stand before the Persian King, must
be anointed six months before their beauty was perfect, Est. 2. 12. hard
swellings are mollified by ointment, but not at one dressing. What ever
operation the best ointment has, it requires a convenient time to accompl^sh
it. But whatever i^ done upon the soul by this ointment, is done in a moment.
^^ sooner is this ointment dropped upon the soul, but the spots are done away, it
cures the most festred sore with once dressing. As Soon as ever the Application
is made, the effect follows. One moment is as good as an age for this ointment.

6. The smallest quantity of this ointment is as effectual as the greatest
quantity. A little of other ointment does little or no good. A drop will not
cure a wound, a small quantity will not perfume a great room, a drop or two
will not supple a hard tumor. But now one drop of this spiritual ointment is
as effectual for the maine work as a whole ocean. One drop of Christ softens
the heart. one grain of this ointment perfumes the soul. There is infinite
virtue in every drop of Christ. He that is made partaker of any part of Christ,
has the merit and virtue of whole Christ. As our Savior tells Peter in another
case, John 13. 10. he that is washed needs not to wash save his feet. He that
has the least measure of this ointment, shall as certainly find all the
effects of it, as if he had the whose vessel poured upon him.

5. He excels all other ointments in the manner of composition. All other
ointments are compounded and made by men; they are called the ointments of the
Apothecary, Eccles. 10. 1. God created the materials, and he it is that has
given man skill and understanding how to make use of them, but the composition
is made by men. But this precious ointment is not made by men, but by God. It
is he that has compounded this golden box of ointment. It was God that
anointed Christ with the holy unction of the Spirit, Psalm. 45. 7. and it is he
that has designed him to be ointment unto others. Yea, the truth is, this
ointment is God himself. Though the humanity be a creature, yet the Divinity is
the Creator. Christ is not only unguentum Dei, the ointment of God, but
unguentum Deus, that ointment which is God himself.

The Uses. These I shall draw
1. From the general Doctrine. 2. From the particular resemblances.
First, In general. We may take notice of,

1. The excellency of Christ. He is compared in Scripture to all things that
are necessary, and to all things that are pleasant and delightful. One great
piece of the study of Christians in this life, is to search into the excellency
of Christ; To know what Christ is in himself, and what he is to us comprehends
a very great part of a Christians study in this life. Paul desired to know
nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. This one resemblance
shows him to be a precious one, he is so excellent, that all the choice things
in nature are made use of to shadow out his glory. His Name, says the Prophet,
shall be called wonderful, Esaias 9 6. how wonderful is that Name which is
com^^sed of so many excellent things!

2. This should draw our hearts exceedingly toward the Lord Jesus: It should
beget in us desire after him and delight in him. Precious ointment; draw the
affections of men toward them. The best ointment is but a drug to Jesus
Christ. If we be not enamoured with him, we do despise him. He that looks on
him as ointment, cannot but be greatly delighted in him. It follows in the
text, Therefore do the virgins love thee, draw me, we will run after thee.
That man does not value Christ as ointment, that does not love him and desire
to be drawn after him.

3. The excellency of grace. It Is the graces of the Spirit in Christ that makes
him compared to ointment; his sweet ointments are his meekness, patience,
holiness and the rest of those heavenly graces. True grace is a choice thing,
the Scripture compares it to the choicest things in all the world, Cant. 4 13,
14. Next to God, and Christ, and the Spirit; there is nothing in heaven or earth
comparable to Christ.

4. That the grace of Christ is not a thing common to all. His common graces
are communicated to all, his special grace is more confined. His Name is
ointment. The holy ointment in the Law was poured upon none but upon
consecrated things and persons. Exodus 30. 2^, 24, 25, 30. It must not be poured
on man's flesh, v. 32. Christ is compared here to this ointment. A select
number, the Elect of God only, those that are spiritual Priests, these, and
these only ^e made partakers of Christ and his graces. Thu^ much for the
general doctrine.

Secondly, particularly.

First, from the fragrancy of Christ (...) may learn four thing.

1. How unsavory they are that want Christ. Wicked men have animam pro sal^
their souls keep their bodies sweet, but what have they then to keep their
souls sweet? the holy Ghost compares men that are in the state of nature to
that which is most unsavory, Psalm. 14. 3. They are unsavory both in their
persons and in services, that want this ointment. A heart unanointed casts the
worst smell of any corrupt thing in the world.

2. Acknowledge from whence it is that all your fragrancy proceeds. If there be
any good smell upon your souls, it is because this ointment has been poured
forth upon you. Jesus Christ mentions the sweet smell of his Spouse, Cant. 4
10, 11. and indeed every believer is a sweet savor unto God. The precious
ointment of the graces of Christ poured upon your head at your conversion, is
the only reason of this good savor; it is great pride and ingratitude not to
own it.

3. This teaches us all how to make and keep the soul sweet. Satan labors to
make it musty by breathing the ill air of sin into it, and if you would have
it smell sweetly, you must anoint it with this ointment every day. Drop but
every day a drop of this ointment upon it by prayer, meditation, or some other
holy duty, and it will preserved sweet notwithstanding the thick fogs of sin
and temptation. Carry Christ in your bosom, and you will smell very sweet in
every company.

4. When ever you smell any sweet savor, think on Christ. The best use which
we can make of perfumes and ointments, is to make them remembrancers to put us
in mind of him who perfumes both earth and heaven. And then,

Secondly, from the cheering virtue of this ointment, learn two things.

1. Whither to go for heart reviving. When you find your spirits dull and
melancholy, when your hearts are tired out, and your souls languish, smell to
this precious ointment, and it will revive you. It Is Christ's work to revive the
spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite. The smell of the
ointment, either of Christ's satisfaction, or of his promises, or of his
intercession is the speediest and surest way to be rid from the power of
spiritual heaviness.

2. Let them that have this ointment, maintain spiritual cheerfulness. God
calls for spiritual gladness, as well as spiritual sorrow, Phil. 3. 1. A well
grounded cheerfulness, honors religion as much as holiness. The Scripture
was written for consolation, as well as for conversion, John 15. 11. Romans 15.
4. The Spirit is a comforter, as well as a sanctifier, John 15. 26. You that
have this ointment, maintain a holy light-heartednesse. There is a vain
mirth, and there is a sinful and sensual mirth, avoid these, but the holy mirth
must be kept up. Its a disparagement to the holy ointment, to see anointed ones
droop in the blackest seasons. And then,

Thirdly, from the mollifying virtue of this ointment, learn two things,

1. The Scripture remedy against hardness of heart. It Is a disease the best
are troubled; with less or more; chafe this suppling ointment (...) to it, and
it will grow soft. This ointment was never used aright, but it did in time
remove the spiritu^l hardness of the soul.

2. Ascribe all heart softness to Christ. Had not this suppling ointment d^opt
upon it, it had been stony to this present day.

Fourthly, from the beautifying virtue of this ointment, learn two things,

1. What true beauty is. To be anointed with Christ, to be filled with his
graces, to be made partaker of the divine nature, this is beauty, this is true
beauty, this is lasting beauty, this is beauty that will commend us to God.
It Is not he that has the beautiful face, but he that has the beautiful soul,
that is accepted of God. And then,

2. He that would be beautiful, let him anoint himself with Christ. How vain
are persons in painting their faces? Jezabels daughters abound, 2 Kings 9. 30.
as if they would mend Gods workmanship, it was formerly whores customs, Ezekiel.
23. 40. Anoint your selves once with this ointment, and all others will be
unpleasant. And then,

Fifthly, from the healing quality of this ointment, learn two things.

1. To acknowledge how their sores were healed. Thou wast one full of wounds,
now they are bound up and healed. Thou may bless God for this balsome of
heaven, jesus Christ, otherwise thou had died of thy wounds.

2. Get this ointment into (...) Wise men will not be without healing ointment
in their house^, especially were they are far from Surgeon. All our houses
by reason of sin are no better then spiritual hospitals. There Is no balm in
Gilead that can heal one sore, but this divine balm, Jesus Christ; get your
vessels filled with this ointment, and all will be well; pray that God would
pour this ointment into your wounded children and servants, else they are but
dead men.

LUKE 2. 25. Waiting for the consolation of Israel. XXIX. SERMON. at Mary
Wolnoth. Lon, May 29. 1653.

THere are in this Chapter four things observable concerning Jesus Christ.

(1) His nativity, ver. 1. to ver. 21.

(2) His circumcision, verse 21.

(3) The presenting of him in the Temple, ver. 22. to v. 41.

(4) A proof of his prophetical office, v. 41. ad finem. In that part which
speaks of his presentation in the Temple, we have many things observable.

1. The time of it, ver. 22. which was the fourtieth day after his nativity.

2. The efficient cause of it, his parents, Joseph and Mary.

3. The final cause of it, this is declared, ver. 23, 24.

4. The adjuncts accompanying this work. These are principally two.

First, the prophecy of Simeon, verse 25. to verse 36.

Secondly, the prophecy of Anna concerning him, v. 36, to 39. In this prophecy
of Simeon we have

1. A description of some things concerning his person, v. 25, 26. And then,

2. A declaration of his prophecy, v. 27, etc. His person is described two
ways.

First, by his piety, v. 25. init.

Secondly, by his gift of prophecy, this is expressed generally by the
efficient cause of it, v. 25. The holy Ghost was upon him, particularly by the
revelation which he received, v. 26.

His piety is set down by three graces.

1. His justice or righteousness, He was just.

2. His devotion, he was a devout man.

3. His faith and hope in expecting the fulfilling of Gods promise concerning
Christ. This is in the text. He waited for the consolation of Israel. ^n which
words we have two things.

1. A description of what Christ is to his people.

2. A (...) of what Simeon did in reference to ^^rist, (...) him. God had
revea^ed (...) by (...) ^oly Ghost, that Jesus Christ (...) before his soul
went out o^ the flesh. (...) ^he holy man believed this, and (...) w^it for it.

From (...) two particulars we have this double Observation.

1. That Jesus Christ is the consolation of Israel.

2. That godly men do expect and wait for the accomplishment of divine
promises, even of such as are most unlikely to be fulfilled. I begin with the
first, viz.

Doct. 1. That Jesus Christ is that consolation of the Israel of God. Simeons
expectation was for the coming of Christ in the flesh as is clear from v. 25.
He that is there called the Lords Christ, is here called (...), the consalation
of Israel. Christ is the only true consolation of all Gods Israel, the
consolation of Israel is a periphrasis of Christ the Messiah, says Piscator.

(1) See the type, Noah was herein a type of Christ, Genesis 5. 29.

(2) See it in the prophecies. They that foretold Christ prophesied of him as a
comforter, Esaias 9. 3, 6. Esaias 40. 1. Esaias 51. 3. Esaias 52. 9, 10.

(3) See it in the Angels that proclaimed his birth, Luke 2. 10, 11. In opening
of this doctrine I shall handle these three particulars.

1. Who are meant by Israel? 2. In what respects Christ is said to be the
consolation of Israel. 3. That he is the consolation of Israel only.
1. For the first. By Israel we are to understand true believers the members of
the truly invisible Church, so we find them called, Gal. 6. 16. They are called
Israel, or the Israel of God in two respects.

First, in reference to the people of Israel, believers are like the people of
Israel in three respects.

1. In regard of their inward circumcision. It was the badge of an Israelite,
and that whereby he was distinguished from all other Nations, that he was
circumcised. Other Nations are called uncircumcision, the Israelites are called
ordinarily ^he circumcision. Believers, they and they only are spiritually
circumcised; the foreskin of their flesh is mortified and cut off, they are
circumcised with the circumcision not made with hands. Col. 2. 11. The body of
sin is truly mortified in them; Hence they are called in Scripture the
circumcision as the Israelites were, Phil. 3. 3. We are the circumcision, says
the Apostle, speaking of believers, which worship God in the Spirit, a true
Believer is a true circumcised person.

2. In regard of the Law written in their hearts. It was the great privilege
of the people of Israel that they had the Law of God amongst them. The Apostle
mentions this, Romans 2. 2. And the Prophet David long before him, Psalm 147.
19. Believers have this privilege above all people under heaven, that the Law
of God is with them, nay the Law of God is in them; not the Law of nature, but
the Law of grace; it is not only written amongst them, but it is written in
them. The Apostle speaks of this, Heb. 8. 10.

3. In regard of their neernesse to God. It was the great dignity of the people
of Israel, that they were of all people nearest to God, Deuteronomy. 4. 7. They were
Gods heritage, his peculiar people, separated from all people under heaven. It
is the great privilege of believers, that they are nearer to God then all
other people. They are near to God in affection, they are near to God in
relation. Of this the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 2. 13. Thus they are called the
Israel of God, in regard of the people of Israel.

Secondly, in reference to the (...) rael. Israel is Jacob, he had that name
(...) him of God, Genesis 32. 28. Now every (...) believer does very much resemble
Jacob; (...) that,

1. In regard of their godly simplicity. It was the commendation of Jacob, that
he was a plain man, Genesis 25. 27. It relates not so much to his outward
condition, as to the inward frame of his heart. Believers are a single hearted
generation: That which our Savior says of Nathaniel, is true of them, at
least in desire and affection; they are not only without gall, but even without
guile, John 1. 47. they study plainness rather then greatness, they put away
deceit far from their Tabernacles.

2. In regard of their holy zeal. Jacob was a man full of the fire of heavenly
zeal. How earnest was he in reforming his family? Gen 35. 2, 3. Here is true
zeal, it begins reformation at home; all true believers have sparks of this
celestial fire in their bosoms, Tit. 2. 14. They desire that they and theirs
may be reformed, who ever walk disorderly. They resolve as Joshuah, I and my
house will serve the Lord, Joshuah 24. 15.

3. In regard of their wrestlings with God. Jacob had the Name of Israel given
him, because of his violent wrestlings with God by prayer, Genesis 32. 28. The
Prophet does fully interpret what this wrestling was, Hosea 12. 3, 4. His
prayers and tears were the two arms by which he wrestled with God. Every true
believer is frequent in this exercise. I give my self to prayer* says David,
Psalm. 109. 4. he that has true grace loves no exercise better then this of
holy wrestling with God. Epaphias is described by his frequency in these holy
wrastlings with God, both for himself and others, Col. 4 12. In all holy
virtues, true believers are like Israel, and therefore may well be called by
his name.

2. For the second. Christ is the consolation of Israel in two respects. By way
of purchase. By way of conveyance.

First, By way of purch^se and merit. Whatsoever is an ingredient or cause of
true consolation, is by the purchase and procurement of Jesus Christ. The
Scripture makes mention of many grounds of spiritual consolation. To instance
some particulars.

1. Reconciliation with God. There can be no true comfort till God and the
sinner be made one. Reconciliation is the first bottom of Consolation, Romans 5.
2. The beginning of his Prodigals joy was the reconciliation of his father to
him, Luke 15. latter end. Now the Scripture tells us, that reconciliation is
the purchase of Christ's blood; he is the only atonement of the soul, Col. 1.
21, 22. There had never been any pacification between heaven and earth, if
Jesus Christ had not interposed himself. He was contented that the Father
should make war with him, that his fury toward us might cease. He is our
peace offering, by whom we have peace with God and with our selves.

2. The work of grace in the heart. Sanctification is one ground of
consolation. The Kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the
holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. That comfort which is true, is builded upon
righteousness. The effect of righteousness shall be peace, and the fruit of
righteousness, quietness, and assurance for (...), Esaias 32. 17. Now all our
holiness and grace is the purchase of Jesus Christ. The shedding of his blood
does not only procure for us glory hereafter but grace here. The conscience is
purified by the streams of his blood, Heb. 9. 14. He is as properly our
sanctification as our salvation.

3. The pardon of sin. Remission is an inlet of Consolation, Esaias 40. 1, 2.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, tell them that their iniquity is forgiven.
Sense of pardon is the true ground of spiritual laughter. Our Saviors usual
receipt for the working of comfort is this, Be of good cheer, thy sins are
forgiven. So he says to the para^ytick, Mat. 9. 2. the heart may be light in
heaviness when sin is once remitted. Now we know Christ's blood is the
meritorious cause of the remission of sin. It Is he that has expiated our
sins, Col. 2. 13, 14. He that will be forgiven any other way, shall never be
forgiven; His blood is the only bath for the washing away of sin, Ephesians. 1. 7.

4. Right to the promises. The promises of the Gospel are the wells of true
Comfort. The Apostle makes mention of the comfort of the Scriptures, Romans 15.
4. If there be any comfort in the Scriptures, it is in the promises. Precepts
are written for direction; threatenings for terror; promises chiefly for
consolation. The Prophet mentions the breasts of the Churches consolation, Esaias
66. 11. The promises of the Gospel are the breasts of the Churches consolation,
by sucking at these breasts the heart is made glad. Now, who but Christ
purchased the promises? The Apostle says, that all the promises of God are in
Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20. They are in him as the procuring and meritorious cause of
them all. The Covenant of grace which is nothing else but a bundle of rich
promises, is the purchase of Christ's blood. The world had never heard of a
promise of any good, if it had not been for Jesus Christ.

5. Hope of salvation. Hope is the door of consolation. We rejoice in the hope
of the glory of God, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 2. There Is more cause of
rejoicing in this, then in being able to cast out devils, Luke 10. 20 Now we
know that it was none but Jesus Christ that did or could unlock the way to
heaven. He is the way to heaven, He is the purchaser ^f heaven. God has given
us eternal life, and this life is in his Son, 1 John 5. 11. He is called the
salvation of God in this song, v. ^0. There would have been no entrance for any
of Adams lost seed into glory, if Christ had not set the door open; it is be
that opened the Kingdom of heaven to all believers.

6. The gift of the Spirit. The holy Ghost is called the Comforter John 14. 26.
His office is to work consolation ^^ ^he hearts of Gods people. Spiritual
comfort is therefore called joy in the holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. because the
holy Ghost does create it in the soul. Now we know the in-dwelling of the holy
Ghost in us is the purchase of Christ, John 15. 26. When the comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the Father. The third person had never been our
comforter, if the second person had not been our Redeemer. There is nothing can
be thought on which has any causality or efficiency in our consolation, but it
is of Christ's procurement. This is the first.

Secondly, By way of conveyance. As all our grace is communicated and conveyed
unto us from Christ, so is also our consolation. Jesus Christ does by his
Spirit in the Ordinances of grace actually convey comfort unto his people as he
sees them stand in need of it. The Apostle speaks of the believers consolation
abounding by Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5. All comfort is in Christ as a fountain; in
him God has put it for all his members, and from him it is communicated to
them according to their necessity. As we receive out of his fullness grace for
grace, so we receive out of his fullness consolation for consolation; that is
one drop, one stream after another in a sweet succession. He that has
purchased our comfort keeps our comfort, and does seasonably administer to us
according to the exigences of our souls.

3. For the third; That he is the consolation of Israel only. As he alone is
the consolation of his people, so is he the consolation of his people alone.
None but believers have a ground of actual comfort in Christ This may be
evinced by a threefold Argument.

1. The Scripture makes consolation to be the privilege only of such. Esaias
40. 1. Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says their God. The Ministers of
Christ in the holding out of comfort, are confined and determined only to the
people of God. The whole current of Scripture runs this way. Esaias 65. 13, 14.
Consolation is proper only to them that are sanctified by grace.

2. None but they have any actual interest either in Christ's merit, or
intercession, or any of his benefits. None but the believer can say, Christ
died for me; none but the believer can say, Christ intercedes for me; both his
satisfaction and intercession are confined to them, John 17. 9. 19. It Is true,
the Elect that are unconverted have benefit in Christ's Mediatorship, by virtue
of which they shall in time be brought in to God; but as to actual Application,
none but the true Israelite has interest. Christ is actually the portion of
none but the believer.

3. Jesus Christ is terror to all unbeleevers, not in himself, but because they
reject him. He that is the salvation of the believer, is accidentally the
dam^a^ion of the unbeleever, because he refuses him. John 3. 18. It will be
the greatest condemnation of the wicked another day, that there was a Christ,
and they would none of him; he is to the unbeleever a stone of stumbling and
rock of offense, 1 Pet. 2 8. They stumble upon him to their own ruin. That is
a considerable passage which you have in this song, ver. 34. This child is set
for the fall and rising again of many in Israel. Christ that is set for the
rising of the true Israel of God, is set also for the falling of the carnal
Israelites; the condemnation of the unbeleever would have been more easy if
Christ had never been. Thus much for Explication.

The Uses of this, are Information. Exhortation. Consolation.

1. For Information. It teaches us a fourfold lesson.

1. That the state of a believer is not a ^bs^^^late estate. It is the design
of Satan and his instruments to cast what od^um and infa^y they can upon the
ways and children of God. Amongst many other unworthy reports; they raise
this, that they are uncom^ortable and sorrowful ways. The devil bears men in
hand, that if they once become holy, they must for ever bid farewell to all joy
and pleasure, and by this means many are affrighted from the ways of God. How
false and scandalous th^s is, the Word of God and the experiences of godly men
abundantly show. Her ways, says the holy Ghost, are ways of pleasan^nesse,
and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3. 17. And says the text, Christ came for
the consolation of Israel. Believers through their own carelessness do many
times droop and go heav^^y, but they are never without a ground of true
comfort. Their consolation is a hidden con^^lation, which the eyes of carnal
men cannot see, and therefore they think they are without it. God has made as
full and large provision for the believers comfort as for his duty; and let
Satan out of the envy of his heart suggest what he will to the contrary; if
there be any consolation in Christ, the believer shall have his po^tion of
comfort. Their present mourning and sorrow does but make way for the filling of
their hearts with a greater measure of comfort, Matthew. 5. 4. Psalm. 9^. 11.

^. That spiritual consolation is not to be tendered promiscuously unto all.
Precepts belong to all, but promises are appropriated only to godly m^n. Men
are apt to quarrel with the Ministers of Christ, because they do not pour out
the comforts of the Gospel upon them. They think that they have as great an
interest in the consolations of the Gospel as the best of men. This Text shows
the contrary. God has by positive command bound up his Ministers, and they
cannot, without going beyond their commission tender any of the comforts of the
Gospel to such as are unconverted, Esaias 40. 1. Christ came to be the
consolation of none but believers. Penitential mourning must go before
Evangelical comfort. This order is observed by the Father in Christ's
commission, Esaias 61. 1, 2, 3. and this method is observed in Christ's
Ministration, Matthew. 1^. 28. It Is as high a breach of duty in a Minister to
tender consolation to an unbeleever, as to preach terror to a true believer. A
man must be a true Israelite before he can look on Christ as his consolation.
And then,

3. Why the believer is so overwhelmed with sorrow when Christ is withdrawn.
That Christ does sometimes absent himself in his gracious presence from his
people: few of the people of God but are able ^o say by their own experience,
that upon such withdrawments the soul is exceedingly troubled, ^^ripture
examples do fully prove, Cau^. 5 4. the troubling of our bowels notes more then
(...) ^ouble; it was so great, that her soul fa^^d and sunk within her, ver. 6.
Egressa est anima m^^, she was without her soul while she was without her
Savior. Thus it was with David, Psalm 30. 7. The world wonders at such
dejection, but there is no cause of wondering, for the withdrawment of Christ
is the withdrawment of all comfort. He is the comfort of their souls, and of
all other comforts which they enjoy. Every thing looks black when Christ is
removed. That which Juda^ said to Joseph concerning the affection of his Father
to Benjamin, Genesis 44. 30. Is much more true of the believers affection to
Christ, his life, and all the comforts of his life are bound up in the
enjoyment of Christ. Their health is turned into sickness, their riches into
poverty, their comforts into discomfort: when Christ is withdrawn, no wonder if
their faces look pale, and their countenance fall. The Disciples were much
oppressed with so^row when Christ told them of the loss of his bodily
presence, John 16. 6. Joseph and Mary had the sorrow of a traveling woman upon
them, when they had lost Christ but for a little time, Luke 2. 48. How much
more cause of sorrow is there, when Christ's spiritual presence is taken away?
How did Mary weep when she missed the body of Christ in the Sepulcher? Ioh. 20.
13. It was a ground of comfort to her, and all believers, though she knew it
not, that Christ was risen. Had not Christ been alive our comfort had bin for
ever dead. That speech of the Church in another case is truly applicable to
this case, Lam. 1. 16. Jesus Christ is he that is the only Reli^ver of the
soul, and therefore if the believers eyes run do^n with water, when he is
withdrawn, there is no cause of wondering, unless at this, that every tear is
not an Ocean.

4. That a Christians consolation is a must rich and dear bought consolation.
What the Apostle says of our redemption, we may well say of our consolation, 1
Pet. 1. 18, 19. You that are believers, ye are not comforted with corruptible
things, but with Jesus Christ himself. Your consolation is not bottomed upon
any outward thing, but upon Jesus Christ himself. Nay consider it. Christ
became a man of sorrow, that he might be made to you a God of comfort; He drank
up the cup of his Fathers wrath, that he might purchase for you a cup of
consolation. Jesus Christ did willingly power out his own precious blood, that
he might mingle a cup of strong consolation for the reviving of thy soul. The
God of consolation has gone the most costly way infinite wisdom could devise,
to provide comfort for his Elect.

2. For Exhortation or Instruction. This commends many duties to the people of
God. viz. these six.

1. Take heed of bottoming your consolation on any worldly thing. It is not
unlawful to take moderate contentment in outward comforts. God has given us
these things for delight as well as for necessity, and we are allowed to
rejoice in them, Eccles. 5 18, 19. But great care is to be taken that we do not
place our chief consolation in any worldly enjoyment. Most men build their
comfort on riches, honor, pleasure, or some such thing. Gods own children are
but too apt to offend in this kind. I might say many things to beat off the
heart from seeking comfort in these things. As,

That they are fading consolations. The best of earthly comforts is a dying
comfort; riches, honors, pleasures, friends, children are short-lived
comforts, the soul will live when these are not.

That they are insufficient consolations. They comfort but the lowest part of
man. What joy can the soul, which is a Spirit, take in any sensual comfort?

That they are common and ordinary consolations. The bad have as great, nay,
many ^^mes a greater portion of all these things then the good.

That they are distressing consolations. The bitterness that is in them, is
more then the sweet that is in them. Jobs bed which he thought should shave
been a place of comfort, was a place of terrifying, Chap. 7. 13, 14. There is
no comfort in this life, but it may, and many times does prove a discomfort.
Many other things I might say to this purpose, but I shall only say this, God
has made none of these things a Christians maine consolation.

(1) Its a disparagement to Gods wisdom: To bottom thy comfort on any wordly
thing, It Is as if thou should say the infinitely wise God wanted judgment
to choose the fittest consolation.

(2) It Is an undervaluing of Christ himself. As if he had not enough of all
manner of consolations in himself. Are the consolations of God small to thee?
Job 15. 11. To bottom the great comfort of thy heart on any worldly comfort,
is to say, the consolation of Christ is small to thee.

(3) Its the way to lose thy worldly comforts. Jesus Christ cannot but in
honor either strip thee of that comfort, or else turn it into a cross which
thou placest thy consolation more upon, then upon himself.

2. Let the Israel of God live comfortably. It is often commanded in Scripture
to the children of God, to live as a comforted people, Psalm. 33. 1. Phil. 4. 4.
The same God which bids you mourn for sin, bids you glory and rejoice in
him. Much might be said to press this duty.

1. It is one end why the Scriptures were written, John 15. 11. As precepts
were given for direction, so were promises for consolation.

(2) It tends greatly to the honor of Religion. A mournful sad life
dispa^^geth godliness as well as a profane life, it makes men think there is
nothing but sowernesse in Gods ways.

(3) It Is a wrong to the Spirit of God. It denies one of his works; He is given
for a Comforter as well as for a ^anct^fier, John 15. 26.

(4) It does much indispose the soul for the duties of godliness. An habitual
heaviness of heart makes duties tiresome and unpleasing. A melancholy heart is
almost as unfit for the service of God as a frothy heart.

(5) It creates many j^alousies and sinful surmisings in the soul against God.
The soul that is continually clouded with melanch^ly, cannot so heartily close
with G^d, or commend his service to others as he might do. Much might be said
to press this duty on believers, but ^ shall keep to the t^x^, christ i^ the
cons^lation of Israel; and i^s some kind^ ^f disp^^agemen^ ^o him to walk
^ncheerfully. ^t makes men t^^k there is not enough in Ch^^st to ^^eer you ^ou
are bound to honor Christ as well in this Name, The consol^^ion of Israel, as
in his other ^^es. As you h^r^ in Christ many foundations o^ real comfort, so
let it ^e your care to preserve and increase actual comfort. As it is a sin
to look for comfort more then grace; so it is ^npleasing to Christ to be so
covetous after grace as to throw aside comfort. Your comfortable life honors
Christ as well as your holy life.

3. Take heed of slighting the consolations of the Gospel. We are very apt to
look upon the duties of the Gospel as very hard, and very prone are we to judge
the comforts of the Gospel very mean. It was that which Eliphaz charges Job
withal, chap. 15. 11. It arises from the pride of our hearts. We think we
deserve great things from God; hence we reckon our comforts and encouragements
as low things. Now amongst many other considerations which do exceedingly
greaten Gospel comforts, this is one, That they are bottomed upon Christ
himself. To slight the comforts of the Gospel, is to slight Christ our
consolation.

Though others perhaps enjoy a greater portion of consolation then thou, yet
thou enjoyest more then thou deservest; yea, the comforts which thou accountest
small; cost Jesus Christ as much sweat and s^^row as theirs did, who enjoy the
greatest mea^^re of comforts. Says Moses to Korah and his aff^^^ates, (...) it
a small thing that God ^hath s^par^ted (...) from the Congregation, etc* Numb.
1^ (...) is just God should remove all (...) as look upon any consolation
received from Christ as a small thing.

4. Acknowledge (...) the fou^^^^ion of all your consolation. When an^ beam^ of
comfort is let fall upon the soul how apt are we to neglect the true fountain
of it? we look perhaps at our own graces and duties, as if our comfort sprung
from thence; Or else we look only at the Ordinance through which it is
conveyed; Seldom are our eyes lifted up so high as Christ. We should labor to
be better informed for time to come. What ever conduit pipe be used, Christ is
the fountain and foundation of every drop of comfort; Christ is the God of all
true consolation. It is not in the power of all the Angels of heaven to give
any soul one drop of comfort. Nor can all the Ministers on earth give you one
dram of comfort. They can speak the words of comfort, but they cannot cause the
soul to receive comfort. God comforts by them, 2 Cor. 6. 6. Titus was but an
instrument. Comforting is called frequently in Scripture, the speaking to the
heart, Hose^ 2. 14. Who is able to speak to the heart, but he who is the Lord
and Commander of the heart? God has put all the oil of spiritual joy into the
hands of Christ, Esaias 61. 3. and none but he can give it out. He that wants
comfort, must go to Christ, he that has received any true comfort, must
ascribe it to Christ. All my springs, says the Church, are in thee, Ps. 87. 7.

5. Let the Israel of God take heed of being a discomfort to Christ. We cannot
properly be either a comfort or di^comfort to Christ by any thing we do. He
receives properly no joy from us, nor is he capable of enduring any sorrow from
us; yet our sins are said in a figurative sense to be a grief and discomfort
to him; If Christ were capable of sorrow, nothing would go nearer his hear,
then this, to see his people sin against him. What the Apostle says of the
Spirit, we may in the same sense say of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 30. It is but a
disingenuous and unfriendly thing to be a grief to him that is a consolation to
thee. If Christ be thy comforter, it is an unworthy thing in thee to be his
tormentor. The Apostle speaks of some who crucify to themselves afresh the
Son of God, Heb. 6. 6. Every sin is in a sort the cruifying of Christ
afresh; if there be any dram of thankfulness in our hearts, we shall loath the
thoughts of vexing Jesus Christ.

6. Maintain close communion with Christ.

Use 3. Consolation to the people of God. It Is better in his hands then in
ours: we are cruel to our selves, foolish,

1. In case of the want of outward comforts. It Is often the lo^ of Gods people
to be cut short of outward things. God sees they are apt to surfeit on this
sweet fruit, therefore he withholds it. Well, Christ is thy consolation. These
things could not comfort thee without Christ, he can comfort thee abundantly
without these.

2. In case of spiritual heaviness and trouble of heart. Remember Christ is
the consolation of Israel.

First, He can comfort in all cases, 2 Corinthians. 1. 4.

Secondly, He can comfort against all difficulties. He can bring comforts
through hell, through an host of temptations to the soul, Hosea 2. 14.

Thirdly, He can give the soul ability to receive comforts, Esaias 66. 13. Wait
on him and on his Ordinances, and you shall have comfort as much as is
sufficient.

Fourthly, he is full of comfort.

Fifthly, ^e is willing to comfort. He has undertaken to be thy consolation as
well as thy salvation. He Is anointed to comfort them that mourn Esaias 61. 1, 2,
3. Say not, I have been so long without Comfort. Jesus Christ can drop that
into thy soul in one moment which shall make thee forget all thy discomfort.
Only wait on him, wait patiently, wait beleevingly; Wait on him, at the pipes
of comforts, the Ordinances, and desire grace rather then comfort, and thou
shall find heart-revivings before thou die.

Use 4. Advice to them that are without Christ Labor to close with him, he is
the consolation of Israel. What poor comforts are those which you now feed
upon! You feed on ashes, you eat husks, you are jolly and brisk, and full of a
frantic joy. If Christ be not yours, no comfort in Scripture is yours. Come
and taste of these comforts, They are pure; They are soul-satisfying; They are
eternal. All your comforts will be your torments, if Christ be not your comfort.

Luke 2. 25. XXX. SERMON. at Mary Wolnoth. Lon^ June 6. 1653.
Waiting for the consolation of Israel.
I Proceed to the second doctrine, which is this, viz.

Doct. 2. That true believers do wait for the accomplishment of divine
promises, even those that are most unlikely to be fulfilled. No promise which
God ever made to man had more improbabilities, and seeming impossibilities to
break its way thorough, then the promise of Christ. He is called a root out of
a dry ground, Esaias 53. 2. He was to be borne of a Virgin; Aw^-man shall
compass a man, Jer. 31. 22. and yet this good man having a Revelation from
God, that he should not depart this life till his eyes had seen him, did wait
for the fulfilling of this promise. If any should wonder why Simeons waiting
for Christ should be noted as an act of such singular faith; when as now the
generality of the Jews were big with the same expectation, C^^mnitius gives
two good Reasons of it.

1. The common bulk of the Jews did expect Christ only for external
advantages. They expected him only as one that should restore their outward
liberties, which were now invaded and taken away; but Simeon waited for him as
a spiritual Redeemer, that should save their souls from sin and hell.

2. Simeon expected his coming to be near at hand, according to the predictions
of the Prophets, whereas the generality of the Jews had but only a loose
uncertain expectation of him. Simeon waited for a speedy coming of Christ,
therefore does the holy Ghost take such strict notice of it. Other examples we
have in Scripture of the holy waitings of godly men for the fulfilling of
Divine promises. Abraham waited for the promise of a Son, when his body was
even dead, and his wife unlikely, according to the course of nature, to
conceive; the Apostle mentions ^^ ^om. 4. chap. 20, 21. 18. 19. David waited
many years for the promise which God made to him of succeeding Saul in the
throne; Though upon difficulties and cross providence which did arise, he was
sometimes put to a stand, yet he did expect the accomplishment of the thing
promised. He does often in the book of P^almes make mention of his waiting, as
Psalm. 62. 1, 2 5. Daniel waited for the accomplishment of Gods promise, for the
restoring of the Church from their captivity, though there were many
difficulties in the way, the Church being then as d^y bones, Ezekiel. 37. 3, 4, 5,
6. yet Daniel believed and waited for it, as appears by chap. 9. init. He did
count the number of the years, and when they drew near a period, then he stirs
up himself to pray with more then ordinary faith. The whole Church waited for
the fulfilling of this promise, Micah. 7. 7. I wi^^ wait for the God of my
salvation, my God will hear me. So in that other sad case, they did wait for
deliverance, though God hid his face from them, Esaias 8. 17. The people were in
great distraction because of Senacherib's Army, and many waited on Rezin, and
Remaliahs son; yet did the true believers wait on God for salvation. This is
the duty, this has been the practice of godly men in all ages.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall open two things.

1. What Is meant by waiting for a promise.

2. Why the people of God do wait on God for the fulfilling of his promises.

1. For the first. Waiting on God for the fulfilling of his promises,
comprehends these three things.

1. A firm believing that the thing shall com^ to pass. Waiting is the acting
of hope; and the foundation of hope is faith: Faith is the substance of things
hoped for, H^b. 11. 1. It Is impossible the soul should wait on God for that
which it does not firmly believe shall be made good by God. Abraham would never
have waited for a son of promise, if he had not first believed the promise of
a Son. Simeon could not have expected the consolation of Israel, if he had
not first believed the promise of God for the birth of him who was the
Consolation of Israel. Take away the belief of the promise, and waiting for it
cease. It Is not an act either of Grace or Reason, but of ^olly and madness to
wait for that which is not first believed. This is the first.

2. A patient tarrying of the Lords leisure. Waiting on God for a promise, is
an act of patience as well as faith. He that believes makes not haste, Esaias
28. 26. and he that waits, makes not haste. He that would have a promise
fulfilled one day before Gods time, is not a waiter, but a Commander. The holy
Ghost describes waiting on God for a promise, by tarrying till it be made good,
Hab. 2. 3. He was a wicked man who said, Why should I wait on God any longer? 2
King. 6 33. True waiting does not limit the holy One of Israel, either for
manner, or time. R^st on the Lord, wait patiently, that is David's counsel, Psalm.
37. 7. Daniel waited for the fulfilling of that promise of the Churches
deliverance out of Babylon till the set time came, Psalm. ^^. 2. 13 which was
penned by David. Waiting on God is called by David, a being silent to God, Psalm.
62. 1. A quick eye and a silent tongue becomes him that waits on God. He that
waits on God may pray for the hastening of the promise, but the conclusion of
all might be, not when I will, but when God will. Our Savior tells his
Apostles what it is to wait on God. ^ct. 1 4. Tarry at Jerusalem, says ^e, and
wait for the promi^e of the Father. He that sets God a time to fulfil^ his
promise, does not wait for a promise, but steal a promise. The Church
expresses well the nature of true waiting upon God, Psalm 123. 2. Our eyes
wait upon the Lord until that he have mercy upon us.

3. An earnest desire to have the promise made good. Patient waiting forbids
murmuring, but it does not forbid desire. Waiting for a promise cannot be
without hungring after the promise. The Church in Psalm. 123. 2. Was contented
to stay Gods time, yet in the next verse she expresses her desire, Have mercy
upon us O Lord, have mercy upon us. The Apostle expounds waiting by a word
signifying desire, 2 Pet. 3. 12. Looking for, and hastening ^^to the coming of
the day of God.

There is a two fold hastening of a promised good.

The one arising from impatience.

The other arising from desire; now though waiters must not hasten any good
with a hastening of impa^ience, yet they may, and must hasten it with a
hastening of desire. To hasten any good which God has promised, out of
discontent, argues distrust of God; but not to hasten out of ardent desires,
argues some sleighting of the good promised. I have longed for thy salvation, O
Lord, says the Prophet, Ps. 119. 174. Longing is the very height and extremity
of desire. A waiter may not be a limiter of God, but he may be a p^titioner
unto God for the fulfilling of his promise. The Scripture expresses waiting by
a word which signifies heat of desire, Rom 8. 19. The earnest expectation of
the creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God. (...), the
word signifies waiting, or looking with a stretched out neck. As a prisoner
looks for an expected pardon, or as a man looks for a friend, whom he has long
expected and would gladly see.

This vehement desire for the fulfilling of the promise is to be expressed,

(1) By frequent musings and meditations. The ^oul must have its thoughts much
upon the promise. What David says of the Precepts of God, that they are
always before him, so we must say, and so must we do with the promises of God,
they must be ever before us, we must meditate on them all the day long.

(2) By ^ervent prayer. Patience in waiting for a promise, and passionate
earnestness in praying for the fulfilling of it are not inconsistent. We must
daily beg of God that he would give being to his promises. We must say with the
Church, Come away my beloved, etc. Cant. 8. ult.

(3) By careful use of all lawful means to make good the condition of the
promise. We must be as earnest to do what God has commanded, as to enjoy the
good which God has promised. This is the first particular.

2. For the second. Why godly men do thus wait for the good which God has
promised. I shall name a sevenfold Reason.

First, They know their selves to be servants. Servants must wait upon their
Masters for the good they expect Psalm. 1^3. 2. The people of God know they are
but servants, and servants that do depend upon the free will of God for every
thing; this makes them willing to wait on God. He that will not wait on God,
denies himself to be a servant, and denies God to be his Master^ Luke 12. 35,
36. And then,

Secondly, They know God has given the^ both faith and hope for this purpose,
that they may wait on him. Waiting is nothing else but the acting of hope. A
child of God would not have any grace lie idle in his soul. He knows God has
given every grace for exercise. Not to employ and act grace received, is to
abuse grace received. A child of God would not abu^e a thing so exce^^nt as
hope is. Now he knows that hope is given to enable him to wait for the
fulfilling of promises, Ergo. And,

Thirdly, They know in some measure what a great sin it is not to wait. To
refuse to wait on God for the fulfilling of his promise, is to slight God, to
undervalue the promise as if there were nothing in it worth our waiting for. A
man cannot lightly disparage either God or his promises more professedly then
by refusing to wait on him for his promises. Now a child of God would not
willingly cast any reproach either on God or his promises from which he
receives so much good, Ergo. And then.

Fourthly, They are not unmindful how long, and with how much patience God
waited on them for their obedience. They remember God tarried Sermon after
Sermon, year after year for their conversion. The Apostle speaks of Gods
long-suffering in waiting on the old world, 1 Pet. 3. 20. Every one of Gods
children are sensible of Gods patient waiting on them when they had no mind to
know him. When they slighted grace, when they scorned mercy, God waited; this
makes them so ready to wait on God, Esaias 30 18. And then.

Fifthly, Their own undeserving of the good promised. The children of God know
that all Gods promises are free as to them. Jacobs acknowledgement will be
readily assented unto by them, Gone. 32. 10. They know how well they deserve the
heaviest threatening, but how unworthy they are of the least mercy. They do with
an unfeigned heart, say as David did, when God had promised him to build his
house, 2 Samuel 7. 18. Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house that thou have
brought me hitherto. A child of Gods Mo^to is. L^sse then the least of all the
mercies of God. This makes them wait. And,

Sixthly, They know how certain the promises of God are. They have had
experience how he has made good the promises that are past, and they know he
will show the same unchangeablenesse in those that are to come. They know his
Name is Jehovah. God that has his own being from himself, and that will give
being to all his promises. This encourages them to wait. It was the Apostles
Logic in their generation, 2 Cor. 1. 10. It is ignorance of God that causes
the heart to distrust. They that know thy Name, says David, will put their
trust in thee, Psalm. ^. 10. Gods children know his Name, therefore they will
wait. And,

Seventhly, The satisfaction they expect from the enjoyment of what is
promised. They know every promise of God will bring ^ull contentment of heart
when it is fulfilled. They cannot now expect so much as they shall then find
in the promises of God. They know they are, as the Apostle speaks of them in 2
Pet. 1. 4. Exceeding great and precious promises. They know the harvest will
make amends for all their expectation, therefore they wait for it.

The Uses are for 1. Information. 2. Reprehension. 3. Exhortation.

1. For information. This teaches us three lessons.

1. That Godly men have a very good opinion of God. They dare take his Word for
that which they love with the dearest affection. They are willing to wait the
whole time of their life for the accomplishment of that good which he has
promised. As they dare follow God when they know not whether he will carry
them, Heb. 11 8. so they dare wait on God, when they see no reason for their
waiting. Did they not bear a singular affection to him, they could never with
so much satisfaction wait upon him.

2. The excellency of grace. Grace is a choice thing in it self, and its choice
in its effects. This is one excellent effect of grace, that it does enable the
soul to wait on God for things that are most difficult to be brought to pass.
Corruption teaches the heart to wrangle with God, but grace teaches the heart
to wait on God. A gracious spirit is a choice spirit.

3. That faith does not only look to things present, but to future things.
Sense only minds things present, but faith minds things that are a great way
off, Heb 11. 1. It is as willing to wait on God for a future good, as it is to
receive a present good. Faith has an Eagles eye, and a Lions heart. It has a
Lions heart to bear present evils, and it has an Eagles eye to see future
good. It Is said of the Patriarchs, (...).
that they saw the promises, and embraced them afar off, Heb. 11. 13. A
believer is as able to live upon good in reversion, as on good in present
fruition. This is the first use of the point.

2. For reprehension. To those that will not wait for the fulfilling of Gods
promises. These are of two sorts.

1. Such as are overhasty, that would have the promise fulfilled before its
time. And then,

2. Such as never mind the promises of God, look no more after them then if
they had never been made. Simeons practice blames both these.

First, For those that would anticipate God in his promises. They are so eager
for the fulfilling of the promises, that they would have them accomplished
before their time. I would desire such men to consider these three things.

1. This is a very sinful frame of heart. Whatever may be pretended as an
excuse or extenuation, it cannot be denied but the sin is great to be over
eager with God to give being to his promise before the time. Consider five
particulars.

(1) It Is an implicit denial of Gods right to appoint his own time. The
Scripture puts times and seasons, as well as things and persons under the
jurisdiction of God. It Is his right to determine times. Acts 17. 26. He that
made time, has the sole power to appoint and set times. Our Savior tells his
Disciples, Act^ 1. 7. That times and seasons God has put in his own power.
Now, not to be willing to stay Gods time, is to divest God, as far as we are
able, and to invest our selves with this great piece of royalty and sovereignty
of appointing times. It is interpretatively to say that we will be the Lords of
time, and not God.

(2) It Is a limiting of God. Moses reproves the Jews for this, as a great
presumption, that they limited the holy one of Israel, Psalm. 78. 41. Men that
are free, will not be limited; much more unfit is it that God should be
limited. To limit God, is to exalt our selves above God, as if we were wiser
then he. We are not wise enough to improve the times which God has set, much
less are we wise enough to set God ^ time. To endeavor to reduce or
circumscribe God to our time, is to take away from him his freedom and liberty
in working.

(3) It Is a questioning of Gods faithfulness as if we were fearful he would
not be as good as his word. When we hurry men too hastily to fulfill their
promise before the time, we give them cause to think we suspect their honesty,
as if their words were but wind. To be overhasty with God, argues a secret
suspicion in the heart, that God will let time slip. It Is a sign that we do not
esteem Gods bond as good as ready payment. Abraham by wishing that Ishmael
might live, Genesis 17 18. did argue some inward doubt whether he should have an
Isaac or no. Turbat^ adb^c and vacillantis animi vox ista est, as Calvin notes.
Though he did recover himself, so as to believe without staggering, yet there
was at present some kind of vacillation in his heart. He that is overhasty
with God, gives occasion to men to think that he does not receive the promise
without some distrust. To suspect God never, so little, is a great sin.

(4) It argues much impati^nce of heart. He that would have a promise before
Gods time, does bewray a secret discontent of heart, because the time was not
set sooner. It implies dissatisfaction with what God has done, as if it might
have been done in a better time. The soul that would have the promise brought
to pass before its time, does in effect say, God has not chosen the best
time. Now to disparage Gods choice, is a great sin. He that says any thing
might have been done after a better manner, or in a better time then that
wherein God has done it, does deny God to be God only wise. Thus you see the
sin is great in being too hasty with God, I might add one thing more.

(5) It Is a denial of our selves to be beggars. We say beggars must not be
chusers. To be two hasty to have promises made good, is as if we should say
Gods promises are not acts of grace, but due debts. This is the first
Consideration.

2. It Is a weak thing as well as si^ful. It Is Christian wisdom to pray for the
fulfilling of promises, but '^is more then brutish folly to be impatiently
eager for the accomplishment of promises. The folly of it appears in these
four particulars.

(1) We shall obtain it never the sooner for our impatience. No man ever did,
no man ever shall wrest a promise out of Gods hand by impetuous violence. I the
Lord will hasten it in his time, Esaias 60. 22. Our willingness to wait for a
promise shall not keep us without it one hour longer, our impatience shall not
produce it one moment sooner then the set and appointed time. Waiting patiently
is the best way to ripen promises, impatient wrangling with God is the way to
set back the promises. God loves the force of faith, but he does exceedingly
loath the force of impatience.

(2) If we could through over much eagerness hasten a promise before its time,
it would prove hurtful to us. An unripe promise is like unripe fruit, it does
not tend to nourishment, but to diseases. An abortive birth is neither so
beautiful, nor so strong as that which is brought forth in its full time. A
promise is then sweet, when it is brought to pass in its due season. He has
made every thing beautiful in his time, Eccl. 3. 11. It Is as true of promises,
as of providence. Grace has its maturity as well as nature. Promises grow to
perfection by tract of time. When the set day is come, then, and not till then
it has full shape and proportion. That which is observed by our Savior
concerning the fruits of the earth, is true concerning the promises, Mark 4.
28. The earth brings forth fruit, first the blade, then the ear, after that
the full co^n in the ear. God in the producing of promises uses the same
method, first the blade springs up, then the ear shoots out, after that, the
full corn in the ear, and so in process of time its fully ripe. If a man
should reap his field in the blade, or in the shooting, he might possibly have
straw, but he would have no corn. Should God permit the impatient Christian to
reap the promises when they are but in the blade, or in the ear, he would lose
all the benefit and virtue of them. It Is mercy to the believer that God gives
him in the promised good in the just season of it. If they should stay never so
little beyond the season, if they should be performed never so little before
the season, the whole benefit of them would be lost. We shall when we come to
heaven bless God as much for the timing of his promises, as for the making of
his promises. The foolish child is ^ager for green fruit; the father will not
give it him till it be fully ripe, because he knows it would then be
prejudicial, when it is ripe then he gives it him. The foolish Christian longs
for a promise; when its green, his heavenly Father knows it would be to his
disadvantage to have it at that time; he will have him stay till it be ripened,
then ^e shall enjoy it. A promise before its time, is like bread half baked, or
like meat half roasted, it does neither feed nor nourish. Our wise Father loves
his children too well to feed them with raw mea^.

(3) Impatient ^astening of a promise deprives us of much of the comfort of the
promise. The promises of God lay a foundation of present comfort. The great
comfort of the promise is in the fulfilling of it, but it yields some comfort
as soon as ever it is made to the soul. Even to day do I declare, says God,
that I will render double unto thee, Zech. 9. 12. It Is a promise of return to
the captiv^d Jews Now as soon as ever the promise was made, they had a ground of
comfort that God would p^t an end to their misery, and restore to them double
what they had lost by their long bondage. As Soon as ever God has made a
promise to a soul, that soul is sure.

1. That God will never do it hurt.

2. That God will in due time perform what he has promised. The husbandman,
though he do not reap presently upon the sowing of his ^eed, yet he has some
ground of comfort as soon as the seed is sown, he has the comfort of hope
that harvest will come, when he shall reap what he has sown. Now a violent
and impatient eagerness of spirit drinks up all the comfort which the soul
might receive from the promise. The promise is most to such a soul as if it had
never been made. His weariness in tarrying breeds more torment, then the
promise does comfort to his soul.

(4) It renders the heart less thankful to God for the making of the promise.
It is the duty of the children of God to be very thankful for every promise of
God. That God that did not owe us any thing, should so strongly bind himself
to us by the cords of a promise, this is worthy our heartiest thankfulness.
All the good we expect from God is by virtue of his promise. Grace and glory
are both wrapped up in promises. He that is not thankful for a promise, deserves
justly the edge of the threatening. Now the heart that is too hasty to have the
promise fulfilled, will never be so thankful as is meet, that the promise was
made. The anguish of his Spirit in being delayed, will weaken, if not quite
destroy the thankfulness of his spirit. A tumultuous wrangling Christian can
never be a thankful Christian. Coffeehouse of heart in tarrying for a
promise, will certainly hinder that thankfulness of heart which should be
given to God for making a promise. This is the second.

3. It Is an undecent thing. It Is a very uncomely thing, that God should be
hurryed by his creatures to make good his promises before his own time. The
undecency of it will appear these ways. As.

1. God is our Superior. He is our King, he is our Master, he is our Father,
he is the supreme Lord, as far above the bighest of us as the Creator is above
the creature. It Is not good manners to be too hasty with a Superior. Woman,
says our Savior to the Virgin, What have I to do with thee? my hour is not
yet come, Joh. 2. 3. It is unsuitable to the highness of the God of glory to
stoop so low as to observe the time of the best of creatures, Great men will
not be hastened by their servants, its incongruous that the great and mighty
God should have his time appointed him by the works of his own hands. The great
God is willing to be petitioned by the meanest, but he will not be determined
by the greatest of his creatures. Greatness will not be uncivilly hurryed by
meannesse.

Luther having once been too bold with God bout a business which he thought
necessary, telling God, it must be d^^ne, thought he heard this answer, Martine
admodum sapis, sed ego non sum Deus sequax. It is not meet that God should
either take counsel, or be importunately hurried by his servants.

2. God is a free agent in whatever he does or promises. All his promises are
gracious, and all his gracious promises are free. Nothing b^t his mere will
caused him to make any promise. They are called promises of grace, not only
because they contain gracious things, but because they are the effects of
free grace. Now it is not meet that a free agent should be determined either
for matter or time. When we do with impatience over-eagerly put God on to
fulfill what he has promised, we do forger that he does all things according to
the counsel of his own Will, which is affirmed by the Apostle, Ephesians. 1. 11.
It Is not equal to determine a free agent.

3. God has waited patiently, and does still wait patiently on us. Before our
conversion he waited long, stretching out his hands with unwearied patience
while we did oppose him. Since our conversion he waits still, Cant. 5. 2. Rev.
3. 20. He waits for our rising after falls, for our obedience to duties
commanded. It Is the most incongruous thing in the world, that a patient waiting
God should be impatiently hastened. This is the first.

2. For those who never look after the promises of God. Many men are so
negligent and careless, that they never take any thought about the promises of
God, they neither pray for them, nor wait for them. I^ God will give them a
^eing, they can be contented, if he never fulfill them, they can bear it.

I would have such Christians consider these four things.

1. This is a great sleighting of the promises, and of the good which is
centained in them. The Apostle, Romans 2. 4. speaks of some who despise the
riches of Gods goodness. He that never looks after the promise, is guilty of
this sin. He scorns the love of God the Father, the maker of the promise;
the blood of God the Son, the purchaser of the promise; the grace of God the
holy Ghost, the applyer of the promise, God complains of his people, that they
accounted the great things of his Law as strange things. Hos. 8. 12. He that
never looks after the fulfilling of the promises of God, accounts the Gospel
and the great things thereof mean things.

2. It renders the promise less comfortable when it is fulfilled. The souls
consolation in receiving the good of the promise, is according to the souls
expectation in waiting for the promise. The Prophet mentions this. Esaias 25. 9.
He that exercises most says and hope in waiting for a promise, shall find
most joy in gathering the promise. We know how it befell that incredulous Lord,
who would not believe the promise of plenty which God made by his Prophet, 2
Kings 7. 1^. He saw i^ with his eyes, but did not eat of it. He that minds not
the good which God has promised, robs his soul of half of that joy which he
might have from the promise. The promise will neither be so fat, nor so sweet
as it would have been, if the heart can be more confident in expecting it.

3. This makes the promise wholly uncomfortable till the accomp^^shment of it.
The very bloss^ms of Gods promises yield some comfort to the soul. God has for
this end revealed his promises, that the souls of his people might have some
ref^eshment by them before they be brought forth. The thoughts that such a good
shall certainly be ours, bear half as ^uch comfort as if it were already
ours. We rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 2.
The present hope of future glorification is not without some joy. Good in
reversion yields much joy in possession. The promise made to Christ, that his
body should not see corruption, was a foundation of present comfort, Psalm 16.
9, 10. the hope of the bodies resurrection makes a child of God die with
comfort. All Gods promises lay a foundation of present comfort. But he that
never looks after the promise, what joy can he have from the promise? It Is the
souls believing and studying of the promise, that draws comfort out of the
promise. He that minds not what God has promised has as little present joy
from the promise as if it were not at all.

4. The neglecting of the promises is a real slighting of the Precepts. The
same God which has made the promise, has commanded the soul to wait for the
promise, and no man can dis-regard the promise, but he does thereby make
himself guilty of disobeying the Precept. This is the second use of the point.

3. For Exhortation. Let all that profess themselves to be of Simeons
religion, wait as he did for the accomplishment of the promises of God. God
has made many promises which are of general concernment to the Church of God;
the promise of calling the Jews, of ruining Antichrist; of Establishing the
mountain of the Lords house upon the top of the mountains; of settling unity
and uniformity of worship in his Church. God has made many promises of
particular good things to believers; the tak^ng away the stony heart, the
giving of them victory over their spiritual enemies, etc. be entreated to
expect the fulfilling of all these. I shall in this Use, 1. Urge the duty by
some Motives. 2. Propound some rules to direct us in the manner of our waiting.
3. Answer some objections which the soul makes against waiting.


1. For Motives. Consider,

1. That all the promises which God has made, shall have their certain
accomplishment in their time. The Apostle says in 2 Cor. 1. 20. That all the
promises of God in Christ Jesus are Yea, and Amen. It is impossible that any
promise of God should ^all to the ground. See what comparisons God uses to
declare the certainty of his promises, Esaias 54. 10. Mountains are the most
fixed parts of the earth, yet the promises of God are ^urer then they, and Jer.
33. 20, 21. The Lord compa^^s his promises for the cer^ainty of them, to the
constant succession of the day and night. We have Gods ^ow and oath superadded
to his promise, to set out t^^ certainty of them, Heb. 6. 17. The Lord has
^nn^xed his broad seal of the Sacraments to his Covenant to show the certainty
of his promises. H^^ b^^e is set in the cloud, Genesis ^. 13. Yea, consider that
the Scripture speaks of things promised, as if they were already acomplished,
and all to show the certainty of the promi^^s, Esaias 44. 22, 23. ^^s deliverance
was not to be accomplished ^^ one ^^^dred years after, yet because it w^^
promised, God speaks of it as a thing ^o^e. So ^^m. 3. 58. O Lord, thou have
pl^^ded the reproach of my s^ul, etc. The Church was at th^^ time in the very
depth of affliction, yet she speaks of her deliverance as a thing past, Thou
have redeemed my life. Dobar in the Hebrew signifies both a word and a work, to
teach us, that when the Word is gone out Gods mouth, the work is as good as
done. To press this point a little further, consider these things which
discover the certainty of the promises of God.

(1) The fidelity of his nature, God is the faithful God, that God that cannot
lie, Tit. 1. 2. Men of low degree are vanity, men of high degree are a lie, as
David found by experience, Psalm. 62. 9. But God is a God of truth. The
Scripture ^uilds the certainty of Gods promises upon the fidelity of his
nature, 1 These. 5. 24. So Psalm. 89. 33, 34. Sara builded her confidence on this
foundation in expecting that great promise, Heb. 11. 11. She judged him
faithful that had promised.

(2) The immutability of his counsel. God is unchangeable in himself, and in
his counsels, James 1. 17. There is nothing in God like change. Men's promises
fail, because their natures are changable. They see some inconveniences or
mischiefs in their determinations afterward, which they could not foresee
before, therefore they reverse and alter: but God foresees from eternity every
accident and difficulty which does fall out in ^very age, therefore he changes
not. Men resolve and determine of things sometimes very rashly; second thoughts
with them are often better then the former; God resolves on nothing rashly, but
with the deepest deliberation which infinite wisdom can use, therefore he
changes not. And because his decree is unchangeable, his promise is certain.
The Scripture does argue certainty of promises from the immutability of divine
counsel, Heb. 6. 17. and Romans 11. 28, 29. God never alters his decrees,
therefore he can never change his promises.

3. The infiniteness of his wisdom. God knows how to bring both ends of his
promises together. Men break their promises often, because they want wisdom to
make them good; but God is a God of knowledge, he knows how to give being to
every word of his mouth; he knows how to deliver, 2 Pet. 2. 9. he knows how to
defend, how to supply. The fulfilling of his threatening word is builded on his
wisdom, Esaias 31. 2. He is as wise to fulfi^^ his promise as his threatening.

(4) His Almighty power. God has strength to remove all obstructions and
impediments which seem to thwart his promises. We find his power mentioned in
order to the fulfiling of his promises, Romans 11. 23. They shall be graffed in,
for God is able to graff them in again. Upon this bottom did Abraham strengthen
his faith in the promise of God, Rom 4. 19, 20, 21. Men break their promises
for want of power. The Apostles confess they were hindered, 1 These. 2. 18. But
who can hinder God: Esaias 43 13. If mountains stand in his way, he can leap
over them, Cant. 8. He can melt them, Esaias 64. 13. If sins oppose him, he can
scatter them; if devils stand in his way, he can rout them: Nothing but his
will can oppose his power, and he cannot Will to break his Word.

5. The riches of his goodness and mercy. The first ^ize of all Divine
promises is Divine mercy. David confesses it, 2 Samuel 7. 18, 21. All the
promises of God are nothing but a fabric of mercy, Psalm. 89. 1, 2. Now mercy
and goodness which made the promise, will not fail to make it good. David
bottomes his faith on this, and so may we, Psalm. 23. ult. Surely goodness
shall ^ollow me all the days of my life. When mercy and goodness in God fail,
then may promises wi^her.

(6) The exactness of his justice. Righteousness does suum cuique tribuere.
Not only Grace, but justice pleads for the fulfilling of the promises. If we
confess our sins, he is just to forgive us, says the Apostle, 1 John 1. 9.
God has in Christ received a valuable consideration for all the good he has
promised, therefore its but justice to make it good. Christ pleads with God in
point of Justice, John 17. 25. and the servants of God have expected the best
of good things upon this account, 2 Timothy 4. 8. God gives heaven to his Elect as
a merciful Father, because it is undeserved; and as a just Judge, because it is
Christ's purchase. Promises are not only acts of grace, but bills of debt. God
in justice will make them good. This is the first Motive, promises are certain;
upon this ground does God require his people to wait, Hab. 2. 3. Promises may
seem to languish, but they cannot die. And let this be added that the
difficulty of the thing does not in the least hinder the accomplishment of the
promise. The things which are hard to us, are easy to God. That which is very
mavelous in the ears of men, is not at all mavelous in the eyes of God,
Zech. 8. 6.

2. Consider the good of the promises. The promises contain things that are
very Excellent. The Apostle ^^lls them exceeding great and precious promises, 2
Pet. 1. 4. The promises are cabinets full of rich treasure. Promises of
spiritual things are very excellent, and promises of outward things have much
good wrapped up in them. One promise of the least good that is immaginable,
yields more comfort then the enjoyment of greater good by common providence.
Whatever a man enjoyes in a promise, he has Gods love and Gods blessing with
it. A little coming from the heart of God, is better then a great deal coming
only from the hand of God. Better to be an heir of one promise, then the
possessour of the whole world by common providence.

3. Consider the excellency of a waiting frame of spirit. A waiting spirit is a
choice spirit. Waiting on God is one of the great duties which God requires
from his people. To wait on God continually comprehends much of our work and
duty to God, Hos. 12. 6. A waiting frame of heart ^. honors God greatly. A
waiting heart, 2. has as much benefit by good in reversion, as by good in
possession, Heb. 11. 1. A waiting heart, 3. can live comfortably under the
cr^ssest prov^^^nces; he that can wait on God for the g^od ^e ^ath promised,
will not faint because (...) ^^^^cted, Mi^^h 7. 7. He that can wait on (...)
his promises, may 4. conclude hi^ (...) to be (...) from the old Patriarchs,
(...) after off, and embraced them, Heb. 11. 13. A ^aiting Christian has a
clear eye, and a ^ong ^rme. He can see things ^t a great distance: he can reach
things that are afa^ off. 5. A waiting Christian is not much inferior to a
comprehending Christian. None but the Saints in heaven live so glorious a life
as the Saints that can wait on earth. The sight of faith is the next to the
sight of Vision. Thus much for Motives.

2. For Rules to direct the soul in waiting for promises.

1. Waiting for promises is to be accompanied with obedience to precepts. Many
talk much of their expectation about divine promises, who make no conscience of
the obedience of divine Precepts. Such a waiting is a groundless presumption.
Precepts and promises must ^e eyed both of them in their kind. I have waited
for thy salvation, says David, and kept thy Law, P^. 119. 174. and 166. I have
hoped for thy salvation, and have done thy Commandments. It Is a blessed
conjunction when waiting on promises, and doing of Commandments go together.

2. Waiting for promises must be accompanied with prayer for the fulfilling of
promises. He that is a true waiter, must be a daily petitioner. The Church puts
praying and expecting together, ^salme 123. 2, 3. The freeness of promises
exclud^s the merit of prayer, they do not exclude the means of prayer. I will
be sought unto by the house of Israel to do these things for them, Ezekiel. 36.
37. Prayer does not purchase the promise, but it does help both to sanctify
and ripen the promise. He will best hold out waiting that holds on praying.

3. Waiting for the promise must be accompanied with joy in the promise. A
waiting heart must be accompanied with a thanksgiving heart. We rejoice in the
hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. 2. While the soul waits for salvation, it
must rejoice in salvation. We must not wait with a sour face, nor a
discontented heart, but (...) cheerfulness of spirit. To ^e admitted to wait,
is a privilege, as well as to receive what we wait for. Thus much for Rules.

3. For Objections. Man's foolish heart is ready to pretend many vain excuses
against this duty. As

Obj. 1. We have waited long, and yet God puts us off; the promise ^s as far
off as ever it was in our thoughts.
Sol. 1. The day of the promise dr^ws nearer and nearer still, do not faint at
last. Heb. 10. 36, 37.

2. The longer thou (...) ^he fuller will the crop be. Gods promises will bear
their own charges. The longer the ship stays out, the richer will the
adventure be. The promise will recompense thee fully for all thy stay.

3. The comfort of thy waiting is more then full wages for thy waiting. God
does bestow some drops on the waiting soul.

4. God does but stay to ripen the promise for thee, and thee for the promise.
It is not forgetfulness, but love that makes God delay.

Obj. 2. I see no likelihood of the fulfilling of it, No means appears.
Sol. 1. He that made the promise can create means. That, that now seems to
obstruct the promise, may be the midwife of the promise.

2. Weak means will serve omn^potency to work by. A broken plant is as good as
a whole one, Acts 28. 27.

Zech. 13^. 1. In that day there shall be a fountain XXXI. SERMON. at Mary
Welnoth. Lon. July 10. 1653.
opened, etc.
IN the former Chapter the Lord promises repentance to the Elect Jews, v. 10,
11. This promise was fulfilled partly upon the conversion of those which are
mentioned, Acts 2. 37. 41. and Acts 4. 4. and it shall be fully accomplished
when the body of the Jews shall be brought home to God. Of which we read, Romans
11. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29.

Note. There are none so far off from, but God is able to bring them nearer
to himself by tr^e conversion. The Jews that lie ^^sti^g and soaking in their
sin for many ages together, shall a^ last be converted and brought in to
Christ.

In this text we have a promise of pardoning and cleansing mercy to these
penitent Jews. In that day a fountain shall be opened for sin and for
^ncleannesse. In the words we have f^^re particulars.

1. A spiritual bath. A fountain shall be set open.

2. The persons for whom this bath is prepared, The house of David, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, that is, for all true penitent believers. The house
of David, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem are mentioned, because they were the
first fruits of the Gospel Church acco^ding to that prophecy, Esaias 2. 3. Out of
Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem.

3. The diseases or distempers for which this bath shall be effectual. For
sin and f^r uncleanness, or for separation from uncleanness, under these
words all spiritual distempers are comprehended. It Is by way of ^llusion to the
legal impurities.

4. The time of the opening of this fountain. In that day. It refers generally
to Gospel times, particularly, and specially, and ultimately to the time of the
conversion of the Jews.

I might lay down many Observations, but I shall sum up all into this one
general doctrine, viz.

Doct. That Jesus Christ is a fountain set open in the Gospel to all true
penitents for the purging away of sin and spiritual uncleanness.

In the handling of this Doctrine I shall open these following particulars.

1. That Christ is the only bath for the purging of spiritual uncleanness. 2.
Why Christ is compared to a fountain. 3. That only penitent sinners shall be
purged in this fountain. 4. How Christ purges away sin and uncleanness
from the soul. 5. How Christ is said to be a fountain opened.
1. For the first. That the purging away of spiritual uncleanness is the work
of Christ. He can do it and none but he is able to do it. This may be evinced
by three arguments.

1. From express texts of Scripture. All purging work is attributed to Christ,
and to Christ alone. His blood is the only Scripture-bath, the Word of God
mentions this and no other. See the following places, 1 John 1. 7. Rev. 1. 5.
and Heb. 1. 3. The holy Ghost tells us, that Christ did by himself purge our
sins, (...). All the ingredients of this spiritual purgation came out of the
hear^ of Christ alone. No creature contributed so much as one herb toward this
cleansing medicine. That in Prove. 16. 16. where it is said, that by mercy and
truth is iniquity purged, is only to be understood as a qualification of the
person that is purged, not of the meritorious cause of purging away sin,
which the Scripture does ever ascribe to the alsufficient sacrifice of Christ,
who is the only propitiation for sin, 1 John 2. 2.

2. From the legal purifications. Many washings did God appoint in the Law for
the purifying of those that were legally unclean. There were two great ways
of ceremonial purification. The blood of the sacrifices which were offered to
God; this was to be sprinkled by the Priests round about the Altar; so we read,
Lev. 1. 5, 11. And the water of separation, of which we read, Numb. 19. init.
where you may see how it was to be made, and how used. Now what was typified by
both these, but this spiritual purgation of Christ^ blood? The Apostle does
clearly and express^ly unfold this to us in Heb. 9. 15, 14. The Gospel-mystery
of all the Levitical washings did am^unt to this, that the blood of Christ did
merito^iously purge away sin.

3. From the baptismal washing. God has appointed Baptism as the seal of his
Covenant under the Gospel. Water is the outward element to be used in the
administration of this Ordinance. What is the meaning of this, but that by the
application of Christ's blood, sin is purg^e away from the soul? Therefore is
Baptism^ called the washing away of sin, Acts 22. 16. because by the outward
washing of the body wi^h water, is the inward washing of the soul from sin
shadowed out. This is the first particular.

2. For the second. Why his blood is compared to a fountain. It Is called a
fountain in five respects.

1. To show the fullness of his merit. Fountains are full of water; there is an
abundance, a redundancy of merit in Jesus Christ. The Prophet would d^stinguish
the Gospel washings from the legal. Those lavers were not fountains, but
vessels, but Christ's blood which is the spiritual laver is an abounding
fountain; the spiritual washing is a rich and plent^^ul ^ashing. The Scripture
does mention ^^e merit of Christ sometimes by fullness, as John 1. 14. sometimes
by the term of abundance, as Romans 5. 17. The grace of Christ is every way
proportionable to the necessity of the soul. The soul may wash it self all
over in the blood of Christ.

2. To show the lastingnesse of his grace. The blood of Christ does endure for
ever. Streams dry up, vessels may be emptied, but fountains have a spring in
themselves, and can never be emptied, Christ's blood has been running for many
ages, and yet it runs in as plentiful streams as if it had been but newly
opened. It Is an ever flowing fountain.

3. To show the purity of it. Streams are sometimes muddy and dirty, but the
fountain is clear. There is not the least mixture of any defilement in the
blood of Christ. It Is compared to crystal for the clearness of it, Rev. 22.
1. The blood of Christ washes away defilement, but it self is not capable of
contracting any defilement.

4. To show the freshness and lively efficacy of it. Streams may lose their
virtue and efficacy; sometimes water that is sweet in the fountain, is bitter
in the streams, especially if those streams be any great distance from the
fountain. The nearer the streams are to the fountain, the more virtue they
have in them, and the fountain it self has most virtue of all. Christ's blood
is full of efficacy and spiritual vigor. It has not lost, it cannot lose that
liveliness and operativenesse which it once had. Thus I have showed you why
it is called a fountain. Before I leave this, let me show you how this
fountain excels all other fountains,

5. To show the freeness of it.

(1) This fountain does heal all manner of dist^mpers. Other fountains,
though they may be of great use for some distempers, yet they are not useful
for all. Yea, the best of them are destructive in some cases; but this
fountain is as good for every spiritual disease as it is for any. It Is set
down indefinitely in the text, for sin and for uncleanness, that is for all
sin, and for all uncleanness. The pool of Bethesda, of which we read, John
5. 4. did shadow out this; that cured all diseases after the moving of it.
Christ's blood is the true pool of Bethesda, which heals all manner of spiritual
sores and diseases.

(2) One drop of this fountain is as effi^acious as the whole fountain. In
other fountains, though every drop be of the same nature, yet it is not of the
same virtue; but here every drop is of the same virtue with the whole. One drop
of Christ's blood appl^ed by faith, will purge away sin and uncleanness, as
well as the whole fountain. The same infinite merit that is in all, is in every
part.

(3) This fountain p^rgeth the soul in a moment of whatsoe^er filthiness ^^
upon it. Things that are very filthy must lie a long time s^aking in other
fountains, before they can be made clean. They must be washed again and
again before they be made white; but this fountain purg^th imm^d^ately. One
minute is as good as a thousand years, as to the main and principal work. Let a
leper ^^ep into this fountain, and he does in one moment become a Nazarite as
white as snow. Naaman must dip sev^n times in ^ordan, or ever he could be cured
of his Leprosy, 2 Kings ^. 14. If a soul do but dip once in this fountain, he
is presently cured.

(4) That soul that is once made clean in this fountain, is never filthy again.
Other fountains cannot give any such power to them that wash in them, as to be
preservd from future defilements, but this fountain does. Not as if a soul
should never defile it self at all after its cleansing; for we do gather new
filth every day, and have need of new washings; but as to the principal
cleansing, the soul is made clean for ever. It can never again return to that
extremity of filthiness, under which it was. The old blackness of
unregeneracy can never return. Every elect person shall be once born again;
but when he is once regenerated, he is regenerated for ever. The foreskin can
never overgrow (...) soul again as it did before. Thus much for the (...)
p^rticular.

For the third. How, or in what respects (...) ^^eanseth away the uncleanness
of the (...) ^his he does in two respects.

1. His blood cleanses the soul from the guilt of ^^nne. Sin does lay a
person under guilt. O^ this ^^^eannesse of guilt the Scripture speaks, Lev. 5.
2. From this uncleanness Christ's blood cleanses, as it is our justification;
for his blood ^^ the meritorious cause of our justification. The Prophet speaks
of this, Esaias 53. 4, 5. God does for the obedience and sufferings of Christ
acquit the soul from sin, and pronounces it guil^^^se and innocent. Hence it
is that Christ is called our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. The Apostle speaks of
this fully, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. He is the lamb of God that takes away the sins
of the world.

2. His blood cleanses the soul from the filthiness of sin. Sin is a filthy
thing in it self, and it does bring filthiness upon the soul. This filthiness
is removed by the sprinklings of Christ's blood in the work of sanctification.
He does by his blood purge the conscience from all dead works, that it may
serve the living God. We are said to be sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.
2. He is as well the meritorious cause of our Sanctification, as of our
justification. Every drop and dram of grace, cost his heart blood. Had not God
poured forth upon us the blood of his Son, our black and polluted souls had
never been made white. We owe our holiness to Christ as well as our
righteousness. This is the third.

4. For the fourth. That only penitent sinners are purged in this fountain.
This is clear by comparing this Text wi^h v. 10. of the former Chapter. There
the prophet decribes the quality of the persons, they are such as look on
Christ whom they have pierced, and such as mou^ne for him. The fountain of
Christ's blood is a sealed fount^ine to all impenitent sinners; but to them that
mourn and are in bitterness for sin it is a fountain opened. Consider,

1. Impenitent sinners will not prize it. A man must both see and bewail his
uncleanness, before he can value the healing fountain. Christ never comes with
acceptance till the soul see his need of him, When the Apostle saw that the
Jews began to be in sadness, then he shows them the fountain, Acts 2. 37, 38.
An impenitent sinner will care no more for the grace of Christ in the Gospel,
then an innocent man will for a pardon. When the Scripture holds out Christ, it
does usually mention something of this nature, Esaias 55. 1. and Matthew. 11. 28.
No man will greatly prize either ease or rest, but he that feels his load heavy.

2. Impenitent sinners will abuse and slight it. A harned sinner will as much
despire a Christ, as a full stomach dainty meat. This is the fourth.

5. For the fifth. Why Christ is called a fountain opened. He is called so in
three respects.

1. To show how willing he is that sinners should make use of him. He is not a
sealed fountain, but a fountain opened. Jesus Christ is mavelous ready and
desirous that polluted souls would make use of his blood. All the invitations
which he uses in the Gospel, show his readiness, Rev. 22. 17. He has for this
purpose appointed the Ministry of the Gospel, that solemn invitation might
therein be made to defiled souls, that they would wash and be clean. All the
complaints which he makes of sinners remissness and backwardness in coming to
him, are a proof of his readiness. Take but two places for this, the one is,
John 5. 40. The other is in, Luke 13. 24. With how much sadness of heart does
Jesus Christ utter those words, How often would I have gathered thy children as
a ^hen gathered her chickens and ye would not: He that commands his doors
always to be kept open does declare, his mind to be, that all that want
succor should turn in for relief. Christ keeps open house for all penitent
sinners.

2. To show the cleernesse of the Gospel revelation above the Legal. Non
dubito, says Calvin, etc. I do not doubt, but by this word he notes the
difference between the Law and the Gospel. Christ was a fountain for sin and
for uncleanness under the Law, but he was a sealed fountain, he was a
typified fountain, shadowed out under the blood of bulls and goats, and other
legal purifications; but now he is a fountain opened, he is clearly and fully
discovered without shadows, or types, or any such thing. The fountain was then
covered over with the leaves of many veiles and shadows, but now all those are
taken away, and the blood of Christ appears plainly; the stone that formerly
lay upon the mouth of the fountain, is now removed; the streams run so clear,
that all that read the Gospel may perfectly see it. And then,

3. To show the readiness and easiness of acc^sse which is afforded to
Christ. The Apostle in Romans 5. 2. makes mention of the access which the
believer has to the grace of Christ. Men pretend many difficulties and
obstructions. There is a lion in the ^ay, says the sluggard, a lion in the
streets, Prove. 26, 13. Who shall roll us away the stone, say the women? Mark
16. 3. the same thoughts have men generally in their hearts concerning their
coming to Christ. When they are invited to wash in this fountain, they
presently reply, who shall roll away the stone, who shall unlock the fountain
for us? This objection is fully answered, the fountain is unlockt already, the
way is plain, all impediments are taken out of the way when the soul is
willing to come; all the straits and hindrances are in your own hearts; do but
co^quer your own unwillingness, and the passage is easy, the fountain is not
sealed, but open.

The Uses are for Information. Exhortation. Consolation.

1. For Information. This doctrine may teach us these profitable lessons, viz.

1. Be^old the heinous and abominable filthiness of sin. The Scripture sets
out sin as a very filthy thing. Its compared to such things as are of a
polluting nature. To the ^kum of a boiling pot, Ezekiel. 24. 6. To the filthiness
of a removed woman, Ezekiel. 36. 17. to mire, to the vomit of a dog, 2 Pet. 2. 22.
To the plague of pestilence, and the plague of leprosy, 1 Kings 8. 38. Sin
is often called a spot, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. It Is a spot exceeding black, and exceeding
broad, and very deep. Many things show the filthiness of sin. The waters of
the deluge in the old world; the flames of fire and brimstone sent down upon
Sodom and Gomorrah. But above all, this shows it to be a filthy thing, that it
could not be washed away without the blood of Christ. That Is a foul stain which
cannon be taken away without the shedding of man's blood. The stain of that sin
of covenant breaking with the Gibeonites, was very heinous, that could not be
done away without the blood of all Saul's house, 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 6. Sin is
such a black spot that it could never have been done away without the blood of
Christ. The Son of God must open a fountain of blood in his own heart to
expiate sin, or it could never have been expiated. The blood of bulls and
goats could not do it, Heb. 9. 12. The garment was too foul to be cleansed by
any such thing. Oh that sinners would lay this to heart! thy lying, thy bloody
oaths which thou look upon as things so mean, thy cheating and defrauding,
thy overreaching and false dealing, thy covetousness, the guilt and
filthiness of the least of thy sins could never have been taken away, if Jesus
Christ had not opened the fountain of his blood as a laver for sin. When thy
heart has any good thoughts of sin, remember this way of expiation, and it
will appear very heinous.

2. Behold the dignity and merit of Christ's blood. The Scripture calls it
(...), 1 Pet. 1. 19. precious blood. It Is precious blood in regard of the
dignity of his person, it is the blood of God himself, that is, of that person
who is true and very God, Acts 20. 28. And its precious in regard of the virtue
and effect of it. By this blood God and man are reconciled; By this blood the
Church of God is Redeemed; And, by this blood sin is expiated and perfectly
done away. Consider these three things.

(1) The multitude of sinners that are cleansed by Christ. An innumerable
company, all the Elect of God in all ages.

(2) The multitude of sins in every person, not one, but many, every sinner
is full of sores, not one free part, either of soul or body.

(3) The perfection of the cure. Every sinner is as perfectly healed, as if he
had never been wounded. He is said to cleanse from all sin; in 1 John 1. 7.
He is said, to take away the sins of the world. He is said for ever to
perfect them that are sanctified. Heb. 10. 14. All these expressions show the
compleatnesse of the sinners cleansing. Were not his blood of infinite value,
it could never have wrought such an effect. The blood of all the men in the
world could not expiate one sin, ^ut the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses
multitudes of sinners from millions of sins, and every one of them mortal.

3. Behold the exceeding greatness of the love, both of God the Father, and of
Christ to mankind. The Evangelist admires it, John 3. 16. It is admired by the
Saints in heaven, Rev. 5. 9, 10. and it may well be admired by the Saints on
earth. That God should let out the blood of his own Son to make a spiritual
fountain for us to wash in; This argues not only ex^ctnesse of justice, but
abundance of love. It will appear to be love indeed, if we consider what Christ
must endure before he could expiate sin: He must drink up the deep fountain
of his Fathers wrath, before he could be a fountain for us to wash in. He
shall drink of the brook in the way, says the Prophet of Christ, Psalm. 110. 7.
This brook is the wrath of God; it was a large brook, and a deep brook, the
streams of it were very fierce and very muddy. This brook Christ did not only
sail over, or swim thorough, but he drank it up, even the thickest dregs of
it. That God should cause his Son, and that the Son should be willing to
drink up such a brook of wrath, that he might become a fountain to wash away
our sin, this argues love unspeakable, and stupendous in both toward elect
men.

4. The Church of God shall never want sufficient means for spiritual
purification. Here is a fountain opened, and being once opened, it shall never
be shut again, and as it shall never be shut, so it can never be drawn dry. The
streams of it shall perpetually flow out in the Gospel whilst the Church has
need of washing. Other fountains may fail through continuance of drought; but
this fountain can never fail. God promises to his Church perpetual springs,
Esaias 5^. 1^. Th^^ shall be as a watered garden, and like aspring of water,
whose waters fail not. This continuance of the fountain is intimated in the
circumstance of time mentioned in the text, in that day. The whole time of the
Churches pilgrimage in this life is comprehended under that expression. The
fountain stands open, and runs all the day long in a full and plentiful
stream. It is the Churches misery that she contracts defilement continually,
but it is her comfort that the purifying fountain does and shall run
continually.

5. How inex^^sable those are that die in their filthiness under the Gospel.
Those who live and die with their filthiness upon them where the Gospel is
not, shall be without excuse at the day of judgment, because God made them at
first clean, and they did wilfully defile themselves. Man's first ^^^^ling in
the mire of sin was his own voluntary act, he can blame none but himself,
therefore none of man's defiled posterity can be acquitted; but of all men those
that live under the Gospel shall be without excuse; For to them a fountain is
set wide open, and they are daily invited to wash themselves therein, their
sin i^ double. They do not only sin in poll^ting themselves, but they sin
in keeping the pollution upon them. They are filthy, no^ because they want
water, but because they want a heart to make use of water. The ^^reames of
Christ's blood run by their doors, and therefore if their guilt abide, nothing
can be pleaded by way of excuse. They were told of their (...), they were
invited to wash, they saw others by washing were cleansed, therefore their
guilt remains. If N^^^^ after the Prophet directed him to wash in Jordan, had
returned without washing, who would have pitied him, if he had died a leper?
Those that are brought to this spiritual Jordan, if they will not wash, it is
pity but their sinful lepro^ie should remain upon them. They do shut that
fountain against themselves, that God has graciously opened. Thus much for the
first Use of Information.

2. For Exhortation. It commends several duties which we should carefully
practice. As,

1. Take heed of despising this fountain. The Prophet foretelling of Christ,
did long since by way of complaint, speak of the despising and rejecting of
him, Isa. 53. 3. We have cause to join with him in the same complaint; the
fountain of Christ's blood is exceedingly despised.

1. The Jews they keep open the typical fountain.

2. The Papists despise this fountain in that Heb. 10. 14
they make other expiatory fountains. They, instead of going to the fountain
of Christ's blood, 1. They go to the Mass, which they call a propitiatory
sacrifice; And, 2. To the merit of their own works, thinking thereby to expiate
sin, purchase the favor of God. Jesus Christ may complain against the
Papists as God does against his people of old because of their apostasy, Jer.
2. 13. My people have committed two evils, they have forsaken me the fountain
of living waters, and have hewn them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can
hold no water. The Scripture makes not good works, but Christ's blood our
ransom and propitiation, Tit. 3. 4, 5, 6. Our good works are so far from
cleansing us from the guilt of sin, that they themselves have need of
cleansing. Domine lava lachrymas meas was the prayer of that father, and it
must be our prayer. Does not the Scripture attribute filthiness to the best of
our works? Esaias 64. 6. All our righteousnesses are as filthy r^gs. Thy
repentance, thy prayers, thy duties must be sprinkled in this fountain, else
God will loath both thee and them. How unable is that to expiate sin, which
does it self stand in need of expiation? 3. The Popish purgatory is also a
direct despising of this fountain, it reproaches Christ's purgatory, as if it
were not sufficient, contrary to Heb. 1. 3.

3. The Socinians despise this fountain, in that they deny Christ to be a
price for sin. They say Christ did not suffer vice nost^a in our stead, but
only commodo nostro for our profit, to be as an example to us. We deny not,
but that Christ by his sufferings has left us an example of patient
sufferings. The Apostle is express for this, 1 Pet. 2. 21. but this was but an
inferior and less principal end of his sufferings; We have benefit by Paul's
death, and all other Saints, but the principal end was to be a propitiation for
sin. Therefore he is called a ransom, (...), 1 Timothy 2. 6. A counterprize,
because the end of his sufferings was to satisfy the justice of God for our
sins. The Apostle says, That he himself bare our sins in his body on the
cross, and by his stripes we are healed, 1 Pet. 2. 24. If Christ did not
suffer in our stead as well as in our nature, we must suffer and satisfy for
our selves. God will have satisfaction, but the Scripture says, and let us for
our comfort believe it, That he was wounded for our sins, he was br^^^sed for
our offenses, the chastisemen^ of our peace was on him, and that God has laid
on him the iniquity of us ^ll, Esaias 53. 5, 6.

4. All unbleevers that make no use of this f^untain, are guilty of despising
it. Though men do not with the Jews, wash in the blood of bulls; or with
Papists, make other expiatories, either of the Mass or Purgatory; nor with
Socinians, deny the satisfaction of his blood; yet if we reject the ^enders of
grace in and through his blood made in the Gospel, we do despise it as much as
they. The Prophet makes not believing in Christ, and despising of Christ,
equivalent, Esaias 53. 1, 3. There is no medium between not believing and
despising.

I have two things to say to all that despise this fountain.

First, It is a great sin. It Is a despising of the richest love, the deepest
wisdom, the gloriousest grace that ever God did or could manifest to the s^nnes
of men. The washing away of sin by Christ's blood is the deepest plot of
infinite wisdom, the richest piece of unsearchable grace that ever was
manifested to the sons of men. It Is that which the Angels do, and shall study
for ever.

Secondly, The danger is great. He that despises Christ, despises cleansing.
All that hate me love death, Prove. 8. 38. It Is a question disputed by Divines,
whether God could have forgiven sin without satisfaction. Most conclude God
by his absolute power might, but now he has declared himself that he will not
expiate sin any other way, nor by any other means but by Christ, whom he
has set forth to be a propitiation for sin, Romans 3. 25. Therefore he that
refuses to wash in this fountain, must of necessity perish in his own
filthiness. Behold ye despisers, says the Apostle, and wonder and perish,
Acts 13. 41. God himself cannot now save him that rejects Christ's blood.

2. Let the opening of this fountain occasion the opening of other fountain^
in all our hearts. Deep calls unto deep, Psalm. 42. 7. There are five
fountains which the consideration of the opening of this fountain should open
in the heart of every believer.

(1) A fountain of love. We should set this fountain wide open both to God and
Christ. It was love that set open this fountain, Rev. 1. 7. and it should work
love in us toward him again; we are commanded to love Christ. We are threatened
with a curse, if we love him not, in 1 Cor. 16. 22. The streams of this
fountain, if any thing will cause the springs of love to overflow in our
hearts.

2. A fountain of thankfulness. The Apostle speaking of the redemption we have
by Christ's blood, begins with Benedictus Deus, Ephesians. 1. 3. We are unworthy to
wash in this fountain, if we do not daily render praises to God and Christ for
it. Ordinary thankfulness will not serve for such an extraordinary fountain.
We owe much thankfulness to God for the fountains of common water, and much
more for this fountain of Grace in the blood of Christ. Sing David's song of
praise, Psalm. 103. init. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me
bless his holy Name. Our hearts, if it were possible, and our lips too, should
be as full of praises as this fountain is of grace.

3. A fountain of sorrow. This fountain shows our guilt. We should not have
wanted a fountain for sin, if we had not fallen into sin. We should never think
on this fountain for sin, but we should break forth into sorrow because of
sin.

4. A fountain of faith. We can neither wash in this fountain, nor go to it
without faith. Christ will be to us still as a fountain sealed, if we do not
believe in him. In his Name, through faith in his Name, whosoever believes in
him shall have remission of sins, Acts 10. 43. This is the testimony both of
Prophets and Apostles. And then,

5. A fountain of humility and self denial. By nature we have proud thoughts of
our selves. All the good which is wrought in us we arrogate to our selves. This
should teach us to ascribe all our purification to Christ. It Is this fountain
that has cleansed us if we be cleansed. The fountain is opened to our hands.
We could neither open the fountain, nor come to the fountain, God has done
both. This is the second branch of Exhortation.

3. Make daily use of this fountain. Bathe your selves in it continually.
Though once washing be enough to purge away sin as to the maine work, yet there
will be need of daily purging. Though we need no new sacrifice for sin, yet
we need daily applications of the merit of that one sacrifice upon every
miscarriage.

4. When ever you see a fountain of water, think on Jesus Christ. Had we
spiritual hearts we might think on Christ all the day long; few creatures but
have some memorial of him. He bears the names of his people upon his breast.
Should not we bear him in our heart by holy thoughts and mediations on him? The
more we think on him, the more shall we love him, and the more will he
communicate his love to us. This is the second Use.

3. For Consolation. This Doctrine is the foundation of all comfort to
believers.

1. Against that bitter fountain which is in our hearts. We have a bloody
fountain in our nature, which is always running. The droppings of this
fountain def^le us, defile our services. Well, oppose this fountain to that
fountain. Gods fountain is more able to cleanse, then this fountain is to
defile. This fountain can drown thy fountain, Christ is a greater cleanser then
sin is a defiler, Micah 7. 19. The sea of Christ's blood is deep enough to drown
all thy sins; Though thy fountain defile thee daily, yet Christ's fountain can
cleanse thee daily.

2. Against their inability to make use of this fountain. They are discouraged
because of the obstructions which lie in their way. This text tells you, they
are all done away; the fountain is not ^ealed, it stands wide open day and
night.

FINIS.

