royal blazon or coat of arms I R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT A PROCLAMATION Against Slanderers
and Leesing-makers.
JAMES, by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sherisss in that part,
conjunctly, and severally, specially constitute, Greeting:
Whereas We are Informed That diverse Ministers, and others, to promote their
Seditious designs, Do take upon them in Sermons, and other Discourses, To
Allarm the People, and to raise dislike of Our Person and Government in their
Hearts, Desaming and Slandering Our Designs, or at least, meddling in Our
Affairs; All which are highly punishable, and the Punishments Declared by Our
Laws and Acts of Parliament; Especially by the seventh Act of the eight Parl.
of King James the Sixth, Our Royal Grandfather, (of ever Blessed Memory) Cap.
134. Entitled, Anent Slanderers of the King, His Progenitors, Estate and
Realm; And of which, in so far as relates to these Affairs, The Tenor follows.
Forasmuch as it is understood to Our Sovereign Lord, and His Three Estates
Assembled in this present Parliament, What great harm and inconvenient has
fallen in this Realm, chiefly since the beginning of the Civil Troubles,
occurred in the time of His Highness minority, through the wicked and
licentious, public and private Speeches, and untrue Calumnies of diverse His
Subjects, to the Disdain, Contempt and Reproach of his Majesty (...) Council
and Proceedings, and to the dishonor and prejudice of His Highness, His
Parents, Progenitors and Estate: Stirring up His Highness Subjects thereby to
misliking, Sedition, Unquietness, and to cast off their due obedience to His
Majesty, to their evident peril, tinsel and destruction; His Highness
continuing always in Love and Clemency toward all His good Subjects, and most
willing to seek the safety and preservation of them all; Which wilsully,
needless, and upon plain malice, after His Highness Mercy and Pardon, oft-times
before granted, has procured themselves by their Treasonable Deeds, to be cut
off as corrupt members of this Common-well: Therefore it is Statute and
Ordained by Our Sovereign Lord, and His three Estates in this present
Parliament, That none of His Subjects (of whatsoever Function, Degree, or
Quality in time coming) shall presume to take upon hand, privately, or publicly
in Sermons, Declarations, or familiar Conferences, to utter any false,
Slanderous or untrue Speeches, to the disdain, reproach and contempt of His
Majesty, His Council and Proceedings; or to the dishonor, hurt or prejudice of
His Highness, His Parents and Progenitors, or to meddle in the Affairs of His
Highness, and His Estate present, bygone, and in time coming, under the pains
contained in the Acts of Parliament, against makers and tellers of Leesings:
Certifying them that shall be tried Contraveeners thereof, or that hear sick
slanderous Speeches, and reports not the same with diligence, the said pains
shall be executed against them with all rigor, in example of others. And to the
end that so necessary and laudable a Law may receive due and punctual
obedience; We therefore, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Do hereby Declare,
That the Contraveeners hereof any manner of way, shall be examplarly punished
with all rigor, conform to the prescript of the said Statute in all points. And
that Our Royal Pleasure in the Premises may be made public and known, Our
Will is, And We Charge you strictly and Command, That incontinent, these our
Letters seen, ye pass to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, and all other Market
Crosses of the head Burghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, And there, in Our
Name and Authority, by open Proclamation, make publication of Our Royal
Pleasure in the Premises, that all Our Leidges may have notice thereof, and
give obedience thereto, as they will be answerable at their highest peril.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the seventeenth day of June, One Thousand
six hundred eighty six Years. And of Our Reign the second Year. Per actum
Dominorum Secreti Concilii. COLIN McKENZIE, Cls. Sti. Concilii.

GOD Save the KING.
This may be Printed,

R.L.S.
June 28. 1686
Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno Dom. 1686.

Reprinted at London, for J. L. 1686.


