THE HISTORY OF Don Fenise. A NEW ROMANCE, Written in Spanish BY Francisco De
las-Coveras.

And now Englished by A PERSON OF HONOR.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Prince's Arms in St Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

To the READER.
WE shall not need to throw away words in commendation of this History. Those
that ^ave read it, will save us that la^our; and those that never saw it, (...)
now they censure it, will speak ^o late: For, the Book has alrea^^ had
honorable Test from the ^est Judgments in the Court and Academies of Spain.
If you ^inke them partial; believe an Enemy (one of the greatest Wits of
France) who in a Letter, since printed, writes thus to his friend: Though I
have little reason to doat on ought that but tast's of Spain, which fights
against us, and in one Summer robbed me of a Brother and a Nephew: Yet I
confess I am much enamored on the Book you sent me, The History of Don
FENISE: The Plots are so well managed; the Passions clean and natural; the
Language chosen and proper; and the whole Discourse so perfectly well wrought,
that I am sorry it was written by an Enemy to our Country. I wish he that
speaks so excellently of Lovers, did not hate France. We allowed them more
Cunning, not more Wit. But this Author has the happiness of his own Nation
and of ours.

By this time perhaps you ^ike the Book, but doubt the Trans^ation. It Is now in
your power, and must speak for it self. All I ask (and it is no buge Request)
that you would not pronounce upon it without comparing the Original: Otherwise
you may do more wrong to the Translator than he has done to the Author.

The several Histories contained in this Book.
THe History of Fenne and Laure page 10. The History of Don Lovis page 26. The
continuation of the History of Laure page 35. The continuation of the History
of Don Lovis page 45. The history of Eufemie and Theodore page 60.
The Second Book.
The History of Rufine and Don Jovan page 88. The History of the Tragic Loves
of Marcel page 116. The History of solitary Simeon page 128
The Third Book.
The History of Frederick page 147. The continuation of the History of Eufemie
page 161. The history of Don Jame page 206.
The Fourth Book.
The History of Don Antonio page 250. The history of Don Charles and Violante
page 295. The history of Don Garcia and Constance page 308.
ERRATA.
Page 8. Rookes for Rocks. p. 16. lin. 31. a Chi^^goo^. ib. l. 32. s^^rec^. p.
20. l 17. could for told. p. ib. l. 18. dele when. p. 36. l. 28. Splendour. p.
41. l. 26. Heride for Lerida. p. 3 13. Lult. then for the.

THE HISTORY OF FENISE.
The First BOOK.
IT was toward the Evening of one of the fairest days of the Spring time,
when Poleron, one of the most accomplished Shepherds of the Mountains and
Meadowe, neighbors of Toledo, was near unto a Fountain en^ertaining his
Thoughts; but so sad, that the various beauties of the Plants and Streams
could but very little recreate him. A misfortune that had be^alne him kept him
in this country place, where in expecting that the Destinyes might be
favorable unto him, he served the Shepherdess Jacinte, whose Renown did
blemish the luster of the fai^est of that Amiable habitation, but his suite was
not pleasing unto her: She showed him nothing but contempt, the assured
recompense of those that merit her the least. She was the only daughter of a
Shepherd, and dearly beloved of another, who did possess much more of the
goods of Fortune then did Poleron, the which did render her equally vain and
disdainefull toward those that courted her, and who did endeavor by honest
ways to get access near to her. In such manner, that playing too much the
discreet, and reserved person, she made her disdain to appear.

Nevertheless Poleron did not cease to continue the Vows which he had made to
serve her, wherein he went beyond his Rivalls, and wherein he had so good
grace, that he was envied of all those which had the same intentions. This
Shepherd Walking about the Fountain, discoursed within himself of the
extravagancies of Lovers, and the diverse effects of that passion, as having a
most particular knowledge thereof, when as remembering himself of certain
verses that did agree with his opinion, he song them for to recreate and
entertain himself with the Echo of those Rocks, expecting that Jacinte would
pass near this Fountain, where she came almost every night, when she might
not b^^ importuned with the heat of the sun: they were these.

A Complaint against Love.
Thou wants as much judgment as ey, no odds,
Thou little devil which subdu'st the gods;
For thou hat'st those that love thee, only those;
And like an insolent Proud Victor
Never is thy rigor strict^r,
Then against such as submitt to thy dispose.
In all thy actions Treachery presides,
And the Army of thy Passions Fury guides,
That against the Laws of prudence will advance,
Thy food is poison, and no reason
Can thy wild Discourses season,
by knowledge is by height of Ignorance.
When a poor Lover, that has worn thy chains
Imagines he has took sufficient pains,
And his Remuneration looks to have:
Then thy severitie regarding
No high merit, for rewarding
^ayes him with torments like a gally slave.
None more then I, feels how thy sorrow wafte^,
None less then I, thy sweetness ever tastes,
^he scorns me, to whose favor I pretend
I chase, she flies, what strange misfortune
Crosses me, still to importune
(...) she resolve never to condescend.
^^at such sad pressures may find some relief
(...) little yet to mollify my grief
from hope alone, vain hope, there drops a balm:
I in the air am building Castles
With the wind my Fancy wrastles
And in a tempest searches for a calm.
Maugre the Demon's power that blinds my sight
And drives into an eternal night,
Yet through the storm my passage I extort.
But las, when I have long been striving
To escape death, and am arriving,
My fate is, to be shipwrackt in the Port.
The Shepherd ending these last verses, remained in so profound a
consideration of their subject, and so satisfied with his singing (for there is
no Musician that does not take pleasure to hear himself) that after having
ended his music, he was a little time without perceiving the motion of
certain bushes which were near him, astonished, it may be, to see a man
habited after another fashion then those who were accustomed to visit them; in
the end hearing this motion, and seeing that there was no storm to cause it,
he was a little surprised; but his admiration ceased by the presence of a young
Gentleman who came out of the thicket, who coming to him said thus. Shepherd
the travells wherewith Fortune persecutes me, and the favor that nature has
done you, has conducted me hither, and although that being brought up amongst
these Rocks, it seems that you ought to retain their hardness, nevertheless
this charming voice wherewith you animate this Forest, has persuaded me that
I should find near unto you the easments and succors which I search, that
heaven having given you the graces of an Angel, you should not be unprovided
of the feelings of a man.

Poleron harkened most attentively to this discourse which gave him knowledge
of the good wit^ of him that had held it; for words being the daughters of the
understanding do give witness of her capacity; and by an answer in the same
style, thanked him for the good opinion that he had conceived of his courtesy,
and promised him to serve him in all things he should have need of; if
peradventure, said he, your high condition do not contemn the lowness of
mine.

This discreet manner of speaking pleased very well this Gentleman, who
answered the Shepherd, that upon the first occasion he would let him know,
the cause which had obliged him to have ^ecourse to him: and after many
discourses he ^old him as a friend, that it did concern him greatly to quit
those habits too full of luster, and to disguise himself in poor clothes like
unto his, to the end that he might not be known during the time that he
resolved to remain amongst these mountains, and also to live more familiarly
with the other Shepherds, and not to give them any suspicion.

This resolation seemed very good to Poleron; and for to put it in present
execution, I will, said he, go fetch you the better of two suits, which I
only wear upon our Village feast days; and when you are accommodated, I will
say that you are one of my kinsmen, which for my sake has left his country, to
pass his life here with me; so you shall be in all liberty, and suspected of
no man.

This Gentleman had scarcely lost the sight of Poleron, when he perceived come
out of the same place, from whence he was come before, three men well mounted,
whereof one had his visage masqued and led by a Peasant; as soon as they did
perceive the gentleman, fury did so strongly transport them, that all three
drawing their swords fell upon him to massacre him. He did what he could to
defend himself, and showed all the courage that could be imagined, but all in
vain, for the party was not equal.

The discourse which Poleron and this Gentlemen man had together, was heard by
Jacinte, and Lizeron her Brother, which were hidden amongst the nearest bushes,
who seeing the stranger all alone, and abandoned to the mercy of his Enemies,
ran to aid him, or at least to stay by their presence the evident danger that
threatened him; for although they did not know him, yet they did so affect him,
having heard him say that he would stay with them, and quit the glory of his
condition for to accommodate himself after the simplicity of theirs: but they
could not make so great have to come to him, as the others did to take away his
life, so that at the instant that they approached, the stranger fell to the
ground, hurt with two great wounds, and had received many others without their
Arrival. The murderers fearing that Lizeron and Iacinte were followed with
many other Shepherds, withdrew themselves into the same place from whence they
were come; fearing that if they should stay, the advantage which they had
gotten, might be changed into disadvantage.

They surprised Clitor the Shepherd which guided them, in demanding of him at
their meeting, if he had seen pass that way a Cavalier of the same feature and
in the same habits of him that was hurt, and he having answered them, yea, they
prayed him to conduct them the same way he had taken, making him believe that
this was their Master, ahd that they had lost him in the next wood.

This Shepherd after having innocently answered to their demands, and seeing
that they had almost killed him, ran hastily to inform the Justices of their
acts, who sent presently op and down the Country to take the Malefactors. In
the interim, Poleron ignorant of this Tragedy, returned from his Lodging,
bringing with him the habit he went to fetch; and finding Jacinte (who being
touched with compassion for the ill fortune of the Gentleman which lay
stretched upon the grass) rubbing his face, and striving to stay the blood of
his wounds, he saw also coming Lizeron with a vessel full of cold water,
wherein Jacinte. wet her hand, and did convert it into pearl, like a new
Aurora, bedewing his face therewith; he suddenly came to himself, and
testified by his looks the astonishment he had to see himself in so different
estate from that he thought fortune had reduced him; but because she is of the
female Sex, me is subject to inconstancy. He did contemplate and admire
together as much as the passion he suffered in his soul, and the pain of his
body would permit, the graces and features of Jacinte: If the cause of the
misfortune which was befalne him had been less adorable, he had suffered
himself to have been overcome by the charming looks, and sweet speeches of
Jacinte. In effect she had in this action so many charms and graces, that
Poleron might have been jealous, if the love which he bore her, had not rather
been for divertisement then design, or that his prudence had not known that
those courtesies which she rendered to this stranger, proceeded only from
charity, and not affection.

Poleron approached, to whom Jacinte's Brother recounted succinctly what was
happened; and after, having bound up his wounds as well as they could, they
carried him in their arms unto the next Village, to be more conveniently
looked unto: At the first steps they made, Clitor arrived with the Officers of
Justice whom he went to fetch, they saw the hurt man, and went on to the
pursuit of those that had committed the crime. In the mean time the good
shepherds went on their way, and Jacinte followed them, with a countenance that
witnessed as much compassion and feeling apprehension of the danger of this
Gentleman, as Poleron had cause to fear the loss of that he did not possess,
nor only hoped. O Love, that thou art a rigorous Tyrant! That there are
extravagancies in thy effects! Thou would conserve that which thou have not:
Thou fear to lose that which thou hopest not for: Thou hopest that which
thou flyest from: Thou flyest that which thou do enjoy: They carried the
Malade unto Polerons house, where they made a bed very carefully, more handsome
and soft, then fair and rich.

The night overtook the Officers of Justice in making their search, but they
forbore not to visit the Caves and Rocks, chasing the prey, so that amongst the
crags of this mountain they found a horse entangled amongst the shrubs,
wherein the reins of his bridle were fastened, and a good way from thence, a
young man of a very good countenance, and well clad: when as without asking him
what he was, or from whence he came, no, nor hearing his reasons, or giving
place to his excuses, put irons upon bis hands like a murderer, and carried him
to the prison of the Village, which joined to the house of Poleron, leaving him
there as to the Inquisition, until he might accuse himself of the crime
whereof they presumed him ^uilty.

The wounded Cavalier felt not so great pain (...) his body, as inquietude in
his mind, seeing him^^lfe without all means to satisfy two violent ^^ssions,
Love, and Revenge; there came from the ^ext Village a Surgeon, who had much
tongue, ^ut little experience, nevertheless this cure was ^^^ppy (rather by
the good fortune of the wounded, ^^en by the science of the surgeon) since
that ^ithin few days he recovered him his health, the which he had never done
before to any man. Poleron ^^patient to know who was his guest, after having
^^ene him carefully looked unto, desired him to dis^over himself unto him, to
the end he might search ^ccasion to serve him: the Cavalier knowing him, ^^lfe
obliged by so many courtesies showed him, ^ade no great difficulty to reveal
unto him his ^^eatest secrets in making him this discourse.

Although I am not ignorant that he is reputed most ungrateful that acquits
himself hastily of ^^t which he owes, for as much as it seems he is ^^lling
to pay to be no longer a debtor, and that ^^ere is nothing dearer then that
which cost many ^ayers; so it is dear Poleron for to please you, and so having
known your spirit capable of confi^^nce, I will tell you the history of my
misfor^^^es, to move you to pity, and also to invite you (...) assist me: and
if one may describe many misfor^^nes in a little room, I will endeavor to make
^^u a succinct narration thereof.

THE HISTORY OF FENISE.
THe heavens were pleased to give me birth i^ Madrid, the Court and ordinary
abod^ of the Kings of Spain, meanly favored with the good of Fortune, but
amply with those of nature; whi^^ consists as you know in noble blood, valor
and fr^^nes of the mind; my young years were employed (...) studying humane
learning, where I found the vanity of those sweet deceipts wherewith the world
flattereth us and destroys us, disposing the pastimes of infancy to serve to
the vices of youth: but because thos^ disabuses proceeded from the experience
of others they converted themselves into proper abuses; for seeing that those
inconveniences which I re^^ in histories and examples did not happen to me,
(...) did repute them fabulous. My father whose age^^ ought to have served him
as the looking glass o^ humane miseries, to amend his humane disorder^^^
affections; and to prepare himself for his approaching death; lived with as
little apprehension o^ the time to come, as if every day had been the (...) of
his life, and that he should never arrive at the last. For certain reasons he
quitted the Court, and went with all his family to dwell in the City of
T^ledo; where lay the greatest part of his estate. My mother was glad of this
change, hoping that my father would change his customs, but it self ou^ quite
contrary to what she expected; since that during the truce which he had made
with the violence of his nature, he quarelled against one of the ^^eatest
families of that city.

Be not astonished dear Poleron, if I speak this of (...) that gave me life:
for I am to be pardoned: a ^^her that brings up his children as an enemy
^^^uld do, does not merit that they should hide (...) evil carriges: In a
word, I fashioned my self ^^^er his negligent example, I suffered my self to
be ^^ryed away with the vanity of young men, and ^^esumption of those that are
rich.

The Cavalier enemy to my father had two sons ^^mine age and a daughter
somewhat younger, they ^re the honor and beauty, of the city, but the
^^^ghter particularly a subject where one might ^^ually admire, wit, beauty,
lively courtesy, and ^^destie joined with virtue, and she was also ^^^h these
qualities, a prodigious oftentation of (...) will and power of Nature I saw her
one day go^^ to the place where duty of religion obliged her; (...) since that
hour (I do not know if I shall name ^^happy) I have been so great an admirer
of her ^^^ty, that I have not known how to conduct my (...) in the way of my
god fortune. By this affection ^^stifie my satisfaction, seeing that it was as
impos^^^^e, as they say, to know Laure without loving her, (...) seems
difficult to be beloved of her. This ^^e name of the fair that causes my
pain, I ^^^t and came by the street wherein she lived, as it ^^^e fashion of
lovers to do, and principally in our ^^^on. In ^ine, I found occasion to
appear unto (...), and to let her know my passion, I flattered her ^^^it with
letters in prose and verse, money, that ^^^h no value, but that which is given
it by them ^^o receive it.

By liberality or rather by prodigality I gained the women that served her,
weak Guardians of the honor of a maid, but the more I searched to approach
her, the further off I found my self, her resistance increased in such manner,
that I forced my self to overcome it. But my love came to such a point of
obstinacy, that it seemed that I had rather design to surmount her rigours
then obtain the enjoying of her beauty.

My ordinary walks about her house served for discourse to the neighbors and
suspicion to her brethren. The eldest, called Don Oliban, having certain
knowledge of my passion, made from thence the foundation of a treason
altogether unworthy of a noble courage or an indifferent wit. Excited either by
the love of his honor, or the inveterate hatred that was betwixt our fathers,
he sought by my death to put an end to their enmity, and to give a beginning
to my misfortunes, one night being gone to the gate of his lodging, with
intention to speak to one of the servants of Laure my confidents, Oliban urged
by a furious motion of choler, would take away my life, and for to render his
enterprise less doubtful, he shot me into the body with a pistol, and cast
me upon the threshold of the door; many people came running at this noise;
Oliban fled, and they carried me to my lodging, where I was carefully looked
unto, and with hopes to be cured; because the wound was not deep, the
violence of the shot being broken by a strong Buffecoate that I then wore.

We had at our house a Barbarian slave, a man of valor and good breeding, he
has served my father in perilous occasions, where he has often prooved his
courage and fidelity; he did particularly affect me, and taught me his
language, esteeming in that he gave me all he was able, telling me, that if it
was not profitable unto me, at least it would do me no hurt. In effect it
seemed to me that no body ought to neglect the understanding of any thing,
though it seem but of small consideration, for it often arriveth that one may
make use thereof.

This man, seeing the outrage which was done me, resolved with himself to
entrap my enemy, and in case he could not, my father gave him leave to set the
house a fire, to the end to take a greater revenge, I mean in destroying the
family: this design coming to my knowledge, I stayed the effect, as much for
the consideration of Laure, as for to satisfy my self, against him alone that
did me the injury. During these inquietudes I received, a plaster so excellent
for the curing of my wounds, that it seemed I had not bled enough to pay the
value thereof. It was a letter which Laure sent me, wherein I learned that
pity, a feeling natural enough to women, had had more force oyer her, then my
diligences and wakings, and that a favor which my pain and travells could not
obtain in a long time, her compassion had bestowed upon me in the space of an
hour: If my memory be good, the letter contained this discourse.

THE LETTER OF LAVRE TO FENISE.
I Shall from henceforth esteem my self indebted to Oliban, If you recover
your health as I wish you may, since that his cruelty has rendered me sensible
of pity, and the wounds which he has given you have pierced my heart. Before
this accident I might have vaunted my self invulnerable, but at this presen, I
am not only subject to wounds, but also to feel those of others; If modesty
did not retain me, I would say that your indispositions are commune to me, and
that I am afflicted with all your apprehensions.


The end of this letter was the beginning of my hopes, and the birth of a more
happy life. From that time my health increased daily, I was able in a short
time to continue my former exercises; very hardly can one quit those habitudes
that custom has naturallized. I had the honor during some few nights to
speak with Laure; but on the other side I did what I could to meet her
brother, the hatred I bore him paralleled the love I bore her. I was told he
was retired into Saint Peter's, whereupon I writ to him that he wronged himself
to make use of a sanctuary against justice, and since that he searched to
assure himself he had no better refuge then his valor, whereof I would make
proof, and for that effect I desired to see him in the field, the night
following, to defend himself from the name of Traitor which I had given him
every where as he deserved.

Laure knew my design, for possessing my heart as she did, it was easy for
her to know my intentions; and he that I had chosen to carry my challenge had
told her thereof to the prejudice of mine honor and secrecy: she prayed him
not to deliver it, until she had provided a remedy, and without losing time
she sent all over to seek me, to the end to dissuade me, knowing well that I
would obey all her commands. But I who feared the power she had over my
affections, and desired to revenge my self by the favor of the obscurity of
the night, to save my self the more easily from the hands of Justice: I
shunned those to whom she had given this commission, the which caused her to
undertake a strange enterprise, as little juditious as promptly executed.

She determined to put her self into man's apparel, and to meet me where I
assigned her brother. Alas Poleron, I then attended a person animated with
choler and not with love; I pretended a vengance, but upon another subject, I
hoped a satisfaction, but not so unhappy. The night was so obscure that there
was not a star to be seen; mine also denied me ^er light: it is true that that
which is contrary to us, ^oth never shine when we may receive any contentment
thereby: Oh a thousand times unfortunate! I was so blind that a small
glimmering of light was ^enyed me, for fear I should see the fault I was ^oing
to commit, being then the first in the place ^^signed, and seeing the
appearance of a man to aproach me, I did not doubt but this was the enemy
attended, I advanced toward him with my sword (...) my hand, and to speak
truth, I would have rendered him the like surprise he had made me, and not give
him time to prepare himself, in such manner that I gave a stocado in the
breast of this poor Lover, which overturned her to the earth, in crying, Ah!
cruel thou have slain me! at this sorrowful accent: I was immovable, all my
senses failed me; Ah Madame is it you said I, in bowing down endeavoring to
know her as well by the face as voice. Alas Fenise, said she, thou revengest
thy self severely, since thou take away the life of a person that loves thee
more then her self, for to triumph more gloriously over thy enemies; these
words pierced me more then a thousand stabbs could have done me, despair did
so violently possess me, that I presented two or three times my swords point
to my breast, but I know not whether a christian consideration, or desire to
search remedy for her withheld me, I fell down upon my knees before her, mine
eyes full of tears embracing her and striving to animate her vigor. O my
Queen, what ill fortune has brought you hither? what fury has guided my hand
to commit this criminal action? saying thus, I strived to stay her blood,
dear Fenise; said she, I think my self happier thus to dye, then by the
hands of my enemies, my brothers, this will be a just repairing of the injury
they have done thee for my sake; but without losing time, let us see if there
be any means to get from hence, to search some remedy for our evils, I am
satisfied with thy apprehensions; hark thee, I will tell thee what is to be
done; she would have continued; but a swoond stayed her speech. Imagine Poleron
in what estate I then found my self; represent unto your self, a rich
Merchant in a tempest upon the Sea beaten with contrary winds, one while ready
to cast all his riches into the water to save his own life, then staying
himself to lament the inestimable loss he was about to make; hoping a calm
in the midst of the tempest, so was I agitated in the storm of a thousand
diverse thoughts. If I should leave her, thinking she was dead, I was hindered
therefrom for fear to lose her, if she was not: If I stayed by her, I must dye
with a thousand sorrows, and endanger my self to be taken by Justice. I knew
not what to do, nor what to think, sometimes I thought I felt her dye and
respire, but, alas, this was a pure imagination caused by the force of my
desires: In fine, I ran to the next house, where by the help of some money
which I gave, I took wine, and a man along with me, to help me to assist
her; I put a drop of that liquor in her mouth, which awakened her heart, and
sighing demanded where she was. Courage my friend, said I, not daring to speak
to her as a woman, in the presence of this peasant, you shall be presently at
your own house; saying so, this man and I took her up, and carried her to the
house of a Cavalier, my intimate friend, called Don Jovan de Valazquez: This
was not without much pain and apprehension of being met by the Justices, who
made their walk at that hour.

This Cavalier had a Sister, who in charity took an extreme care of Laure,
whilst I went to seek Surgeon, to whom I paid as much for his crecy as
cure, as I had done to him that helped me to carry her. The Surgeon having
taken away a handkerchief, which I had put in her wound to stay the blood, did
carefully dress it, but he could not yet give us any hope of her recovery.

Behold Poleron, how rudely Fortune used me; she was not only content to
deprive me of all sorts of goods, but also of all my hopes thereof.

In the interim, the absence of Laure being perceived, all her Fathers house
was in an uproare; but the brute passed not the doors, as well because the
honor of a family is in danger of Shipwreck, when it is tossed by the winds
of popular mouths; as also to make way the better to the revenge her Brothers
hoped to take, thinking by this silence to take away all apprehension to their
enemy.

They incontinently persuaded themselves, that there was none in the town
capable of the Ravishment of Laure but my self; for they knew well that I
served her, and that she had some inclination to me; so that they were
resolved to pull out my heart, and seek me even to the center of the Earth, if
I should be there.

This project was not so secretly kept but it came to the knowledge of one of
their servants whom I had obliged with diverse presents, who came to give me
advice thereof: At her first seeing me, she demanded where Laure was, and I
being afraid of a double intelligence (from those that are for them will give
most) counterfeited to be astonished, faigning to know nothing of her absence;
she who was discreet enough, pressed me no further: Well, well, said she, in
what place soever she is, do not often frequent her, for her brothers have
espies to trappe you both together, and take away your lives at the same time.
If you be wise get away from this place, otherwise you are in danger to be
slain; do not neglect my counsel. I desiring to conserve my self, more for
the consideration of Laure than mine own, went to Cigarales, which are the
chiefest Farms belonging to the Citizens of Toledo, and lived in the house of
a Farmer, who before had served in my fathers house. I much desired to hear
news from Laure, and to let her hear from me, but I durst not confide in any
one. And although I had no great cause to be in pain for her, having left her
in such hands, yet I could not continue long time where I was, being ignorant
in what estate she was. A heart that wants that which it desires, is in
perpetual inquietude: I knew not whether I was dead or alive, so that to know
certainly the estate of my life, it was necessary that I should search after
news of that of Laure. I went disguised to Toledo, where I was scarcely
arrived, when I percei^ed the younger brother of Oliban, who saw me, and
^ollowed me, doubting it was I; I made many ^urns one way, and another, to try
if he looked after ^^e; but seeing that in truth he had discovered me, was
constrained to leave the town, only passing before the house of Don Jouen, the
keeper of the ^easure of my felicity; not very well satisfied, ^eing all the
doors shut up, fearing that some evil ^^d befalne Laure. I was not gone far
from To^^do, when turning my self, I perceived three men ^ding full gallop
after me: I imagined that these men had a design upon me, therefore I went
into the next thick wood to hide my felfe from them, being behind a very
thick tuft, I saw them pass by me, very much troubled having lost the sight
of me, they looked here and there doubting what to do. And because I was not
in too secure a place, I went amongst the rocks, knowing it rather
desperateness then valor to attend their coming; where perceiving my self
amongst so many precipices and not knowing which way to avoid them, I lighted
and and left my horse at hazard, I had wandered amongst the rocks almost two
hours searching the refuge of some shephards cabin; when I so happily found
you near the fountain where I was catched by mine enemies, whilst you went
to fetch me habits to disguise my self.

Fenise thus could his history to Poleron, when when the Judge of the town
assisted by the Pregnotory and sergeants came into the house; he had been
told that Fenise was arrived in that town in other clothes and that he was
some spy disguised: addressing himself to him, with an action fierce and
barbarous told him, that he was the Kings prisoner. Fenise astonished at these
words, asked him the cause; the house said the Judge, (thinking he had demanded
the house whither he would carry him prisoner) continuing to speak upon this
conceit: you are pleasant said he to enquire of m^ the house, whither I will
carry you; you shall go^ whither I please: I here represent the King, obey,
away, to prison. He was so cholerique and spoke s^ fast, that his words
stumbled one upon another, the^ made so much have to get out of his mouth; if
Fenise was astonished at his arrival, he was now altogether confused; but
using prudence, he endeavored to moderate the too violent motion of this
rustique magistrate, he told him he did not ask for the house whither he would
have him, but the reason of his imprisonment, the which instead of appeasing
him provoked him the more, in such manner that he went to have laid hold of
this unfortunate Cavalier, if the Pregnotory had not told him that he ought not
to proceed with so much incivility against a gentleman; the Judge being
thereupon freshly angered, fell to cuffs with the Pregnotory until the blood
came from both their noses.

This little tragy-comedy did not at all please Fenise for having been acted
upon his occasion, he feared to pay the charges thereof by some rude useage.
Poleron being of the same opinion, counseled Fenise to suffer this brute to
do what he would, assuring him to take him presently out of his power, he
confiding in this suffered himself to be taken prisoner.

They put him in the same prison where the young man was, that the judge had
taken the same day that Fenise was hurt, and who had suffered him to lie there
without questioning him, expecting a fit occasion to send him to Toledo,
knowing himself not capable enough to form a process of so high a nature. By
the light of a lamp they chained Fenise as a criminal of state, to the other
end of the beam whereunto the first was tied, who was very glad to have a
companion to entertain himself with. Whilst they were tying Fenise the other
attentively regarded him, thinking that he knew him, and when they were alone
without light, he disguising his voice demanded of our Cavalier the cause of
his imprisonment, my misfortune is the only cause, answered Fenise; for I do
not believe that I have deserved this punishment, by the tone of his voice the
first prisoner confirmed himself in the opinion that he had that he knew
Fenise; yet he was so amazed with this strange encounter, that being night he
thought he dreamed: when an unfortunate person receives any contentment he
thinks it an illusion. Fenise had also the curiosity to enquire the
misfortunes of his companion, who answered him always in a disguised voice.
You and I are of different opinions, you say your ill fortune has brought you
hither, and I that my good fortune has conducted me, and rendered my captivity
a thousand times more dear to me then liberty. I never heard any but you,
said Fenise, say, that pains were pleasant, liberty troublesome, and
imprisonment delightful; yet I esteem my self happy, answered the unknown,
in regard I find two sorts of contentment, the one real, and the other in
appearance, and although the latter be not, he that presumes it so, does not
desire it less then the first: so that I find my prison lovely, my chains
favors, and my pains delightful: I am of the nature of those that love their
captivity. The pearl conconserves and nourishes it self in a prison of a
shel, the diamond forms it self in congealed dew, the gold ingenders and
augments by the Sunbeames in the Entrails of the Earth, and the soul which is
the most perfect of all creatures next unto the angels, does so well please it
self in the prison of humane bodies, that she cannot quit them without great
trouble, the same cause have I to love my condition. Love makes me find
delight in torments, felicity in misfortunes, and pleasure amongst these
pains. He, answered Fenise, has no great experience of the effects of love,
that takes his afflictions for contentments. Alas love, the world would be at
quiet, if it could avoid thy reaches, and warrant it self from thy deceipts.

For my part I, have a thousand times proved, that all the evils that our
misery has cast upon us in nature, are found in him; and without going about
to tell them in particular, I demand what tumult is there in the World, which
he causes not? What sedition, which he stirs not up? Noise, which he makes
not? What fear, which proceeds not from him? He is the most cruel Enemy of
men: He betrayeth them under flattering appearances: He makes them swallow
poison deliciously prepared: in embracing them, he kills them: In brief, he is
of such a nature, that there are none but those that know him not, that esteem
him; therefore I wish that he may possess the soul of him that is cause of my
misfortunes; it is the most rigorous vengeance that I can desire.

Fenise said this with so much vehemence, that he thereby testified the passion
which moved him, and the force of his apprehensions; whereupon his companion
answered; without doubt, you love in such a place where your affections are
little regarded, since that you speak so ill of him who has been the cause of
all the good that the Earth now possesses, that the World admireth, and that
Nature adoreth. Love is the original of our life: He provides us nourishment;
without him the Earth would not bring forth those savoury fruits which serve us
for food, and without him men would have no communication together: He peopleth
Cities: He governs Commonwealths: He is the Spring of Peace and Joy: His
effects are Force, greatness of Courage, Liberality, and Courtesy: He is the
Father of boldness and Generosity: And I could give you examples of all that I
have told you in my proper person, if I did not fear more to weary you by
giving ear unto them, then to tire my self by relating them. In conclusion, I
maintain that there is nothing without love; yea, that he is among contrary
Elements.

I do not deny, answered Fenise, that Love has all these properties, but as
no man is bound to say more then he knows of him, I that have found in his
Garden nothing but thorns and brambles; I tell you what I have seen, what I
have experimented, and what I have learned of himself. I do avouch that of
all humane contentments there is none like the pleasures of a Lover, who is
beloved with a reciprocal Affection; but this happiness endures so little,
that the happiest Lover can scarcely vaunt himself to be arrived at the
beginning of his pleasure, but at the same instant he loses it.

Fenise and the unknown Prisoner passed the rest of the night in this pleasant
contestation, the the one considering the miserable estate whereunto fortune
had reduced him, not being able to have news from Laure; the other satisfied
with the favors of his destiny, desiring always to allege the affliction of
his companions; but seeing that opportunity was not yet offered, he determined
to have patience, and not to make himself known, but to very good purpose.

As soon as it was day, Poleron went to visit his Friend, to confirm him in
the assurance which he had given him to deliver him from the hands of that
insolent and ignorant Judge. Fenise thanked him for the care that he had of
him, and told him that he was happy in his misfortunes, to be a prisoner with a
man of so excellent a wit, whose pleasant conversation had much diminished his
sorrows. Poleron turned himself for to behold him, but the Prisoner having
seen him enter, had turned his back against the light, and lay half along upon
the beam, feigning to be asleep, as well not to be in view, as for to hearken
if amongst their discourses he might find any thing that might concern him.
The two Friends believing that sleep had seized him, begun to discourse
together, and amongst the discourses which they held, Fenise did observe so
many judicious reasons in Poleron, that he found them to exceed the wit of a
Shepherd, as already he had seen other testimonies thereof. Desiring then to
content his curiosity, he made him this discourse. I might believe (dear
Poleron) that you did not love me with a good heart, if you should refuse to
give me the clearing of an opinion, which I have conceived, and which does
trouble me. Your Countenance, your Courage, your Actions, and your Discourses,
agrees so little with the birth of a Shepherd, that I have imagined diverse
times, either that you are not descended of the Line of these country
Shepherds, or that Heaven and Nature have taken a most particular care to form
your Body and Wit, to render you worthy of a higher fortune then that of this
habitation

Truly (answered Poleron) I should be very ingrate, if I should not give you
the satisfaction you desire: And for to avoid this shameful reproach, I had
rather in discovering my secrets to you, hazard my self to be accounted light,
then to be thought to undervalue the amity which you have testified unto me in
concealing them: And letting go a sigh that seemed to come from the center of
his heart, he said.

THE HISTORY OF DON LOUIS.
Near to the River of Tage, Nature gave me for Father and Mother two high
Rocks, I may well call them so, since the two persons that brought me into the
World, having denied me paternall kindnesses, these Rocks received me amiably
into their laps, where, as by miracle, heaven was willing to save my life,
although I might almost wish not to have been obliged to it for so many
favors, knowing well that I might have been exempt from many pains which I
have suffered; it was not only content to do me this grace, but it yet
permitted, that Timante, a shepherd of this town should wander into a grove to
find me, and should lose himself to get me in him a new father, and he in me
an adoptive and obedient son. He took me from the unpitifull hardness of
these rocks where I was abandoned, carried me away in his arms, and gave me
to a peasant who gave me the first nourishment of infancy. By little and little
I grew up amongst the other children of the town, making appear daily the
marks of a noble extraction, for although this rustique education has
rendered my behavior rude and gross, yet it has not taken from me the
feeling of honor and generositie.

In the flower of my youth, fearful death came to knock at the door of
Timante; and he, receiving his advertisments with humility, prepared the
jewel of his soul, for a more precious inchasement; he gave me by his will
the best part of his goods, and having taken those spiritual refections, which
the Church gives to those Pilgrims who finish the passage of the tempestuous
Sea of this world, and come to the straites of Death, he rendered his last sigh.
But before he came to that extremity, he called me privately to him, and told
me that which I have told you, of my birth, and gave me at the same time a
little purse, wherein were certain papers which he said he had found with me,
and told me my name was Don Louis, and that I was of another lineage, then I
thought my self to be.

This narration did so elevate my courage, that I resolved to search some other
occupation then those of a village, so that within a short time after the
decease of Timante, I sold his goods, some flocks of sheep, and some lands of
inheritance which he had left me, and left my village life, and country, to
travel into foreign nations.

Having seen many towns in Spain, clothed like a cavalier of the court, I
arrived at Barcelon, with design to pass into Italy, and from thence into
Flanders, to exercise my self in warlike affairs; but this proposition was
vain, for a beauty which I saw in the town of Barcelone hindered all my
projects, and made it impossible for me to pass further. If I determined to
see fair Italy, and begun to think of this maid, I found her so fair that I
believed there was nothing beyond her; here was my Hercules pillars: on the
other side, if my courage reanimated the desire I had to seek Laurells in the
hazards of the wars of Flanders, I found near her so many Mirtles, Palms,
and glorious victories to be obtained, in remaining overcome by her charms,
that I might have been thought to have wanted judgment, if I had neglected
those delitious conquests.

As soon as this adorable object appeared before mine eyes, respect seized me,
which in mine opinion, is one of the graces that renders a lover most
commendable, but not to give occasion to the common people to talk, I thought
it best to use the diligence of a servant, to go after this beauty and follow
her coach unto the place where she dwelt, to the end I might endeavor to get
access there: but either the impertinence of my servant or my proper
misfortune made him lose the fight of it, and presently took from me all
possibility of offering her my service. Rare loves had never happy beginnings,
it was also necessary, that mine which had a strange issue as you shall see,
should have a difficult entry. The negligence of an hour cost me almost three
months (for love always delights to give heavy punishments for light faults)
so during this long space it was impossible for me to have knowledge of the
cause of my inquietudes. This made me resolve to take again my first
intentions, and seek my fortune in diverse Countries, since that she is not
always to be found in the place of a man's birth. The night before my departure
I went to suppe with a gentleman one of my friends, for to take leave of him,
from whom I departed very late: in passing by one of the best streets, I found
my self near unto five or six men, who without saying a word set upon two who
came innocently the same way with me: they seeing themselves surprised, put
themselves into a posture of defense, and I considering the inequality of the
combatants, ranged my self with my sword in my hand on the weaker side: but
after a few blows of one side and the other, one of the defendants was hurt
and fell to the ground; at the same time those that had wounded him, retired
themselves, and the companion of him that was hurt pursued them; I stayed there
to assist the wounded, and speaking to him I knew him to be an old gentleman of
quality, I helped him up and conducted him to his lodging; by the way he gave
me a thousand thanks for my assistance, and at every step asked me what was
become of Filendre: which made me believe that that was the name of him who was
run after the enemies. I not knowing what to answer him, told him to comfort
him, that he was gone to fetch a Surgeon: thereupon we arrived at his house,
those of his family knowing that he was hurt, were all frighted; and amongst
others, a young Lady, whom the grief of this accident had put into great
confusion. I regarded curiously her gestures and actions, and knew her by the
light of a torch to be the very same that had caused my torments; then a
respectfull fear seized my heart, and I felt certain pricking griefs in my
breast, as if the wound which she had first given me with her eyes was opened
again. O Beauty, that thou art so powerful! so to astonish those hearts which
the most perilous hazards cannot affright. All the domestiques lamented the
disaster that had befalne their Master, whilst I was ravished in the admiration
of the features of this Lady, when there came in a young man who had his
countenance full of alteration, and his spirit animated with choler,
approached her, and gave her two boxes upon the ear, and at the same instant
withered the roses and lilies of her cheeks. I being offended with this
barbarous insolence, and rashness, that he had to use her so unworthily in my
presence, I went to him with my sword in my hand, rebuking his brutality with
offensive words: He, who knew me not, drew also his sword, and fighting one
with another, I warded his blows, and gave him two upon the body, which he
could not avoid: then in despite of what they could all do to stay me, I
saved my self, and went out of the house without being known to any one, yet
having a great desire to know the day following the names of these persons, and
the occasion of these strange aecidents.

Don Louis, whom we call Poleron, was upon the passage of his history, when
Clitor, and the Judge of the Town entered into the prison; the first, to see if
the unknown prisoner was of those that did hurt Fenise; and the other
protesting that he knew very well what belonged to his Office. They were all in
suspense to see what would be the issue of these words; but their attention was
turned into affliction, knowing that his design was to send them to Toledo.
Fenise had an apprehension thereof, the unknown prisoner trembled for fear,
and Don Louis doubted the execution thereof: Seeing the danger wherein Fenise
would be, returning into the hands of his enemies, he endeavored by prayers
and fair words to divert the intention of the Judge: and although that Clitor
affirmed that the unknown prisoner was none of those that had hurt Fenise, he
changed not the resolution which he had made; all the grace that they could
obtain, was, that the prisoners should be removed from the dark place where
they were, into a chamber, but bound to ^wo posts.

When they were come into the light, Fenise ^aced his companion, and saw in him
the origi^all of his disgraces, he saw himself near to Laure, when he thought
himself to be far from ^er: He was almost without motion and sense, so much
had joy transported him; but without ^estifying the excess of his joy, he
contented himself to speak to her with the mute language of his eyes, which
often express the feelings of the heart more intelligibly then the tongue can
do. Laure of her side, made such signs with her eyes, as rendered faithful
proofs of the constancy of her love.

Don Louis, who perceived all these amorous actions, seeing that they were
alone in this chamber, having had license of the Judge to visit his friend,
prayed them to explicate the Aenigmas of of their gestures. Fenise spoke, and
told him; Dear friend, only in telling you the name of this person, showing
Laure, I answer to all the demands you can now make me, you having heard me so
often speak it. This is Laure, that incomparable beauty which has charmed my
soul: her presence has surprised me with so excessive a joy, that if it was
not moderated with the sorrow that I have, to see her suffer so many evils for
my sake, it would take away my life. Then turning himself toward Laure; Ah
dear object of my happiness, is it possible that my destiny may be appeased?
Is it true that it is you? my imagination perpetually occupied with your image,
does she not deceive me? What, amongst so many torments can I enjoy so extreme
a felicity? Without lying I have good cause to complain of your rigor, that
has hindered me so long time the enjoying thereof, in disguising this night the
delicious organ of your voice. Speak to me dear Mistress, let me see that my
glory is not a dream; tell me what mavelous adventure has reduced you to
this misery, which produced me so great good fortune. Laure, who might rather
be called Aurora, letting fall liquid pearls upon the vermillion roses of her
cheeks, answered him. My dear Fenise, I have striven much with my self to use
the dissimulation whereof you complain, and and hinder my self from letting you
know what company you had in your prison: I wanted but a little of declaring my
self when I saw you brought thither; but honor, which you know is so delicate
a thing, obliged me to this severe retention; so that your love being guided by
respect and civility, you have rather cause to be satisfied with me, then blame
me. You cannot doubt of my passion, since that for to give you most particular
assurances thereof, I have violated paternall respect, and also that which I
owe to my person, in giving occasion to speak to the prejudice of my virtue.
But if our destiny have made us miraculously to meet again, it seems it is but
to run the same fortune, and make us hope for a more free convenience to
entertain our selves, with the fortunes that have arrived us since our
separation, the which obliges me to pray you to give me leave to remit until
another time the satisfaction of your just curiosity.

Don Louis, who heard these discourses, was so lively touched with compassion,
besides the inclination which he had to serve Fenise, that he vowed from this
moment to hazard all that he esteemed, as well of his goods, as person, to
deliver them from the tyranny of this barbarous Judge: And in the opinion which
he had to come to the end of his design, he endeavored to comfort Laure,
giving her hope that she should see her self presently at liberty with her
Lover.

This comfortable friend having left them in this expectation, and being gone
to put his project in execution, the impertinent Judge came to tell them he had
changed his resolution, and that it was not necessary to carry them both to
Toledo; that for the love of Poleron he would leave Fenise, and only take the
other. At this advertisement, Laure felt her heart gnawed cruelly, and
revenging her misfortunes upon her self, let fall tears from her eyes which
were able to have softened Marble. Fenise on his side repented himself for
having so easily believed Don Louis, and for suffering himself to be taken
prisoner; he could not resist the apprehensions of his passion, nor Laure
overcome the vehemence of her love; so that when she saw her self untied from
this post, she approached her Lover, and without being seen of those who were
to carry her, she fell upon his neck for to embrace him: By good fortune a
swoond seized her at the instant, which stayed the effect of the Judges
proposition. Having perceived this swoond, they took all care possible to
remedy it, but not with so much diligence, but that the rest of the day passed,
which forced them to attend until the morrow for to carry her to Toledo,
judging that it was better to defer it, then to hazard in the night the loss
of a prisoner which might be taken from them in the dark.

Fenise beheld this image of death, whose sorrows he felt in his heart,
nevertheless he was presently glad, seeing that the Officers of the Judge
deferred their departure until the next morning, because he hoped some succor
from Don Louis that night. Laure being returned from her swoond, they put on
her irons, and chained her as before, and Fenise seeing himself a^one with
her, prayed her to acquit her self of ^he promise which she had made him, if
sleep, or her indisposition did not hinder her, and to tell him by what happy
and strange accident she was come into this prison. She who could not close ^er
eyes, and who felt no incommodity near the object of her contentment, served
her self of his favorable occasion, and made him this dis^ourse.

THE CONTINVANCE OF THE HISTORY OF LAVRE.
SInce that you left me in the house of your friend Don Iovan de Velasquez,
hurt with your sword, but more with your love; and that this Cavalier ob^ged by
your prayers, had taken care for the curing ^^e exterior wounds of my breast;
I imagined ^ith my self that you had abandoned me, to ^ake your vengeance
more rigorous, in offen^ng my line as well in honor as in blood: having ^^ven
this foundation to my wrath, I again incou^ged my hopes, and represented to my
self, that you ^ould never be so barbarous, as to leave me in so ^iserable a
condition, but my imagination pro^unded always to her self, rather evil then
good, and I was disquieted with a thousand troublesome thoughts, making me
incontinently change my opinion; sometimes I uttered injurious words against
the subject I adored; I accused you of ingratitude, perfidiousnesse, and
inconstancy, then upon the sudden I took your part, and sought reasons to
excuse you, because I wished you innocent, as well for your honor as my proper
interest. And for as much as the outrages which I spoke against you, proceeded
from the excess of my passion, when my imagination had rendered you some ill
office, and obliged me to mingle some cold with my flames, I perceived
immediately, that this was with design to render them afterward much more
violent. These were the ordinary entertaines wherewith! divertised my self
during mine abode with this Cavalier, except when Leonor his sister kept me
company; for her wit was so excellent that she gave me no time to think of any
other thing, but of her sweet discourse. But exactly to instruct you of all
that passed in this house whilst I was there, I must tell you a tragique
history, whereof it was the Theater.

A young man called Felix, a Merchants son of Toledo, but of very good
fashion, possessing many of those qualities which are requisite to a gentleman,
became inflamed with the love of Leonor: Nevertheless the inequality of their
conditions, the recluse life which she led, the splender of her beauty, the
gravitie of her presence, hindered Felix from daring to discover his passion;
He suffered long time inquietudes very violent, in the end not being able to
resist his torments, he resolved to have recourse to the intermission of a
third person, to interpret his thoughts, not having courage enough to explicate
them to her that had made him conceive them. He used a very ordinary way, which
was to apply himself to the Chambermaide of this Lady, because those kind of
people are enemies that fight close, they strike almost always where they
please, and render the victory less doubtful: They evermore find occasions
to praise the pretendant, and to present him to the person sought after. Leonor
had with her a witty wench called Amarante, which Felix knew to be able enough
to render him good offices. He gave her presents to incite her to favor his
intentions: Liberality is the first virtue wherewith a Lover ought to be
qualified. He declared unto her his passion, and the time when he begun to
feel it, the torment which be suffered, the qualities wherewith Nature had
adorned him, the advantages of the hopes of his fortune, being the only Son
of a very rich Father; because these things are more freely spoken to those who
are employed in such businesses, then to the persons sought after, who without
doubt might have cause to esteem them impertinencies and presumptions.

Amarante being very often entertained by this Gallant, had designs upon him,
and determined to keep for her self, that which he desired by her organs to
offer to Leonor; she received his messages, and gave him answers according to
her mind. She entertained the unfortunate Felix with words, and hopes, false
as from her Mistress, but true of her own part: Making him believe, that if
Leonor did not render him more certain proofs of her affection, he ought to
attribute it either to her fear of her Brother, or to her proper modesty:
Whilst Felix thus persevered in his pretensions, and Leonor was ignorant
thereof, Amarante invented ways to enjoy her lascivious affections. Felix
spoke to her at a window almost every night, attributing the care and vigilance
she took to content him, to proceed from the presents he daily gave her.
Alas dear Fenise, I dare not blame the love of Amarante, for fear that by
others I show myself culpable; I know one ought not accuse the faults of Love,
because this passion blindes the judgment, and leaves but little place for
reason, to consider the inconveniences it breeds, and to foresee how to avoid
them, but I do not approve of the unjust dealing of this damsel.

Don Jovan was much troubled to have a man walk nightly about his house, but
he spoke not of it; from whence I presume his pain was but moderate; for in
such displeasures it is almost impossible for the most excellent prudence in
the world, and the most stayed spirit to keep it secret. One night desiring to
clear his doubts, it befell him as to those who are commonly too curious to
know what they would be ignorant of. He hid himself in his neighbors porch,
and saw a sign given by the unknown man, and at the same instant Amarante
appeared at the window, who told him that her Mistress could not come forth
that night, but that the night following he should speak to her, and see her
in her chamber. Felix having received these sweet assurances, went his way very
content with the hopes that he had to receive a recompense in so short a time,
which he could not hope for in many years. Don Jouan having heard what his
confident had told him, seeing that the term of the return of this Lover was
not long, since that he was to come again the night following, would not
trouble himself to follow him. He resolved to be patient, and dissemble what
he thought, nevertheless in the morning he took Amarante aside, questioned her
concerning the discourse which she had with the unknown, who, without enduring
many threatenings, made an invention as extravagant as one blinded with love and
ignorance could produce. She told him that Leonor loved a Cavalier called Don
Antonio, who you may well know (said she) by his high birth, and that the night
following, he was to come into the chamber of his Sister by her intermission,
and the consentment of Leonor; she used this stratagem, thinking it would serve
her to come to the end of her intentions, imagining that when Felix should
enter that she should put him into her bed, and when Don Jouan should find him
there, he would constrain him to marry her, by that means she should quit
Leonor of the infamy she had laid upon her, and that her artifice would pass
for gallantry.

The words which Don Jouan had heard the night before, and those he now heard,
had so much conformity, that he had no great difficulty to believe what she
said, she having confessed her self the mediatrix of their loves, he made her
also promise to assist him to surprise Don Antonio when he should be with his
Sister, to the end to oblige him to some convenient satisfaction.

In the interim, Felix impatient to possess the glory he hoped for, passed the
day with great inquietudes, so also did Don Jouan, but for different ends; the
one imagining how to come to the recompense of his pains, and the other how to
hinder him. The night being come, Don Jouan hid himself, and the poor girl
thinking that she had subtly contrived her project, came to the window to
attend the arrival of the abused Felix. Leonor was come that night to lie with
me in my chamber, as she often did, which gave more way to Amarante, to abuse
the innocent Felix, whom she hoped to make enter into the bed of Leonor.

When he was come, she opened him softly a window, into which he mounted by the
help of a Ladder of cords, from thence she carried him into her Mistresses
chamber, and there left him without light, telling him he might have patience
whilst she fetched her Mistress, speaking very softly for fear her voice
should make her known; She took Felix by the hand and put him in estate to come
to the point of his desires. Don Jouan, who lay in wait, believed when Amarante
came again, that it was her Sister gave her leave to assure her self of her
Lover, but presently entered the chamber, and without informing himself of any
thing, gave either of them a stab in the breast, so that the unfortunate
Amarante, thinking to find her Marriage Bed, found her Tomb. The blow which
Felix had, was not in so mortal a place but that he had force enough to
recover his arms, and obliged Don Iouan to do the like to defend himself,
but in this violent agitation, the miserable Felix advanced to his end, and
tumbled dead in striving to get away.

At the same time Don Jouan came into my chamber, I am not very certain with
what intention, but I am willing to believe that it was to warrant me from the
danger I might be in, if the justices should enter and know me: being entered
and seeing his sister with me; he stayed, confused and without speaking a word,
returned to see who the dead persons were. He knew Felix and Amarante,
different persons from those whom he thought he had killed; he was extremely
amazed as well for the error wherein he found himself, as for the slaughter
of this young man, being the only son of a very rich Merchant; who was able
to employ much money to punish him that should be found authors of this crime.
Perplexed with the horror of this murder, and fear of Justice, he absented
himself before day, after having told us the mournful act he had committed.
And I being habited as you see with the same clothes wherein I came from my
fathers, when I came to meet you in stead of my brother; I became guide to
Leonor, as if I had been some valiant cavalier, and accompanied her to the
house of one of her cosens with whom she was to go to Heride a town in
Catalogne where one of her Uncles dwelt; because she was resolved to stay no
longer with Don Iouan, not being able to forget the cruelty which he had
thought to have executed upon her person.

See the misfortune that arrived in this great family, by the impertinent art
of a domestique of little experience which makes me say, that it is sit, that
the sesrvants of an honorable house should be virtuous as well as their
mistresses, otherwise they are capable to corrupt the daughters or mothers whom
they serve, and bring them to tragique ends with the loss of their honor and
general infamy of their family. I took leave of Leonor at the door of the
house, where I left her, and immediately by the favor of the obscurity I came
by these mountains and valleys, searching some village where I might in this
disguisement hide my self from the knowledge of my brothers, and attend until
it pleased heaven to moderate the rigours of my destiny: The little knowledge
which I had of the country, which is full of bushes, hills, and precipices,
was the reason I lost my self, and that the Justices of the village light upon
me; who led me so happily to this prison, where without thinking thereof, I
found that which to me is the most delightful in this world.

Fenise lifted up his eyes and shoulders, astonished with this strange
accident, nevertheless he had taken great pleasure in the harmony of the words
of Laure. And also to satisfy her on his part, he told her all which was
befalne him until their common good fortune had brought them together. This
discourse ended, they begun to reason upon the actions of Don Iouan who after
the murder of Felix and Amarante came unto the chamber of Laure, judging that
he had some design against the respect he ought to his friend, and integrity
of Laure, his mistress.

The half of this night was almost spent in these entertaines. In the intrim,
Don Louis slept not but labored for their deliverances as they presently saw
the effect thereof. We told you before that this prison joined upon the house
of the sayned Poleron, but you must know that there was but a thin wall betwixt
them two, made of joysts and bricks; so that it was easy enough for him to
execute his design: so that when he thought them to be in their first sleep
who guarded the prisoners, he broke this wall without noise, with a crow of
Iron made a hole big enough, went into the chamber, and with other Iron
instruments, broke the locks which held Laure and Fenise chained to the post,
and delivered them from this rigorous captivity.

Being gone out of this infamous place he exhorted Laure to show her self
courageous in this occasion, then they mounted every one upon a good horse, and
Don Louis served them for guide; they took the way to Toledo thinking that
they would not search after them that way; having testified to apprehend very
much their going thither, as the swoond of Laure had showed. Before Aurora had
given place to the sun, they found themselves near the town; They
determined not to enter therein, for fear of some inconvenience, but to go on
to the farms which are thereabouts, which are caled Cigarales, the same
farmers house, whither we have already told you, Fenise had before retired
himself; this was accordingly executed; and the day following Don Louis went
to visit Fenise his father on the behalf of the son, and to receive his
commands, but not to acquaint him that he was with Laure, as they had agreed
together. For the hatred which Feronte, (so was the name of this cavalier) bore
to her Family was so violent, that he would have abandoned abandoned his
son, if he should have known thereof. He received this Ambassador with great
joy, and without making him stay too long, he made one of his servants take a
horse, and gave him good store of money, and commanded him to follow Don Louis
and to give the money and the horse to his son, with a letter whereby he
ordained him to go to Valence, and to stay there until he heard further
commands from him.

Fenise was well satisfied with the return of his friend, having received by
his means news of his Fathers health, and witnesses of his affection. He
took the horse and treasure, and for many considerations, he sent back
presently his Fathers servant, because when a secret is known to many, it is
hard to keep it; immediately after they all three took horse and went toward
Valence. Don Lovis was then habited like a Cavalier, having clothed himself at
Toledo, before he went to Feronte.

They went so merrily, that some mischief was to be feared; for it succeeds
ordinarily after great contentment. Without doubt the Philosopher had
experienced this, who desired sorrow, and feared joy: Because, said he, after
Melancholy a man may hope for Mirth, but after Mirth he can have nothing but
vexation. The affection of Fenise and Leure increased every minute by the
mutual pleasure which they received in their conversation, whereby they grew
more acquainted the one with the other; Don Lovis took an incomparable
pleasure in hearing their discourses, and seeing their pretty behaviors,
wherein Fenise inviolably kept all the respect that could be desired; he acted
nothing but with honor and respect. They had not above one days journey to
Valence, when Laure prayed Don Lovis to finish his History which he had
begun, and he being extremely obliging, begun where he was interrupted by
the rustique Judge, and thus continued.

THE CONTINVANCE OF THE HISTORY OF DON LOUIS.
YOu may remember the pitiful estate of this noble Family, amongst so many
disasters; Therefore without repeating that discourse, I will only tell you,
that being happily gotten out of the house, without being known, my Love made
me stay six whole days in Barcelone, where I learnt that the old hurt man was
father of the beauty which had so lively touched me; a Gentleman of a great
extraction, and very rich; that he recovered by little and little; but he who
I chastised for his insolence was dead, and that he was brother to this Lady
called Hipolite, most wise and virtuous.

All these considerations and high qualities made me judge, that I set upon a
place too hard to be taken, but my love was come to such a point, that it was
impossible for me not to adore that divine object. I would not inform my self
more exactly, for fear of giving suspicion to my prejudice. I must be
contented to go and come before her lodging, to endeavor to get a view of
her, although I knew her sight would but augment my pain.

All my diligence and care was inutile, she led so recluse a life, that I could
not see her otherwise, but with the eyes of mine imagination; there was no
other remedy for my torments, but to wish death, or to banish this celestial
Image from my memory, but all these desires and propositions had no effect; I
could neither dye nor forget her. In the end, as love finds out inventions as
well as necessity, it came into my fancy to make acquaintance with one of the
domestiques, and to oblige him by liberality, to procure me some aleagement.
There was in the house a young man who was Steward, and sometimes served for
Usher, whose name was Octave, I prevailed so much with my promises and gifts,
that I got his acquaintance and affection, and by this means an access free
enough into the house, without fearing the murmur of the neighbors, who hold
their peace at good things, though they know them to be so, but publish that
which is ill, though they but doubt thereof. I saw often the fair cause of my
inquietudes, but could not find an occasion favorable to speak to her.
Seeing me often frequent Octave, and perceiving I negarded her too attentively
to be without design, she took notice of my behavior and actions, and since
gave me some signs of hope. From thence I took the boldness to declare unto
her my passion, by the secreet language of a Letter, which I made her receive.
At the first she showed her self very angry with my audaciousnesse;
nevertheless I did not forbear to send her a second, which was more happy than
the first, since that she had the curiosity to see it and boldness to make
me an answer: The discourse thereof was very succinct, but yet ample enough to
make me hope a glorious success.

I seeing my self thus favored, was encouraged to go on, persuading my self
that a Lady that acknowledges her self engaged, would not be long in
acquitting her self thereof. Octave being interessed in my contentments, took
often occasion to speak well of me in the presence of Hipolite, and at such
hours, when she could best give ear thereunto, so that by little and little
she became more sensible of the power of Love. One day she feigned her self
extremely melancholique, which obliged her Father, who loved her dearly, to
take her into the country to recreate her spirits, by the change of air.
Octave gave me notice of this design, and told me the day when, and place
whither they went, which was to a village that belonged to them. I disposed my
self to follow the light of mine eyes, and the felicity of my life, which had
a happy issue, for the liberty which they take in that country to walk,
sometimes near a Fountain, sometimes near a Meadow, Wood, or Garden, gave me
opportunity often to come near her, and endeavor to make her accept my
services.

Not long after her arrival, the Townsmen made certain games after their
manner, where I appeared ^ike a stranger, and gave occasion to Hipolite to judge
of my dexterity in those exercises, so that since that time she has shown
her self not so indifferent ^s before, and upon a convenient and favorable
oc^asion she permitted me to speak to her. I cannot represent unto you the
ravishment of this charming conversation; for there is nothing in the world so
sweet as beginning of Love. But as after pleasures discontentments succeed,
this felicity lasted not long: The day following they must return to Barcelone.

About a League from the Town, Leoncio, Father of Hipolite, her self, and the
whole Family were invested by a Troop of men armed with Carabines, who came to
affront Leoncio. He had an old quarrel against agreat Cavalier, who had
watched him to satisfy his hatred. The Father of Hipolite who defied his
enemy, kept himself upon his guard, being always accompanied with his Kinsmen
and Friends, as well as his adversary; though not in so great number, yet more
valiant. The contrary Troop seeing themselves the more, sent three of their
men to the Coach of Hipolite to seize upon her person, whilst the rest set upon
and pressed Leoncio, who had left his Daughter to assist his party.

Most insolently they made this young Lady to quit her Coach, and set her upon
a Hackney, and carried her away as the most glorious Trophee they could take
from their enemies. By ill fortune I was not near her at this time, I stayed
behind, devising with Octave of mine amorous adventures; but as we drew
toward the Town, we saw coming the object of my contentment, in the hands of
her enemies. Oh God! cried Octave, there is some great misfortune arrived; see
the Kinsmen of the enemy of Leoncio, who carry away Hipolite, let us return
behind these bushes, and get before them; we did accordingly, and put our
selves in ambush in a certain passage, where whilst we attended them, Octave
told me the cause of the quarrel; when they came to pass by us, we ran upon
them with our swords in our hands, crying to me, to me companions, they are
here, feigning that we were a greater number, wherewith they were so frighted,
that they left their conquest, and fled, except one which stayed upon the
place, to pay with his blood and life, for the insolence which he and his
companions had committed. After this action we went to Hipolite, whom we found
half dead, as well with the fear which she had of her enemies, as that which
we had caused her, for she knew not that this was Octave, and my self, which
had delivered her from her ravishers.

She was ravished with joy to see us, but yet this gladness was mingled with
displeasure: she perceived a hurt which I had received upon the head, without
feeling it, by reason of my action. In the interim Leoncio assisted by the
valor of his friends had on the other side given the chase to his enemies, and
being all come together again, Octave recited to him our good fortune;
thereupon Leoncio, thinking himself, obliged to me, would needs have me taken
care of in his house, to the end to have more occasion to serve me. I made him
many complements, yet nevertheless I should have been very sorry to have
refused so advantageous a gratification, since by that means I should have
occasion to see more commodiously Hipolite: But to my disgrace my hurt was too
soon healed, and as pleasures of this World dure but a short time, so was I in
civility forced to leave the abode of my affections, and entertain my desires
as I did before.

Not long after, I was told that there was a Cavalier of Barcelone, called Don
Vincence d' Aualois, of eminent quality, a handsome man, of a commendable wit,
and rich condition, who sought after Hipolite, with design to marry her. He
had not yet let her know of his affections, but having acquainted her parents
therewith, he took liberty to publish them, so far as to compose verses upon
the same subject, to give her music, which was as troublesome to me, as
pleasing to others: As one time amongst others I thought to enjoy the dear
entertain of Hipolite, she having appointed me a certain hour to see her by a
window, whereof the iron bars had been often witnesses of the favors she had
done me: As I approached to this place, followed by Octave, we heard many
instruments tuning, which obliged us to stay: it was Don Vincence, who
testified his esteem of an Ebony Ring which Hipolite had worn, and which he
had got by craft from one of her servants, having given her a gold chain in
exchange.

This Consort was so melodious, that another would have been charmed therewith;
but jealousy, which beat me, rendered this harmony so troublesome, that I
wanted not much of making an uproare in the street, audaciously enterprising to
trouble their mirth, and chase the Muses from thence. The prudent advice of
Octave moderated mine anger, he counseled me to attend until DonVincence had
made his serenade, and after he was retired, I might approach to Hipolite's
Window. I governed my self by his advice, which succeeded happily: Hipolite
let me know by her discourses, that although she had heard the music, she did
not believe it was for her, but for another Lady her neighbor, the which
contented me much. In our discourses I represented unto her that I had served
her four years, and that this constancy merited the performance of the
promises she had made me. Thereupon she answered, that ingratitude never had
commerce with her, and that she was always disposed to give me those
satisfactions I could hope from my services, that I was to find an invention
to get into the house, and keep my self in Octaves chamber, which being done,
she would take care for the rest. As she gave me these instructions, we heard
some people in the street, which obliged me to take leave of her, and to retire
my self with all the contentment that could be presumed from so glorious hopes.

I left her, and went to search Octave, in turning at the corner of the street,
I perceived that those who had made the brute which separated Hipolite and me,
followed me; I doubled my paces for fear of being known, so that I lost them.
But having ^oo much pleasure in the conversation of Hipolite, (...) had let
pass the hour that I had appointed to ^eet Octave at a Rendezvous that I had
assigned ^im, so that I found him not there, which drove ^e almost into
despair, seeing that I lost the most ^avourable occasion that Hipolite could
ever present ^e. And for to oppress me with grief, when I ^aw Octave the next
morning, he told me the great complaint that she made of my negligence, and
that this was such an occasion as it might be I should not meet with in my
whole life: That for his part he could not assist me no more in such occasions,
because Leoncio had commanded him to go to certain lands of his, to make a
receiver give an account; that it was not permitted him to defer his departure;
that I must be silent, and suffer until his return, having none but him that
could manage my good fortune.

He was a month absent, during which time it was impossible for me to see
Hipolite, not for want of diligence, or care, but of occasion. In the interim
Don Vincense, whose love increased, pressed the father of Hipolite to resolve
upon the proposition which he had made him. Leoncio seeing a match so
advantageous for his daughter, and the equality of their conditions, after
having communicated it to his kindred and friends, promised the Cavalier what
he desired, without demanding the consent of her that had the most interest
therein, thinking it unnecessary to a daughter, humble and obedient as Hipolite
was, for he did believe that her consent would always depend upon his. Oh the
great errors of Fathers, to think that a virtuous daughter ought to be deprived
of her choice and will! In fine, Leoncio told her no more of this affair, but
that he had married her: She was greatly surprised with so short an oration,
and obliging her Father to express himself a little more amply, he told her
the person, admonished her to dispose her self to this new change of
condition, as also to put on her best ornaments, and to look cheerfully, for,
said he, contentment is the most excellent paint wherewith a woman can
beautify her self. Having thus persuaded her, he left her; but in stead of
preparing her self for joy, she abandoned her self to sighs and tears.

At that time I went often to her house, as well for to seek some favorable
moment to speak to her, as for to learn if Octave was returned from his
voyage. The last time that I was there, I saw at the door many Lacquees in the
same Livery; this expense testified that they appertained to a Master of great
condition: I was astonished with this novelty, and entering for to know the
cause thereof, I found Octave, who was newly arrived, who (in stead of
approaching me with joy) looked so sadly upon me, that he gave me cause to
suspect that there was something to be done to my prejudice; I saluted him in
embracing him, and asked him the explication of what I had seen; but without
daring to regard me, he answered, that being my most affectionate servant, he
desired to be excused from interpreting things so troublesome. The longer he
deferred to satisfy me, the more I pressed him, in the end my importunity drew
from him these words, go above into the Hall, said he, and you shall see the
subject of my affliction. The general joy of those who were invited, wherewith
the place was almost filled, gave me occasion to enter without being noted. I
saw Hipolite in the middle of a circle of Ladies, shining like a Sun: on
another side Don Vincence, my competitor, with a countenance that testified his
contentment. Finding things in this order, I was confirmed in the opinion which
I had conceived. I put my self in a place where I might be seen of Hipolie, to
the end she might make an end to destroy me, which had arrived without doubt,
if I had not been so unfortunate, that when I search torments, they fly me.
She lifted up her eyes, and seeing me, it was impossible for her to retain her
tears, which she hid the most discreetly she could; thereupon he arrived who
was to administer to them the Sacrament, and join their hands and wills; but
when as they came to entreat Hipolite to approach, she begun to talk so
extravagantly, that all the company was affrighted. She blamed her Father,
offended her Kindred, spoke injurious against Vincence. O extreme puissance of
an amorous passion, capable to alienate the spirit of the wisest! In a word,
she became senseless, to the great confusion of all the company, and
principally of the Gentleman that pretended to marry her: she named and called
me every moment, said that I was he, for whom heaven had ordained her, and that
I ought only to possess her. I found my self much troubled amongst these
strange confusions, and fearing some danger, slipped behind a piece of hangings,
by which means I got out of the house, without being perceived. When she had
lost the sight of me, she begun to run about the Hall to seek me, but not
finding me, so violent a grief seized her, that she fell in a trance. They
carried her to a bed, where after a little time, she came to her self again,
but with a burning fever. All the company departed very Melancolique, and also
Don-Vincence full of despite and despair, and Don-Leoncio suffered himself to
be surprised with so great vexation, that he dyed within four days, leaving
to her Brother the care of Hipolite, and the Administration of his Goods.

See the unfortunate successes of my Loves, whose image will be perpetually
engraven in my heart, see how my hopes were converted into smoke, which may
serve for an example to consider the inconstancy of humane felicity. After this
I retired my self into that country place where I had the honor to begin my
acquaintance with you, thinking that I might there live quietly the rest of my
life, since I have been established in that course of life; Octave writ to me
that Hipolite continued in the same estate that I had left her in; but I am not
in the same condition I was then, my Flames are doubly increased, they augment
every moment, seeing how much I owe to her faith and constancy, so that I now
love more madly than ever; neither absence nor time can deface it from my
memory. During the time of my abode in that village, I courted a Shepherdess
honored amongst all the mountains of Toledo, but it was but for to entertain
my spirit (although she be perfect, I did but imagine that I treated with
Hipolite.) So I passed my time when you arrived there dear Fenise, and when I
was so happy to find an occasion to serve you, which I shall take pleasure in
all my life.

Don Lovis thus ending the History of his Loves, they were within a League of
the town of Valence, but it was very late, which obliged them to make haste,
for fear of being benighted. But they had scarcely begun this last League,
when they heard amongst the Orange trees which grew by the way side, whereof
that passage was full, a plaintiff voice, the which with violent sighing seemed
to desire to render the air sensible of his sorrow; they stayed to hear the
words which he spoke, afterward they came near him, and saw a man stretched
upon the the earth, in appearance near the end of his life; at this object
generous and charitable Fenise lighted, tied his horse to a tree, and demanded
of this miserable one the cause of his plaints. Don Levis and Laure did the
like, and accompanied Fenise, when this unfortunate spoke these words;
Cavalier, whatsoever you are, I am so near mine end, that what diligence
soever you can take to succor me, will but little profit me; it must be a
force more than ^umane which must reduce me from the pain I am in; yet
nevertheless I will take courage: Saying so, he endeavored to rise, and Lovis
and Fenise assisted him. When he saw himself up, and supported by these two
Cavaliers, he cried out louder than before, and thereupon came two men who fell
upon Fenise and Don Lovis, who being assisted with him who counterfeited the
dying man, bound and tied them to two truncks of trees, at the same time they
went to Laure, who was half dead with fear, seized upon her, and one of the
three having known her, said to the others, Courage my friends, I have found
what I searched for; then taking the horse upon the which the head of the
Troop was come, they set Laure upon him, tied her, and made her ride before
them. Thus they abandoned the two prisoners to the mercy of their fortune,
without taking either Arms or Horses, to let them know, that they who had
ravished Laure from them, were persons that scorned so poor a booty.

It would be more presumption then eloquence, to go about to describe the
feelings of Fenise and Laure, seeing themselves so cruelly separated the one
from the other. A spirit weaker then that of Fenise, would have been dejected
with so sensible displeasures; seeing him self tied and deprived of all means
to recover his dear Laure, who was carried away like a prisoner. She on the
other side fell into tears and sighs which were able to have given
apprehensions of pity, to any thing which is not entirely deprived thereof;
she employed all her force to unty her self, to the end to be revenged upon
her self, so far had despair transported her. The silence and imagination of
the reader must supply the defaults of the discourse for the pen cannot lively
enough represent an adventure so deplorable. Don Louis almost forgot his proper
displeasures, to take part of the griefs of Fenise, yet without comforting of
him, for as much as consolation cannot be admitted in violent afflictions, and
it is a great secret to let pass the first violences. These Cavaliers had
suffered this misery almost half an hour: when Don Louis by violent moving
and tormenting him self had slackned his cords, and not long after found
means to lose himself. Fenise used the like diligence, but he could not
arrive to his end so soon as Don Louis, who was strong, and who knew how to
add industry to force, having set himself at liberty he also delivered
Fenise, they mounted upon their horses, ride after the ravishers of Laure,
resolved to dye or to overcome, and to take from them this glorious conquest.
But they had not ridden far; when they were met by two horsemen, who they did
believe fled, or pursued after some that fied from them, they were confirmed in
this opinion, hearing one of them hastily utter these words: see the traitors,
kill them, kill them, Marcell since we have reason of our side it is requisite
that their blood repair their treachery. Don Louis and Fenise were much
astonished at this language, and for to warrant themselves from inconvenience
they lighted, and put themselves in a posture of defense. The others seeing
them thus resolved, imagined them to be those they looked for, then being
carried away with the excess of their passion, and more blinded with choler
then the darkness of the night, begun to set upon them with a great deal of
rashness, in regard they were advantagiously armed. And in effect, if heaven
the protector of innocents had not had care of Fenise and Louis, they would
have been in danger to have been sacrificed to the anger of these unknown.
It happened that there was a little rundle betwitxt them which stayed the
course of Marcell: and as he came to pass it, he fell into a puddle, from
whence he was long before he could retire himself. His companion, called
Leonard, found a happier passage; but which had like to have been that of his
death, for he found himself betwixt two enemies, and without the good arms
wherewith he was covered, he had presently seen his rashness paid with his
blood; in the interim, Marcell got out of the bog, and came to his defense. Don
Louis seeing him come, left Fenise before Leonard, and went before him, crying
hither, hither inconsiderate, to me, to me, heaven will serve it self with my
arm to chastise thy insolence; at the sound of these words Marcell knew that
his companion and himself were deceived, and that they fought not against
those they sought for: he retired himself and cried to Leonard who was
fighting with Fenise, that he should make truce advertising him of the fault
which his inconsideration had made him commit, in falling upon men they had
nothing to demand of. At the instant Leonard ceased to press his adversary,
who was already very weary and hurt, and lighting left his arms and went to
succor him; the hurt of Fenise was upon his right, side, but it was given him
in gliding, which was the cause that it entered not much into his body and in a
place which was not mortal. They demanded pardon one of an other, and those
who did before endeavor to take away one another lives, used then all
diligence to conserve them. For this effect they took the way to Valence, the
habitation of the one, and the unfortunate end of the others journey. Leonard
extremely afflicted with the hurt of Fenise, did not cease to make him
complements and excuses, and to testify to him the extreme sorrow which he
had for what was happened, he conjured Fenise to take his lodging, to the end
he might endeavor by the services which he hoped to render him during the time
of his indisposition, to merit the honor of his affection. Fenise used the
same courtesy of his side; told him that he esteemed his blood well employed
since that it had got him the acquaintance of so generous a Cavalier, to whose
valor he had design to have recourse upon all occasions that should present
themselves: they thus entertained themselves by the way, when Don Louis said to
Leonard and Marcell, that if they were willing to give them more certain
proofs of their freedom they would not reject the prayer which they made to
them, to recite the cause of the great precipitation wherewith they set upon
them, without knowing to whom they addressed themselves, because Fenise would
take delight in this recital; if it be true that there is consolation in the
company of those that are touched with the same afflictions that we are.
Leonard then spoke as being the most qualified. I would freely tell you,
answered he, the cause of the too blamable rashness which I have committed, if
this relation might not be received as a testimony of the honor which I bear
you, hoping that greater occasions shall be presented wherein I may manifest
it, but the fear I have to trouble this hurt Cavalier does oblige me to excuse
my self from satisfying your curiosity.

Then Fenise added his prayers to those of Lovis, and at the same instant
Leonard made them this discourse.

LEONARDS HISTORY OF EUFEMIE and TEODORE.
THe town of Valence whither we are going, is the place of my birth, and
ancient dwelling of my Ancestors: If I be not of the greatest families, at the
least I am of the most noble, with the successions which my father and mother
left me, leaving this world to go to a better life, they charged me with the
care and guard of two Sisters, who had the reputation to be of the number of
the fairest, not only of the town, but of the Province, as they grew up, my
cares augmented; and in truth it is a dangerous charge to guard a fair Maid: I
had an eye perpetually to conserve their honors, because besides my fraternal
obligation, mine was therein engaged. I was always putting them in mind of the
virtues of the illustrious Ladies of our lineage, to induce them to imitate the
purity of their lives. The eldest was called Eufemie, and if I be not a
partial Judge, I may say that her graces and beauty were incomparable. Seeing
her fit for marriage, there passed not many days before I desired her to
resolve thereupon; and to excite her thereunto, I represented unto her, that
the beauty of a Maid, was a flower exposed to the desires of a thousand
Gallants, who would endeavor to stain the purity thereof. She was so easily
persuaded by my reasons, and rendered her will so conformable to mine, that I
sometimes doubted if we had two souls. I propounded unto her parties which I
thought most convenient for her condition, for to dispose her self thereunto
according to her liking, for a maid ought never to be constrained, she should
be free in that election. After that she had maturely considered thereof in her
particular, she made choice of a Cavalier called Don Alonso de Vlloa, whose
Merits and Qualities were correspondent to hers.

At that time, when I treated of these affairs, liberty of youth, which makes
almost all young men commit extravagancies, carried me in the day to the
conversation of my friends, and in the night to those Academies where they cut
away the renown of the most honest men, where they ravish the goods of others,
and where many vices are learned. I always lost my money, when I set down to
play, it is true, that there is not much difference betwixt playing and losing,
since that to express that a man has lost his estate, we ordinarily say, that
he has played it. One night a Gentleman, with whom I played, quarrelled with
me, almost without cause; from words we came to a challenge, and being agreed
upon the place where we were to fight, we met there almost at the same instant,
Fortune was more favorable to me than to my adversary; I do not say that I
had more valor; for he that has a heart to measure his sword with another,
ought to be esteemed as valiant, although he has the worse. The combat was so
advantageous to me, that I tamed the pride of mine enemy, and made him kiss
the same place he had already bedewed with his blood.

This Cavalier had a brother, which had a design to affront me, to ravish from
me the glory I had gotten, to the confusion of his Kinsman, who seeing he could
not execute his vengeance upon me, he invented the most infamous and cowardly
one that is possible to be conceived by the most infamous of men. He resolved
to make love to my Sister, to defame her honor and ruin mine; a new and
cruel method to kill a man. He found occasions enough to execute this
mischievous project; he took the time of my absence in a voyage which I must
needs make to the Court; so that not being able to continue the necessary watch
to guard the Citadell, this traitor most industriously made himself master
thereof. Eufemye rendered her self at his discretion; but let us excuse this
fault, which might be caused by her youth, liberty, beauty, delights, solitude,
amorous discourses, inflamed letters, services, witnesses of deceitful
sincerity, the persuasions of others, her proper passions, or those who have
heretofore experimented those things, tell me, what resistance can a maid make
that is set upon so many ways? Don Pedro, so was this perfideous called, did
not content himself with taking from her that which was most precious, but
stole her away from my lodging, and being furnished with things necessary,
carried her to Madrid, where being arrived, he told her he had no intention to
entertain her there. But Gentlemen, be not astonished, if in telling you the
rest, I hide my face for shame. He provided her a house proper to receive
visits, it is the fashion to speak thus of such kind of people to disguise
their infamy: I take the boldness to speak thus freely hoping in the
consequence of this discourse, you will see that I am not guilty of these
enormious delights, and that you shall by and by know the diligence that I have
taken to deface them from my gentilitie. In a word, Eufemy, who might now more
properly be called infamy, became one of the most famous Curtizans; the most
courted, and the least reserved: Oh prodigious change of life! what
astonishment was it to those, who had before seen her in her retained course of
life, and then abandoned to all sorts of liberty, to those who had praised her
honesty, and now considered her so disordered, to those, I say, who had seen
her make scruple to be regarded only by the sun, now to see her so visited,
that she was never one moment without company.

Don Alonso, the cavalier that I told you sought her in marriage, having heard
the deplorable newe^ of her absence, not knowing no more then I what was become
of her, absented himself from Valence sad almost to despair; And I abandoning
my house went to Madrid to endeavor to divert the melancholy which consumed
me, yet ignorant, that the Traitor and my infamous sister were there. Having
stayed there some time, a young gentlewoman of condition and very rich, bore me
some affection and by this meeting I was confirmed in the opinion which I had,
that love is a conjunction of starts, whose conformity infuseth affections into
the soul.

I wholly employed my self, then to search after the tyrants of mine honor, I
enquired after them of all my friends, presuming to hear something in Madrid,
amongst the confusion of the court, which for refuge to so many sorts of
persons, but all my diligences were vain.

During this exercise, one day as I went in the town, a woman came to me and
asked me my name, and I having told it her; she drew a letter from her bosom,
put it in my hand and without giving me leisure to inform my self from whence
she came: read this letter, said she, and neglect not your good fortune; when
she is so inclined to favor you. I was astonished with this short speech,
opened the paper and read this discourse.

A LETTER FROM AN UNKNOWN LADY TO LEONARD.
YOur good countenance has given me notice of your valor, the former
testifies your original, and both excites me to the boldness, to beseech you
to meet me to morrow at seven a clock in the morning in Saint Heirosmes
meadow, I will there tell you more amply what I desire from your generositie. I
imagine that the merit of a gentlewoman of honor may oblige you to this
courtesy; but I hope more from the nobleness of your courage. This bearer
will serve you for a sign to know me.


In ending the reading of this letter, I begun to be ignorant of the author,
and the confusion wherein I was, made me wish that the term which she had
given me was expired to be delivered therfrom. I passed the night in this
impatience, and the hour being come I rendered my self at the place assigned,
where I presently saw arrive too women who had their faces covered with
cipresse, which I did not think strange because it was the fashion, put I was
astonished with the brightness of the beauty of one of these women, which she
permitted me to see, in letting fall her veil upon her shoulder, as not
thinking thereof, and lifting it up again at the same time, I remained as
immovable at the splendor of this object; and as this had veiled again her
face, the other discovered hers, thereby to let me know that it was she that
had brought me the Letter. Then I thought it convenient to premeditate some
little discourse wherewith to approach this Beauty, for he does much that is
able to pass the first encounter of a fair Lady with respect, and without
committing some impertinency.

Then animating my resolution, and using all all the courtesy I could
possible, I said to her; Madam, if I be too bold thus to accost you, the
confusion which this paper has given me, and this messenger which brought it
me, may serve me for excuse. I have learned by the discourse thereof, that
Heaven is willing to render me worthy to serve you, and that you desired that
I might come hither to receive the honor of your commands: And since that I am
come, and have seen, there rests nothing but to overcome the obstacles, which
would oppose themselves to your contentment, as I shall do without doubt when
you ordain me. Then this Lady again discovered her admirable countenance,
and looking upon me with gracious eyes, Cavalier, said she, I esteem my self
much indebted to your courtesy, which merits more praise then excuse; but I
blame her who has caused you to come hither, and whose imbecility has at this
time so greatly prejudiced mine honor. Saying so, she turned toward
Feliciane, so was she called that accompanied her, and severely chid her: She
who was prepared of what she ought to say, made a thousand excuses to Teodore,
this was the name of that Lady, who coming again to me, spoke this language; I
must confess I writ what this woman gave you, and that I am very happy that it
light in the hands of a person of merit, as you are, although I do not know
you to be of the quality of him to whom I had intention my letter should have
been given, who is a brave Gentleman.

Thereupon I took occasion to tell her what I was, but feigned to be come to
the Court for better occasions then those that kept me there. She answered me,
that the courteous actions I had shown her, would serve for warrant to my
words, but that her affair was a secret, praying me to pardon her if she told
me nothing thereof; for although she judged I might be confided in for things
of much greater importance, so it was continued, she that the little knowledge
which she had of me, hindered her ftom taking the boldness of communica^ing her
secrets unto me. She said all this to the and to oblige me to promise her to
see her afterward: But being at Madrid, rather to execute the effects of hate
and vengeance, then seek the pastimes of love, I neglected this occasion, and
civilly took ^eave of her.

Teodore stayed there very ill satisfied with her ^ndustry, and the little
power which the darts of ^er eyes had had over my heart, she had good cause ^o
be astonished therewith, for they had so many ^llurements and charms, that it
had been impos^ble for another less afflicted then me to have re^sted their
force. So that considering my coldness, ^^e knew not whether she ought to
attribute it to ^ontempt, or accuse me of want of judgment, ha^ing not
conceived her intentions. She finding her self pressed with her passion,
resolved to hazard what she had the most dear to satisfy it: and what is it
which a woman animated with love will not prove to content her desires, and
render those things easy, which seems impossible unto her? But for to render
this discourse less troublesome unto you, I must here make a digression. You
must know then, that during this time, I met Don Alonso, whom I believed to
have been far from Madrid; after embracements, and ordinary complements, which
pass amongst friends, he told me, that besides his passed sorrows he had a
new displeasure at his heart; this inquietude made me curious to know the cause
thereof; then in renewing unto me his ancient protestations of amity, he told
me that the day before he was amongst young men, such as seek their pastime
every where, and who give to their senses all they can wish for, who having
discovered where Eufemie was, and knowing that he had heretofore had design for
her, had let him see her unknown to her, he being disguised for that cause:
that he had like to have died at the instant of this Vision, and in this cruel
displeasure it was some ease to him to advertise me thereof, to seek mean^ to
remedy it the most discreetly that could be possible.

These news stirred up so violently my vengeance, that nothing seemed hard to
me to execute; he named to me the street and house, and then left me: Almost
at the same time, a servant that was unknown to me, came to tell me that there
was a Lady in such a house that desired to see me in the evening, and
communicate unto me something of importance, and presently went her way; the
house which she directed me unto was the very same that Alonso had told me of,
where resided the original of my opprobry. I considered the great impudence of
her that desired to see me in stead of flying from me, which made me suspect
some treason; but amongst these confusions, passing beyond all apprehensions, I
went to the lodging with a poniard hidden. This new Messenger stayed for me at
the door, and conducted me into a chamber, where I found a candle upon a
cup-board a ^ittle removed, and betwixt the wall and bed, a woman in petticoat
and wastcoat. I had scarcely perceived her, and begun to draw my poniard,
lift^p mine arm to strike her, when she cried, Ah Sir, what will you do? I
stayed my self, hearing by the sound of her voice, that it was not ^he I
imagined: in the same time I ran to the candlestick, and in approaching her, I
knew that it was Teodore, whose fear had so increased her beauty, besides the
art which she had joined to nature, that (...) had taken her for a Goddess, if
I had not remem^red my self to have spoken with her in the meadow of St.
Hierosme. I was so extremely surprised with ^his accident, that I doubted
whether it was fond ^magination or truth, I did not know whether Alonso mocked
me or no. In fine, after a long suspension of mind, the apprehensions of hate
gave place to those of love; and as I went to demand her pardon for my error,
there came into the chamber the servant that came to seek me from her,
^ccompanied with Feliciane, her first confident, who ^ame running at the
clamor of Teodore, thinking that I would take away the life of her, that had
ravished from me my liberty; and seeing me yet have the poniard in my hand,
which glissened by the light of the candle, they fled, crying murder, and for
help. I went after them, to stay them, and upon the stairs I met lascivious
Eufemie, coming up with a torch in her hand, to know from whence proceeded this
great disorder. For me, I confess, that when I knew her, my whole body begun
to tremble, being ready to discharge it self of the heavy burden of my affront;
but as soon as she saw me with the poniard in my hand, fear of death so
violently transported her, that she cast her self out of a window of the
stairs which looked into the Court, I was very glad to see her resolution,
thinking that in saving her self from my rigor, she would chastise her self,
but it happened otherwise: I put my head out of the window, thinking to have
seen her broken to pieces upon the pavement, and I saw her in the arms of Don
Pedro, he who had debauched her, who happened to be directly under the window
at the instant of her fall, he saved her in receiving her into his arms, for
he was strong, and the window not very high. I ran hastily to take the occasion
that was offered me to be revenged of them both in the same time, and poniard
them both together, but the two servants had shut the door of the stairs which
entered into the court. Seeing then so many obstacles to the execution of my
design, choler so violently surmounted me, that I went up the stairs to cast
my self out of the same window, I did it as soon as thought it, but my fall
was not so happy as that of Eufemie, I hurt so extremely one of my legs,
that when J would have gone to have ruined my enemies, it was impossible for me
to go, which gave them leisure to save themselves. Teodore altogether confused
with this prodigious rumor, got quickly to her lodging, wherein she entered
without wakening her father. J doubt not Gentlemen, but that you desire to know
by what accident Teoddre came into this place, but J will tell you the reason
thereof.

Eufemy was lodged near her house, and Teodore knowing the life which she led,
determined to be acquainted with her, by the intermission of Feliciane, who
went to make complements to her from her in the quality of a neighbor. At the
end of some few days, she demanded permission of her Father (for her Mother
was deceased) to go see one of her cosens that was sick. The good man seeing
his daughter excited with so charitable a desire, gave her leave, upon
condition, that Feliciane should accompany her; for he confided in her, and
thought the Chastity of Teodore in great safeguard with her.

They went abroad together, made some turns in the streets, and stayed under a
door, where they disguised themselves, as well as they could; for fear of
being known, and so entered into the house of Eufemie. She seeing Teodore at
her house was ravished with that honor, as they are ordinarily who meddle with
the trade she did, when other women come to visit them. Eufemy embraced her a
thousand times, transported with joy and admiration; and after many fair words
given and received of one and the other, Eufemie prayed Teodore to tell her
wherefore she had taken the pains to visit her. Then without suffering her
self to be much entreated, she ^ngeniously declared to her that she had made
choice of her lodging to satisfy an extreme passion; that she loved a
Cavalier, which she was a going to send for; and for that purpose, she prayed
her to lend her a chamber for a little time, that passing for a Courtizan, she
might without being known, content her amorous desires.

Consider a little how this Gentlewoman prostituted her honor, to adhere to
her sensual fantasies! but what is it that a woman animated with love will not
prove to make easy the things that seem to her impossible? let us now return
to the house of Eufemie, to see what happened there, after the hurt which I had
received in leaping out of the window. Her servant which fled away, seeing me
with the Poniard in my hand, went in a fright to fetch a Justice, who being
arrived, made me be carried to prison, without any formalitie in a chair.
Before that this officer was entered into the house, the Pregnotory had
received the depositions of two witnesses, who said that I had given to a woman
three great stabs with a Poniard, and that they had seen the wounds. The vulgar
are such liars, that they affirm to have seen that they only dreamed of, and
hold for truth what they have heard say, as if they had seen it. They would
then know in what estate the hurt person was, but they found nothing but
witnesses of my justification; nevertheless I remained three weeks a
prisoner. Do but see a little how rigorously the innocents are handled by
those people they call Justices.

In the mean while Eufemie and her protector changed either the country or
quarter, but if they were in Madrid, they were well hid; for in six months
that I stayed there, it was impossible for me to hear news of them, what
diligence soever I could use. As long as my captivity lasted, Teodore sent
often Feliciane to see me, and to offer me assistance and money, but not having
need, neither of the one nor other, both because of my justification, and not
being in want; I thanked her, remaining always extremely obliged to her good
will, and indebted to her affection, whereof she rendered me sufficient proofs
during my imprisonment. If my body was set at libertv, my soul was enchained;
the beauty of Teodore captivated all my powers; my understanding understood
nothing but of her, my memory had no other image, my will walked not but by the
shadow of hers: She simpathized to all my feelings; I failed not to be every
night at the foot of her walls, and she never wanted to be at her window: I
lived not but by her presence, nor her heart was ever at ease but when she saw
me. One night when I went to prattle with her, and give nourishment to my
flames, her father surprised her, which was the cause that the window was
walled up, and that this Sun was long time eclipsed from me. After having
suffered much for her absence, I had a Packet brought to me from the Post,
wherein was a Letter directed to the Father of Teodore. I presently imagined
that this was not done without mystery; in this thought I opened the Letter,
which was directed to me, wherein I found this discourse, which I knew to be
written by the hand of Teodore.

THE LETTER OF TEO. DOOR TO LEONARD.
I have already rendered you so many proofs of my affection, dear Leonard,
that I do not think you can doubt thereof: If you desire to conserve it, you
must assist me to warrant it from the dangers that threaten it, or I shall now
know that yours is but dissimulation. My father treats about marrying me to a
Cavalier his kinsman, who is of the province of Guipuscoa as he himself is,
and although there are presented many parties more advantageous for me, yet
those of that country are of such humor; that they esteem none but those of
their own nation; for that cause my father desires I should continue the
alliance thereof: but my nature repugnes to those affections, because your
merit makes me search means to avoid the constraint of this obedience. He
expects hourly this Cavalier, and I prepare my self for death every moment. I
am told that he has been rustically educated; and to marry me to him was to
renew the cruel tortures of the ancients, it is to tie a living person to a
dead, to make it die with more horror. Succor me in the danger I run, since
it is only your consideration that that renders all propositions of marriage
odious unto me. It will be easy for you to do in taking a country habit, and
faining your self to be called Don Martin Elizalde, and give this packet of
letters to my father: this being done to save me, I will charge my self with
the rest.


I was a little shaken in the resolution of this enterprise, but seeing that
therein consisted the conservation of a thing so precious, as was the love of.
Teodore, I clothed my self like a traveller, and mounted upon a Mule; I
arrived all alone at the door of my dear Teodore: I addressed my self to her
father, gave him her letter, fained to be Don Martin, and saying that I was
advanced two days journeys before my people and equipage, to satisfy the
amorous impatience that I had to see his daughter. I was embraced by him with
much affection. All the family received me with applause; Theodore felt an
interior joy, but she made appear an exterior modesty. I spoke little for
fear of discovering my self: I was respectfull as a young lover and stranger.
The letters* which Teodore had sent were read, the which were effectually come
from Guipuscoa, and light in her hands unknown to her father; so that she had
kept them to serve her self thereof upon occasion. I am astonished said her
father to me, that my cosen your father sends me word, that Don Martin should
begin his journey within a short time, and nevertheless you are already
arrived: I was already extremely surprised with these words, but love inspired
me suddenly with this reply. Sir said I, it is true that my father believed
that I should not come so soon as I am, and to give you some excuse for my
delay, he writ this letter, but my affection which could not permit any stay,
solicited me to be the bearer thereof my self. He easily believed me, and two
days after with the dispensation of the popes Nuntio Teodore and I were
married without publication of banes. The day following I so admired at this
success that I knew not my self, I looked in the glass fearing that I was
some other. In truth I was so, for a wise man cease to be himself when he
marries. I contemplated my wife, who I saw ravished to have me for her
husband; and in this conformity of joy it seemed impossible that any humane
contentment could equal my amorous imprisonment and her free possession.

In the very excess of this joy I was in great care of what would be the
success of this intricacy. We expected from hour to hour Don Martin; at the
beginning of the night one of his Laquyes arrived, saying that he would come
the next day, and that he was got before to deserve the recompense of bringing
the first news thereof; when the good man my father in law heard that Don
Martin was coming, he came up all moved into the chamber where I was set near
to Teodore, and asked me where I le^ my train. Then in smiling I pushed his
daughter with my elbow to the end she might answer for me to this question. She
boldly told him that I was not Don Martin, but a cavalier of Valence, which
equalled him in nobleness, and surpassed him in riches, that she was assured
of all this before she resolved her self to do what she had done; and if that
I wanted those advantages my merits and her affection would supply all. In
fine, that since I was her huband there was nothing more to be said.

She spoke with the resolution of a wife that would please her husband: her
father, who loved her dearly, answered her, that if she was content, he was so
also: that he esteemed and honored my person; but that he feared that Don
Martin finding himself offended with this proceeding should do them some
displeasure. Teodore answered him, that ^he should let her alone, and she would
remedy all, or would be exposed to suffer a lone all the evil that could come
thereof.

In this occasion, I found that a woman's spirit is extremely ingenious in
pressing affairs. Her intention was, to counsel me to go out of the house,
and to court her as if I was her lover, and not her husband; then she prayed
her father, and advertised all the servants, who would have sacrificed their
lives to serve her, to make a joyful reception of the stranger when he should
come, even as he was to be her husband. The assurance that I had of the
goodness of her wit, and seeing that I neither hazarded her honor nor mine
own in executing her advise, obliged me to aid and consent to her designs. I
went out of the house the same day that this abused cavalier arrived. He was
received with all the good cheer that was possible, but he appeared to the
eyes and judgments of all those of the house, a beast in humane form, with an
ill countenance, uncivil and unweildy, so that his impertinence rendered me
the more commendable; which gave greater means to Teodore to conduct her
project as she had premeditated. From that day I went and came many times
before the house: he took notice of these actions, and saw that I lifted up
mine eyes every moment to the windows where Feliciane appeared every moment;
and he imagining that we did not perceive that he spyed our actions, he
perceived that I gave a letter to the same Feliciane, which she put in her
bosom, and as being unseene gave it to Teodore. In brief, every one of us
played so well his personage in this Comedy, where Don Martin held the babble,
that the catastrophe thereof was pleasant for us, and ridiculous for him.
Seeing so many witnesses, that his Mistress had other thoughts then his, he
begun to seem melancholic; he spoke but by monosyllables; he neither eat nor
slept, but to the half part: in fine, to deliver himself from these
inquietudes, he pressed the conclusion of the Marriage; but of the other side,
Teodore prayed her Father in his presence to defer it yet, excusing her self
to be indisposed to that action; and he, full of respect, or rather fear,
resolved to have patience and suffer.

In the interim, to the end to make him the more sick, it came into my fancy
to give a serenade to my wife, counterfeiting the amorous passionate, and
having advertised her at what hour I would be under her window, she came to
the window, where she heard these verses recited.

O busy tedious law of reason
How much art thou out of season,
When nothing can thy fury quell,
And whilst thy vain seditious course
That would would my strong passions force,
Makes me against my self rebel.
Thy Physic cannot me restore,
Farewell and trouble me no more.
That Beauty that claims heaven by merit
To which my undaunted Spirit
An eternal Victim's made,
From her sweet as modest eye,
Lets such Flames and Arrows fly,
That 'twere a crime but to evade.
Thy Physic, cannot me restore,
Farewell and trouble me no more.
Though hopeless I am a presumer,
Yet to adore her it is my humor.
She Is too chaste, too fair not to take,
Faith to what end then serves thy Treason,
When I have never so much reason?
As when I love it for her sake.
Thy Physic cannot me restore,
Farewell and trouble me no more.
In such occasions, the greatest part of discreet Lovers, content themselves
that the subject of their passion know, that it is they that give the Music,
and endeavor to hide the knowledge thereof from all others, but I proceeded
otherwise: When the Consort was ended, I approached to those that had sung, and
speaking high, made my self to be named, with design to be known; from thence
I went to salute Teodore, and after having made her excuses, that the Verse and
Music were not so good as she deserved, and she had given me such thanks as
civility obliged her to, I retired my self, testifying by my gestures and
words, that I was much in her favor.

This jolly troop that accompanied me were not so modest, nor made so little
noise before the house of Teodore, but that they wakened my poor competitor,
or rather gave him subject to rise from his bed; for I think his inquietudes
would not suffer him to sleep. He came then to hear this consort, which was as
odious to him, as pleasant to others that heard it, yet he spoke not one word
thereof, no more than of the words he had heard, he contented himself to
confer with one of his servants, whom he had made his confident; who having
more wit and understanding, let him know, that Teodore must needs be engaged in
affection to him that gave her the Serenade; that such carriages were to be^
suspected, and that the excuses she had made to her Father for to hinder the
execution of their marriage, testified sufficiently that she had other desires
then his. In fine, he advised him to retire himself, if he would save his
honor. Don Martin being persuaded by these reasons, feigned to have received a
Letter from his Father, which called him home in diligence, because he was very
sick, and taking leave of the father of Teodore, promised him to return as
soon as he could possible.

Thus Teodore quit her self ingeniously of this displeasing pretendant; we
re-entered into the enjoying of our felicity (one may so call a marriage,
wherein the affections are conformable) The invention was published, and the
ignorance of the Biscain Gentleman mocked.

But as there is no pleasure in this life which is not mingled with bitterness,
not long after his departure my Father in Law took also leave of us for to go
into a better life. Then pressed with desire to see again my country and my
other sister, which I had left at my house. I came to this town accompanied
with my dear Teodore. It is now but three days since I arrived here, and this
night I have received a writing from Don Martin, who incited by his Father and
his Friends demands reason of me for the injury I have done him, in taking from
him his wife. J prepared my self to meet him, not with design to do him any
displeasure, but civilly to satisfy him, when a man came as a friend to
admonish me not to stir out but well armed, and with a good second, because
the Letter that I had received came not from Don Martin, but from two of the
Cosens of Don Pedro, in his name, who would set upon me to revenge their
Kinsman, (whom they were told) I had killed. J was not so rash to despise this
advertisement: J furnished my self with what was requisite to resist mine
enemy, and accompanied my self with Seigneur Marcell my Kinsman, a generous
man, and to whom J am obliged. We came together to the rendezvous, which was
near to the place where J set upon you, where J knew your valor, and where J
hurt my heart with a perpetual sorrow in hurting you; for reparation of which
fault, and to convert our indifferences into affection, J consecrate to ease
your troubles and misfortunes my house, my person and all J possess.

Fenise thanked him for his offers, and thereupon they arrived in the town of
Valence, and at the prayer of Leonard went to light at his house, at the same
instant a Surgeon was fetched, who visited the wounds of Fenise, to the
which he applied necessary plasters, judging that they were not dangerous, but
that they would be long in healing. In effect two months were spent in this
cure, during which time Fenise had in abundance all things, that was necessary
for him, so that being obliged with so many benefits, he discovered to him the
very secrets of his heart, and his adventures, from the beginning until the
ravishment of Laure, the only thing which troubled him the most. Leonard
promised to assist him in all that he could possible, and assured him that he
should have presently news thereof, or the Ravishers should not be in Valence.
These officious promises reanimated the courage, and augmented the health of
Fenise; and as soon as he was able to go abroad, he privately enquired who he
was from whom he had received so great an affront.

The End of the first Book of FENISE.
THE SECOND BOOK OF FENISE.
WHosoever will make comparison of the inquities of this Age, with those of
times past, will easily see, that the World has alvvaies been vicious, and our
nature always fragile; when I remember the words of Seneca, Virtues are
perished; Fortitude, Piety, and Modesty have left us, and it is almost
impossible for them to find the way to return again unto us: I imagine with
my self, that Fenise lived in the time of Seneca, or that Seneca was present at
the misfortunes of Fenise.

The experience of the Surgeon, and the sweet entertainment of his host,
advanced his recovery sooner then was expected: as soon as he was permitted to
go abroad, he begun to make all the diligences imaginable to recover the
delights of his life which he had lost in dear Laure. Don Louis, interessing
himself as a perfect friend, in all things that concerned him, spared neither
labor nor dexterity, discreetly to enquire in all places where he presumed
to hear any thing thereof. They employed all the day in this troublesome
exercise, but seeing that it advanced them nothing, they were therewith doubly
wearied; their bodies labored therein as well as their spirits; for it is true
that the one cannot feel any evil but the other participates thereof.

Fenise scarcely knew what to resolve upon, if not to refer all his hopes unto
time, when one day coming from the town, dejected with weariness and
vexation, he threw himself upon a bed to repose himself: it was there that
his sorrows increased, he suffered himself to be carried away, with the
excess of his displeasures, and seemed to exhale his very soul with sighs
and sobbs, when he heard one knock softly at his chamber door, and as he had
always his imagination occupied with the object of Laure, and his heart with
desires to see her again, he persuaded himself that this was some one that
came to give him advice of her. He arose quickly and saw a young maid of the
house, who with an action, fearful and hasty, said to him. Sir, I doubt not
but you are astonished, to see me here, for admiration is the daughter of
Novelty: here is a letter from Celie my mistress which she prays you to
read, and satisfy her in what she desires of you, if the respect of an
honorable Lady may oblige you thereunto. Fenise demanded of her who Celie was:
the messenger answered him that she was the sister of Leonard, and that she
could not talk to him any longer for fear the Cavalier should find her
speaking to him, or might have some shadow thereof. Fenise more astonished then
before, received the letter, made a complement to the messenger and her
mistrisse, and promised to obey all that she could command him, assuring
himself that their discretion, would not engage him in uncivil enterprises.
This maid being gone, Fenise was ill troubled to imagine what this Lady could
desire from him, having never seen him; nevertheless after having many times
contemplated the letter yet sealed, he resolved to open it, and saw that it
contained this discourse.

A LETTER FROM CELIE TO FENISE.
THe esteem and commendations which oftentimes I have heard my brother publish
of your worth, excuse the boldness which I take to address my self to you,
for an affair of great importance, it requires a longer relation then this
paper can contain, and less delay then you may imagine. You shall have the
whole explication thereof this afternoon if you will take the pains to go
abroad. A maid shall be at the door to conduct you to a place of assurance,
where you shall see a person, whose entertain shall supply the brevitie of
this discourse. I persuade my self that your generositie will render you
observant to these desires, and that you will esteem your self indebted to me
for having given you an occasion to serve a fair Lady.


Never man was so surprised as Fenise was after the reading of this writing; he
read it three or four times over, and the more he read it the more aenigmas he
found therein. He had diverse imaginations, but that which troubled him the
most, was the fear to be invited to some action, which might violate the
respect of hospitality which he reverenced as things holy. In the end resolved
to enterprise nothing unworthy of him, he went out of the house at the hour
appointed, and walked thereabouts expecting the maid that was to be his guide.
She came incontinent, her face covered with a veil; she approached to Fenise
and asked him his name; and seeing that it was he whom she sought, she prayed
him to follow her, but a little behind for fear of being perceived, and that
he should enter boldly and without any apprehension, into the house whither
she carried him. Fenise answered her that he feared nothing, having nothing to
lose but his life, and he needed not search far, to be too unhappy. Saying thus
he went after the maid, and not far from the place where they met, they
secretly entered into a house, very fair without and curiously hung within; at
the entry into the hall, this girl discovered her face, and bad him yet follow
her; she led him up a pair; of stayres into an Antichamber, richly adorned
with the fairest tapestry of Flanders: then his conductresse prayed him to stay
a little, to whom he obeyed; in the interim he considered the propriety of
this house, and to what end he was brought thither: but incontinently the maid
returned, and made him enter into a great cabinet, filled with an infinite of
rich furniture, as pictures, glasses, plate, candlesticks, and arms of silver
gilt, and other curiosities very delightful to the sight, a great piece of
Turkey tapistrie covered the floor, upon the which were great store of
cushions, and cushionets, of velvet, and imbroydery. When he was there, there
entered a young Lady, perfectly fair, clothed in mourning, but with such
order, comeliness, and good carriage, that with this modest and sad color,
she had more Majesty and Luster, then another would have had in the most lively
colors and shining attires. Having saluted one the other, she made them give
him a seat, sat herself down by him, and commanded her women to retire
themselves to the end she might discourse more freely of her secrets.

Then Fenise spoke, and by a well polished complement let her know his ability
in speaking, and the vivacity of his wit: This Lady answered him with all the
courtesy and civility imaginable. Sir (said she) I thank my good fortune, for
having rendered me so happy as to have your acquaintance, to trust you with an
important affair, wherein I have need of two excellent qualities, which I
believe to find in your person, discretion, and valor; the one for to keep
secret the project, and the other for to execute it. And since that you offer
me your assistance in this occasion, I will take you at your word, upon the
assurance that I have, that you have too much generosity to fail in the
effects of your words. But before that I explicate my self further, it is
necessary that I make you a little discourse of my life, to move you the more
to assist me in the afflictions which oppress me.

THE HISTORY OF RUFINE AND DON IOUAN.
ALthough that my Parents are not much accommodated with the favors of
Fortune, so it is that Nature gratified them with an honor which cannnot be
purchased with riches, which is nobleness. With this advantage I was borne in
Seville, one of the most pleasant Towns the Sun shines upon. I am called
Rufine: My Father and Mother seeing that Heaven had not made me ill-favored,
if I may speak it without vanity, had care to bring me up according as their
little estate would permit. I had attained to the sixteenth year of my age,
when a Cavalier of this Town of Valence, of an illustrious name, coming from
Lema, a Town and Realm of the West Indies, took Port at Sevill, full of
prosperity and honor, and my destiny having one night conducted me into the
company of Ladies where he was invited, she also made him cast his eyes upon
me, and made me the object of his desires. After which time, to abridge my
discourse, I was delivered into his free possession, but by the holy ways of
Christian Laws. Not long after he had design to return into his Country,
and to take me with him, there to establish our perpetual abode; and forasmuch
an honest wife ought to have no other will but that of her husband, I willingly
went with him, and we lived together six years, which was the time that Heaven
had limited to finish my contentment with his life. I then remained alone, yet
accompanied with riches and sorrow, for temporal goods are not always the
riches of the soul, from whence it proceeds that there is many poor contented,
and rich miserable. He left me the only inheritrix of all his possessions, by
which means I was respected and served as a Queen. My sorrows for the loss of
this brave Cavalier kept me company two years entire; but in the end, suffering
my self to be persuaded by the consolations of my friends that visited me, I
begun to leave my solitude, and to frequent those conversations whither my
youth led me. In one of these Assemblies I was considered by a Gentleman, a
stranger which arrived in this Town about three months since, a man of a good
countenance, and as well accomplished as any other of his condition, suffering
himself to be wounded by mine eyes (as he said) he found an invention to
declare his inquietudes by a Letter, which I favorably received, and found it
so well indicted, that it incited me to esteem the Author, and give him a
civil answer, from whence he took occasion to render me proofs of a sincere
passion, and the services of a voluntary slave. In the end, his continual
submissions obliged me to wish him well, and for to render him some proofs
thereof, I permitted him to visit me one evening after supper, but my
Garden-window was betwixt us. In the enjoying of this honor, after having told
me that he was of Teledo, and was called Don Jouan de Valazquez, he made me a
thousand protestations of service, swearing to renounce all remembrances to
remain all his life at my feet if it pleased me, and esteeming himself most
happy to he under the subjection of so adorable a Mistress; these was the
terms which he used. But seeing that his passion begun to enter into excess,
I prayed him to retire himself, showing him that this was enough for the first
sight; assuring him that I honored him with all my heart. He obeyed me, and at
the same time went his way, and left me as voluntarily obliged; for after a
woman of honor has given her word, she is bound to accomplish it.

He saw me many other times in the same manner, and one night, knowing that I
would not agree that he should come into my house, nor adhere to his desires,
if he did not give me his word to marry me, he made me promise thereof, in
taking my hand and kissing it, believing already, that under this weak
assurance, I must accord to what he pretended, and by and by open him the door
of my house and honor; but he saw himself deceived in his attempt. Having
received his protestations, I made him answer, that since we were both of free
condition, and that there was nothing that could cross our mutual intentions,
the next day we would dispose our selves to confirm our faith in the presence
of the sacred Ministers, and after that, he should have an absolute power over
my person, goods, and life.

When he saw me in this resolution, he begun to demand term for the execution
thereof, saying that before that, he must receive news of letters of Ex^hange
which he had sent for, to the end he might ^olemnize the Marriage according to
his quality. In (...) word, from that hour he became less inflamed, ^ore
careless in his visits, and more retained in ^is carriage, which let me know
the great error (...) had like to have fallen into, if I should have suffered
him to have approached me nearer then the thick^nesse of the bars of my
Window. The know^ge of his merits which I had got by his frequent conversation,
left not my mind so free but that I had an extreme sorrow to see my self so
separated from him; I begun to reason upon his actions, and to seek the cause
of his coldness, and to speak truly to you, either by love, jealousy, or
curiosity, or it may be by all these affections together, I found means to
speak with a woman that dwelt in his house, and to oblige her by presents and
promises to tell me the particulars of the life he lead. I found this woman so
willing to satisfy me, that she told me more then f expected. She told me that
Don Jouan had with him an extreme fair Lady, which was of his Country, and who
was called Laure. That at first when he brought her to Valence, he could not
make her resolve to adhere to his desires, but at the present she believed she
was pacified and reduced to his will.

But Sir, What is it that the malicious industry of men will not accomplish?
And to what fragilitie is not the inconstant nature of a woman subject? I
thought it strange that this Lady should show her self so cruel toward him,
since that she came with him, and when I demanded of this woman the cause
thereof, she told me, that she had learned all of a servant of Don Iovans (with
whom I hear since she has good intelligence) who told her, that Don Iovan was
become amorous at Toledo of a Lady, Mistress to one of his friends: That
having been forced to absent himself for a Homicide which he had committed,
and not being able to carry her with him, he had left this servant at Toledo,
to see what would become of this Lady during his absence, and to let him know
when it would be expedient to execute the intention which he had to steal her
secretly, and to carry her away with him; so that this servant faithful to his
Master, having discovered, that this Lady was in the company of her true Lover,
who was conducting her to Valence, he had followed them from place to place
disguised, and had got before them the last days journey with diligence, to
advertise his Master thereof, who at the same instant accompanied with him and
another of his friends disguised, and put themselves in ambush in the way, and
with more treason and industry than valor, had surprised these Lovers, and
stolen away the Lady, whom he keeps at this hour in his house. In fine, by
force of flatteries, services, and by diverting her by all the recreations he
could devise, he had not only made her forget her lispleasures, but had
rendered her sensible of his passion.

After this discourse, I remained in the condition of a jealous person, who
has found the cause of his disease, protesting to search all means to revenge
my self. It is long since I have been troubled for this purpose; for although
this passion be violent amongst women, and in me more than any other; yet I
would not make my infirmity publicly known; I desire to redress it. And
communicating my feelings yesterday to Madam Celie, mine aliant, if amity
contracts aliance, she told me of the merits of your person, and amongst
others, your courage and discretion; so that considering all these
circumstances, and also that you are a stranger in this town, and of the
country of Don Jovan, I determined with the counsel of Celie, to to discover
to you the evil which persecutes me, to trust to you with my secrets, and to
demand your assistance to put my spirit to repose. I do not hope it from any
merit of mine own, but from your proper valor, which will not suffer you to
refuse a courtesy to a Lady which never will be ungrateful.

It was not necessary to give so many marks to Fenise, to let him know that
the author of this affront had been before trusted with the secreets of his
Loves. But in dissembling his anger and jealousy, he busied himself in
thinking what art he should use to revenge himself of this perfidious, being
thereunto engaged more by his proper feelings, than by the interests or prayers
of Rufine. Madam, answered he, you have shown so much wit and judgment in the
discourse you have now told me, that in trusting me with your secrets you have
ravished from me my liberty. I can no longer dispose of my will, I am ready to
obey all you please to command; assuring you that I will be the instrument of
your vengeance, and the executer of your desires. I find so much cowardlinesse
and infamy in the soul of Don Iovan, that although he be of noble extraction,
I esteem him no more than an infamous person. It is not the same thing to be
born noble, and to be so, for there are many that are noble, without being
borne so; and also many that degenerate from their nobleness by the unworthy
actions which they commit. Sir, replied Rufine, I esteem my self no longer
unhappy, since that Heaven has now given me so generous a defendor as you are.

But to begin our enterprise, t desire that you should this night know the
house and person. I have already made one of my Cosens become acquainted with
Laure, she shall anon go to visit her, and you with her, if you please,
disguised, and in the quality of her servant to wait upon her. The evil that
I desire to do to this ingrate, by your means is no other then what he has
already done to the Cavalier from whom he has ravished Laure his honor, and
joy all together.

Fenise was then in humor to undertake any thing, nothing seemed difficult
unto him: And remembering himself of the recital which Rufine had made him,
he judged that he was one of the three with his face covered, that had left him
for dead in the mountains of Toledo, as we have told you in the beginning of
this book. He was confirmed in this opinion by that (which Laure had told him)
he had done the night he had slain Felix, which was to go to her chamber under
pretext to warrant her from the danger of Justice; and all this was but adding
oil to the fire of his choler. In fine, the time that Rufine and he desired
with impatience arrived: Narcisse which was her Cosen came at the hour she was
sent for, and going out with Fenise came incontinently to the house of Don
Iovan. Fenise let Narcisse go in, and attended at the door disguised with a
false beard, faigning to be servant to this Gentlewoman, who was courteously
received by Laure, and welcomed by Don Iovan; if not as the cosen of Rufine, at
the least in the quality of the intimate friend of Laure. Fenise was not so
far from the room where they conversed, but that he heard all that they did
and said, in walking; for the door was open. He knew his perfidious friend and
ungrateful Lover, whose repose of spirit he admired, whilst his suffered so
great inquietudes. He represented to himself a thousand things, whose
conclusions were always augmentations to his displeasures. Many times he was
upon the very point to execute his vengeance, so far did his anger transport
him; then he deferred it, expecting a better occasion.

He forgot himself to remarke their disbourses, familiarity and love; he
almost lost his wits in considering the strange change of Laure. At every
moment he saw gestures, or heard such discourses as made him die with despite,
and yet he beheld and hearkened carefully. So the greatest evil of jealous
persons (and what hinders them from finding remedy) is to desire things which
kill them. Every minute seemed to him an age, but as ages have their
beginnings, they have their ends. Narcisse at the end of a little time took
leave, and went out of the room. Laure went out with her to accompany her,
where Fenise had accasion to consider her as well with extreme sorrow to see
her so ungrateful, as to see her so dishonesty abandoned, to the possession of
another, he could not speak; and had it not been for fear of giving
advantage to his enemies he had at that time committed some excess. Don Jouan
would wait upon Narcisse to her house, although she prayed him not to take
that pains, she having a man with her for that purpose, but the courtesy of
the Cavalier prevailed with her. When Fenise saw so near to him the author of
his troubles, he had attempted upon his life, had it not been for the respect
he bore to Narcisse; But Don Jouan having left her at one of her friends houses
where she fained to have business, Fenise followed him, and not far from
thence, overtooke him with his false beard which disguised his voice as well as
his face, for he held it in his teeth by a little stringe of wire; Sir, said
he, faining not to know him, is it not you who is called Don Jouan? yes
answered the traitor, what would you have with me? there is, answered Fenise, a
Lady without the gate of the town in a Coach who desires to communicate to you
a secret of importance, if you will see her: Who is she, said Don Jouan; I dare
not tell you her name, answered Fenise, not being assured that you will take
the pains to go to her: but you need fear nothing, you shall speak to her
alone. I will go upon your word, replied Don Iouan, though it may be another
would make difficulty thereof; saying thus, he lead him to a place a little
distant from the town, when Don Jouan looking on all sides him, and seeing no
body, whether he knew Fenise or no, he asked him where the Lady was, you shall
see her presently answered Fenise. Then Don Iouan drawing his sword and
retiring three paces, told him that before he passed further he would know who
he was. I am content said generously our enraged lover casting away his false
beard, look upon me, I am Fenise, and know, that I have but thus long retarded
to make thee feel the chastisement of thy treason, to bring thee into a place
where there may be no witnesses of the vengeance I am going to take of thy
treachery, for I hope that heaven the revenger of wrongs will assist me in this
action: in saying so he threw away the scabbard of his sword and poinyard, and
put himself into the posture of an active and valiant man; Don Jouan knowing
who he had before him, full of confusion or shame, made him no satisfaction,
but on the contrary told him, that he had long desired this meeting, and that
he was glad to see him in this estate, for to take his life from him
generously; and by his death to enjoy more freely the contentment which he
possessed. He could say no more because Fenise pressed him so quickly, or
rather so mortally, that it behooved him to moove all his members, in stead of
his tongue to defend himself from the furious thrusts which he gave him, being
newly angered with the insolent words of his enemy. But what violence or
address he could use in this action; he presently felt the just punishment of
his treachery: Fenise gave him three wounds, by the which his soul found her
desired issue out of his traitorous body. His conqueror seeing him dead was
sorry for him, for so deplorable a death as that was, would touch the heart of
any generous man. But advising himself, that he ought more to the satisfaction
of the offense then to pity, he determined to do as much to Laure, to the end
to chastise her inconstancy, exterminate her beauty, and to give a new example
to ingratefulls; to this end he threw away his hat and cloak into a pit, and
took those of his enemy, which was of a higher color, and being so covered,
he went to the door of the house of the dead man, where Laure was: he knocked,
one of the servants looked out of a Balconia, and believing that it was Don
Jouan her master descended presently to open him the door, but not finding the
key in the lock she went up again to look it. Whilst Fenise stayed at the
door consulting what he should say and do to his ungrateful and perfidious
Laure, when he heard a great brute of arms at the end of the street; which
made him fear to be interrupted in his design, if they came not presently to
open him the door, because these people being moved advanced toward him, it
happened as he apprehended: the quarrellers killed one of the troop, who
crying for confession made all the rest fly. Yet Fenise had not stirred from
the door, always hoping to enter, but either by the servants too great have
to seek the key, or rather by the good fortune of Laure she could not find it.
The clamours of this dying man near the place where Fenise was, brought
thither incontinently the justice, which obliged him to abandon his place; for
although he was innocent of this murder, he feared to be known the homicide of
Don Jouan, whereof he bore witnesses with him, which were his hat and cloak.
He was so slow in retiring himself that the justice perceived him when he
begun to dislodge, and seeing no suspicious pers on ^eere the dead man but him,
one of the archers, the most disposed, begun to run after him. Fenise
perceiving himself to be pursued, employed all his force to save himself from
the claws of this Arther, but he being more agile then our cavalier, ob^^iged
him to stay after a long course: so that Fenise ^eeing the wilfulness of this
man returned with his sword in his hand to cut his hamstringes to hinder his
course, which this companion seeing and wisely judging that a single man ought
not to press another that was armed but to save himself, returned almost as
fast as he came. At this instant Fenise found himself near a gate of the
town which was yet open because it was not ten a clock. Then he resolved for
many reasons to quitte Valence by the favor of the night, but as he begun to
execute this determination, he heard that they begun to ring the bell; designed
to advertise the officers of Justice of the company, that there was a
malefactor escaped; which was the custom of the country. To avoid being taken,
he crossed the country it may be because he did not know the ways, and went
about two leagues so tired that he was forced to yield to his weariness and
repose himself, in expecting the day. He sat down at the root of a tree, his
body being wearyed with travel and his spirit perplexed with a thousand
troublesome thoughts. But he had scarcely begun to take breath, when in the
midest of the silence of the night, he heard the echoes of the barking of dogs
whose voices beat against a Rock, whereby he knew that these dogs were a good
way from him; which made him judge that there was some house where he might
retire himself. He quitted his tree, went whither the barking of the dogs
guided him, and arrived at the foot of a hill, upon the side whereof he saw a
poor shepherds cabin covered with bows: he entered into it, and found no
body there, but only sheep skin^ which served for a bed to the inhabitants.
The extreme weariness and sleepiness which he had, obliged him to search
some place to repose in, and not finding any more commodious then those skins,
he lay down upon them. The shepherds hosts of this cabin, advertised by the
barking of their dogs, that there was some wolf about their flocks, were
gone out for to chase him, and by reason of their great have had forgotten to
cover their fire: so that presently after Fenise was a sleep, he was awakened
by the sharp stink of a thick smoke, which begun to choke him, the fire
having taken hold of leavy fagotts. He sought an issue to get out of this
danger, and saw himself beseiged on one side with flames, and on the other
barricadoed with great pieces of wood: then he made reflection upon the estate
he was in, and judged that this was to punish the offenses he had committed,
and as he made this pious meditation, and assayed to make his way over these
pieces of wood, the shepherds arrived at their little house, which they found
all on fire, they presently endeavored to quench it. Fenise having perceived
them implored their aid, crying withal his power: these poor rustiques were
greatly astonished to see a man so well clothed in the middle of so fearful a
danger, not knowing how he came thither. In the end employing all their force
and diligence, they got him miraculously out of this little hell without much
hurt, but not without much fear; for as these good people removed the wood to
help him out, they let in air which augmented the flames, wherewith the
unfortunate Cavalier had like to have been devoured. Truly a man may be
esteemed very unhappy, when those that would procure his good do him hurt, and
that the ease they would give him turns into the encreasment of his pains.
Fenise having taken fresh air, thanked his benefactors, and to give some
satisfaction to their curiosity to know how he came into this danger, he
invented an adventure, and told them that he was come from Barcelone to go to
Valence the lie was pardonable, since that in speaking the truth his life was
in danger; (for he feared he was followed) that being a quarter of a League
from this Cabin, wandering betwixt Dog and Wolf, he met with Thieves that had
dismounted him, that being escaped from them he had lost his way, and going he
knew not whither, he had perceived their cabin, and had retired himself
thither, expecting the day. These simple persons believed what he said, and
endeavored to entertain him the best they could: They killed a Kid, and made
him eat with them, afterward they dressed him a lodge with branches to keep
him from the humidity of the night; and thus Fenise expected the Suns return.

As soon as day appeared he would take leave of his hosts, and yet try the
effects of his Fortune, forcing himself to overcome her; for he was resolved
rather to tire her with persecuting him, then to make it known to her, that he
wanted patience to suffer. He then renewed his thanks, and prayed them to show
him the way to Barcelone excusing himself that he was not able to stay longer
with them, because of important affairs which already suffered, by his delay
and ill fortune, which obliged him to return the same way he came. Although
they opposed his desires with their prayers, they could not stay him any longer
in this country place, for he knew well that a village life ought to be
elected for ever, or avoided as soon as could be, for fear of their taking of
some impression of malice, or clownish behavior: Besides, hosts are masters
of the house the first day, friends the second, and enemies the third: In the
beginning they bring joy, in the middle pains, and at the end trouble.

They sent a Shepherd with him to set him in the way he desired, and which he
followed to Moraiedre: He there found a Traveller which came from Valence, of
whom he demanded what news there, who told him, that there was found out of
the town, a dead Cavalier, that the brute went that he had been slain by one
of his friends, and that the Justices sought after him by horse and foot. This
news made him change his course and draw toward Sarragoce, always going out
of the highway, and in the night being favored by the Moons brightness, which
was then toward the Full, about his third nights voyage, being clear and
bright, passing by the side of a Wood, he heard a plaintive voice, which
endeavored to oblige some one to moderate his sury. Fenise judged by the
delicateness of the voice, that it was a woman, which made him advance to
succor her; as he came near the place where she was, her complaints ceased,
and in another tone of voice, more bold, he heard her speak these words; Now
infamous thy blood shall repair the affronts thou have done me. And at the
same time, the voice of a man replied; Ah trayteresse! I never expected less
from thy cruelty, and the vicious life I have led. Our Cavalier was ready to
enter into the thick wood, where he heard them speak, but he was stayed by a
man and a woman that came from thence; she proper and cuririously attired, he
strongly set, and of a valorous resolution, who presented to his head the mouth
of a Pistol; stand said he, return from whence thou cameft, or thou die.

Fenise so surprised and threatened, would not hazard himself, believing that
there was nothing there that did concern him. He stayed, and saw these two
without speaking word take two Mules that were tied to a tree, mount upon them,
and ride fast away from the place where he was, and out of his sight. His
curiosity and valor would not permit him to retire himself without looking
what was become of him, who seemed by his sad words to testify his last
sorrows: He entered by the same place the others came out of, and found a dead
man upon the ground, wallowing in his blood. He was considering this poor man,
and discoursing upon the miseries of this life, when he heard a little noise of
men which approached him, but he had not time to know what they were, for as
soon as they had perceived him, they fell upon him, bound his eyes, and called
him traitor, homicide, and many other injurious names, and lead him tied and
bound into a Village which was near that place. He endeavored to justify his
innocence by reasons, and to buy himself out of their hands by money; but
whatsoever he could say or do, he could not moderate their violence. They put
him laden with irons into a stinking dungeon, and there left him until the
next morning, abandoned to a thousand sad thoughts: The day being come, he that
executed the office of Judge, but yet without judgment, came to interrogate
him, and demand of him the confession of the crime he had committed. He asked
him questions so impertinent, that he could scarcely answer to them, but in
lifting up his eyebrows and shoulders. He knew nothing of what they questioned
him, and the Judge was persuaded, that he who was purely ignorant, was
maliciously vvilfull; so that he was ready to condemn him to death by the
suffrage, as well of those that helped to take him, as by the opinion of him
that gave him advice thereof, when the Inne-keeper of the Village came to tell
him that he believed that the prisoner he was about to condemn was innocent of
the crime he was accused of, and being asked upon what reasons this opinion was
grounded, he thu^ answered; I remember that about eight or ten days agone,
which is about the time you took this prisoner, that the Gentleman with whose
death you accuse him, came to lodge at my house, with a fair woman, who said
they came from Sarragoce; and at the same instant came also another Gentleman
from Castille, whom I lodged in another part of the house, separate from them:
He who accompanied this woman, being gone abroad (a I think) to walk about the
Town, she came out of her chamber, and went to seek the Castillian. (...) who
saw her go without being my self perceived, ^earkened curiously at the door,
to know what she went to do, and I heard her hold him this discourse. Sir,
having seen you arrive at this place, and presently considering your fashion
and actions, I believed that so many advantages of nature could not willingly
meet in a common man, and thereupon imagining that you are a Gentleman, I have
taken the boldness to have recourse to you, to endeavor to save my self from
the extreme peril that threatens me.

Time, which presses me, will not permit me here to recount the strange
misfortunes of my life, nor of what Country I am, it shall suffice me now to
tell you that I am called Eufemie, and that a Cavalier who is here lodged with
me, and now gone abroad, stole me from my house, under promise of Marriage.
After having stayed some time with him, the ardour of his passion died, since
which time he has used me unworthily, and a thousand times witnessed an evil
and unthankful nature, contrary to the faith he had sworn to me. I know not
whither he carries me at this present; but the great love he bore me at the
beginning, is changed into so cruel a hatred, that I do but expect the hour
when he shall take away my life, when he shall find a place commodious for
that purpose, as I may conjecture by his fearful threatenings, and his
speeches, which have been reported to me; so that fearing that his hatred and
fury may transport him, I cast my self at your feet, humbly beseeching you to
take me into your protection, since that it seems that Heaven has miraculously
brought you hither for this action of piety. This Lady spoke these words after
so sweet a manner, that they were able to move compassion in the most barbarous
soul; for my part, I was sensibly touched therewith. As soon as she had made
known her intentions to this Cavalier, he promised to serve her in all things
she should think him worthy; then they spoke softly together; I believing it
was because I had stirred the latch of the door in approaching to hearken, I
retired my self for fear of being surprised in so ill an action as to pry
after the secrets of others, and she came out presently after to attend the
return of her dangerous conductor. As soon as he came in, I took notice of his
behavior, and saw that with a fierce look he told this young Lady that he
would be gone before Sunset, as he was. Scarcely were they out of my house,
when the Gentleman to whom the Lady had spoken, and who had promised her
assistance, followed them. And I fearing some unhappy accident, sent one of my
servants after them to know which way they went, to the end to give you notice
thereof to follow their steps, and prevent the evil that threatened so many
people. This boy did as I had appointed him; but when he saw appearances so
conformable to what I had heard, as he came to tell me what he had done, he met
an Archer, to whom he told it. He going to seek his companions to take them
along with him, came too late, the murder was committed; so that they have
brought to you this unhappy prisoner, which I hold for innocent, for he was
none of the company of those that lodged at my house. I durst not speak of what
I have now told you, for fear I might thereby get some displeasure; but seeing
the danger that threatens a man whom I presume not culpable, I had rather
hazard my repose, then see him suffer without deserving it. The Judge his Son
came in upon this discourse, who confirmed what the Inne-keeper had said,
assuring that he had newly met upon the way of tortosa a man and a woman
mounted upon Mules, with all the tokens and marks the Innekeeper had spoken of.

The Judge informed of these circumstances, went to see the prisoner, whom he
found less sorrowful then he left him, for delay made him hope the verity of
his innocence would be discovered; he spoke to him with a countenance less
severe then before, exhorting him, not as Superior, but friend, to declare to
him how he came near the dead corpse in the wood, to the end he might help him
to justify himself.

Fenise, who then saw the Judge more reasonable then when he was brought before
him, satisfied him with reasons so accompanied with truth and likelihood; that
the Judge found them conformable to the relation of his Son, and the
Innekeeper, he determined to set him at liberty; but how innocent soever he was
found, he could not get out without leaving the blood of his purse. The talents
of Pregnotories, Sergeants, and Gaolers, are too sharp, not to scratch a man,
and it is a great grace when he escapes without being torn in pieces.

Our Cavalier seeing himself at liberty, resolved to go into Italy, and quit
his Country Spain, since that she used him as a Stepmother, to try if in
changing the Land, he should not also change his fortune.

For this purpose he took the way to Barclone, where he arrived without any
other disgrace, but to suffer much by necessity upon the way, because of the
great charges he had been at to purchase his innocence. He could well have
found friends in this great Town who would have supplied his necessities, but
he feared to be known; so that he chose rather to suffer amongst strangers,
then to be beholding to his Countrymen. Then a Ship made sail toward that
Country, he put himself in the service of an Italian Lord, near whom his good
behavior and wit had got him an access free enough. He imbarqued himself, and
arrived happily at the Port of Gennes, and from thence to Naples, where was the
abode and family of this Italian. This Cavalier had found so great merit in
Fenise, that he loved passionately his conversation, one should never see him
but with this Spaniard by his side, so that he did not treat him as a servant,
but, as a friend. Ricard, so was this Lord called, had an urgent affair, which
obliged him to go by night to seek the Viceroy of Naples, to confer thereof
with him, because it was a business of State. He took Fenise with him to serve
him for companion and safeguard. He entered into the lodgings of the Viceroy,
and in the interim Fenise walked in the great and spacious rooms of the
palace, in expecting his Master: And as curiosity is the daughter of
idleness, Fenise not knowing how to pass the time, was descended into the
Court of the Castle, and approaching to a little door, where he heard a noise
of men's voices: he listened, and knew incontinent that this was the lodging of
the slaves of the Viceroy, Turks and Barbarians, which spoke their natural
Language, believing that no body heard them, because they judged that all was
in bed, or that they knew not their langnage. But Fenise who knew it perfectly
well, having learned it of his fathers slave, as we have said, heard that they
had conspired against the life of the Viceroy, and the most resolute of the
Troop spoke thus to his companions. What my friends, shall we yet defer the
execution of our vengeance? Have we lost our courages in losing our liberty?
Shall we be willing to die, without selling our lives to those that would have
them? You know well the resolution I have taken, to have reason of the
Viceroy, whose people have killed my brother, and drowned my wife and ship,
and for this effect, I have suffered my self to be made a captive to my
enemies, to the end to find that in Peace which I could not in War, by
reason of my want of power; you know also how willingly you offered your selves
to accompany me in this design, without being forced thereunto by persuasions.
This being, if I suffered my self to be taken alive; and you come with me for
this intention, to what purpose serve so many delays, but to certify our
cowardlynesse? For my part, I know I must dye, but I shall expire contented, in
seeing my self satisfied? Courage then my dear friends, animate your just fury
in exciting your cruelty; and since that our liberty is engaged for the end of
this action, let us enterprise it boldly, if we perish therein, at the least it
will be with much honor. Then all the Troop renewed their oaths of
fiderlitie, protesting to enterprise valiantly all that he should ordain; and
under this assurance he proceeded. I shall find an invention, said he, to hide
my self to morrow in the Antichamber of the Viceroy, and you, when all shall
be in the greatest silence, shall come and make a noise in the Hall, for to
let me know when you are there. At the same instant you shall endeavor to
amuse the Guards, whilst one of you open me the door with this double Key; for
when I shall hear you, I will fall upon his person, and take away his life in a
moment; then I will come to find you, and we will attempt together to force
the door to get out; for though we should dye there, we had better end so than
otherwise. All his disciples answered, that they would assist him in all
things, and that the recompense of the peril they were to hazard themselves
in, consisted in his satisfaction. Thereupon they held their peace, and Fenise
considering this bloody conspiration, judged that he ought to prevent the
effect thereof, and that he was obliged to advertise the Lord against whom it
was made thereof, esteeming it was rather the providence of heaven which had
conducted him to the slaves door, then his curiosity. Without staying the
coming of the Italian Lord his Master from entertaining the Viceroy, he went
to the entry of the chamber, and made him be called, and succinctly instructed
him with the furious design of the Infidels. The Cavalier entered again into
the Vice-Royes chamber, and led Fenise with him, that he might hear him, and
might look for present remedy for the danger that threatened him. At the
beginning he doubted of the truth of this relation; but seeing that Ricard
assured him of the honor and honesty of the author, he thanked him for his
advertisement. Fenise, who had a subtle wit, made the Viceroy yet more
beholden to him, teaching him an industry how to make these slaves feel the
effect of the evil they had plotted. Sir, said he, your Excellency shall
command that they bring you a criminal that has deserved death, the which
shall be armed to the neck in a coat of Maile, and put on one of your rich
Sui^^s upon it, he shall be hazarded to the proof of my words, he shall be put
into your chamber, and there left alone, where they say you often stay
slumbering after meat: But to the end that this criminal may the better
represent your person, it will be good to let him know, that he is so
accomodated to intrappe a slave, that would attempt against your life, assuring
him that you will pardon him. This being done, occasion must be given to the
slave who seemed to be the head, die most disposed, and the strongest of the
conspiratours (as far as I have been able to observe by the cranny of the
door) to hide himself where he will: Your Excellency shall in the interim be
safe, and your guard shall be ready to fall, as well upon the executors of this
detestable project, as upon the the accomplices, to the end that none of them may
escape. So you shall triumph over these Bloodsuckers, and thank God for having
preserved you, by my intermission; for the which I thank him of my part, and
esteem my self most happy.

The next morning all was executed as it had been propounded; the grooms of
the chamber, and other servants of the Viceroy, went and came into the chamber
where the criminal was disguised, with the same respect as if it had been
their Master: having left them all alone, and he faigning to be asleep, the
slave that was hidden came softly, and holding his breath for fear of being
heard, fell upon the criminal, and gave him five or six blows with a knife
upon the belly^ (seeing him in habits Royal) but without offending him,
because his coat of Maile guarded him: At the cries of the criminal, the
Gaurds of the Viceroy came running; but as they presented the points of their
Partisans to this slave to stay him; he seeing he was not succored by his
companions, thinking he had killed the Viceroy, he gave himself three stabs
into his left side, whereof he died, before he could be carried out of the
chamber, which he had stained with his infamous blood.

The Viceroy beheld this spectacle with horror, being greatly astonished
therewith. He embraced Fenise, and prayed him to take such part with him as he
pleased, to the end that when time and occasion should be presented he might
testify unto him, how much he esteemed his service he had rendered him. Ricard
counseled him to accept the Viceroy's offer, assuring him that he was a
magnanimous seigneur who knew well how to acknowledge the merits of brave men;
and Fenise not being willing to neglect his good will,, determined to stay
there, and expect what it would please fortune to do with him. In succession
of time his capacity got him so familiar an access to the Viceroy, that he
had no affair which the other had not particular knowledge of: so that he
consulted with him of all things of importance. In the end to satisfy in some
sort the obligation he had to him, he made him governor of the town of Tarente

Fenise seeing himself honored with this charge, made excuses of his
insufficiency; yet he accepted it, for fear of offending the judgment of the
Seigneur which had made choice of his prudence and fidelity. He departed by the
commandment of the Viceroy to take possession of this administration in which
he made appear, that he perfectly understood politic things, to the great
contentment of the honorable men of the town, and glory of him that had
installed him in this Government. He was accustomed to go out almost every
night, accompanied only with two men, of whose valor and fidelity he was
assured, to the end to observe and chastise the lurkers, to whom the obscurity
seemed to give license; one night entering into a street, making his ordinary
round, he heard a door shut a far off, and advancing that way, he perceived by
a house side, a representation of some thing which he could not discern by
reason of the night, he approached with his company, and saw that it was a
woman, almost all covered, with a great and rich loose garment, which hid her
face: they would have discovered it but me resisted; and for to oblige her
thereunto without violence, they told her that it was the governor of the
town that commanded her: then this unknown person drew out a pistol and
presented it to the head of Fenise in drawing the tricker, but by good fortune
for the Governor it went not off, at the same instant this woman let fall her
pistol and trading up her garment turned her legs into wings and fled almost
as fast as a bird could do; one of these two men that accompanied Fenise ran
after her, and the other conducted this too vigilant governor to his house;
from thence he went to seek the officers of Justice, to break open this house
and know who was therein lodged, to discover from whence came this attempt.
They found there two women, the one fair and young, the other hideous and old,
whom they took prisoners: this being done they followed him that was gone
after her that would have killed the governor, wherein they used such
diligence, that they led her with the others; as they beheld her more curiously
With a candle, they knew that it was a man disguised like a woman, they left
him there putting irons upon him, until the next day. The day being come,
Fenise was advertised of what had been done by his commandment, and knowing
that the person that would have killed him was a man, he was extremely
astonished. He went into the prison and made him be brought before him. It was
a man of a good countenance and habited after the Spanish fashion. Fenise
having beheld him, remembered himselse, that he had before seen him, but it was
a confused knowledge before he had asked him any question, the prisoner prayed
him to be pleased that the company might withdraw, that he would tell him a
business of importance, and which merited to be kept secret.

The assistants being retired, Fenise asked him what subject he had to attempt
against his life, what he was, and if that he bad heretofore seen him in
Spain. For your first demand answered the prisoner you may already be
informed, that I had noe design against your person; besides upon another
occasion I have served you as a defendor, in a dangerous encounter. I am called
Marcell that friend to Leonard which you found near to Valence, and with whom
you fought to the great hazard of your life. But to inform you the better of
what you ought to know and what will serve to justify me; I am obliged to make
you a relation, if you please to give me audience, Fenise having let him know
that he would willingly hear him, he thus continued.

THE HISTORY OF THE TRAGIQVE LOVES OF MARCEL.
IT this day just a year since I left my country and five since I knew the
cause of my travels, in a woman more fair then rich, and more noble then wise.
It was upon the sea shore near Valence, where I first saw this beauty, and
where I became her slave. You shall dispense with me for telling you the means
I used to win her, for fear of troubling you, and also because there is
nothing rare therein, because I found no great difficulty. At the first she
affected me, because I gave her presents; for it is long ago since liberality
has been the mother of love: she also would have given me all that she had;
but I would never receive any thing but the recompense which my love merited.
During the space of four years we had two children; but as all things in
this world tire us in the end, yea vices themselves, I grew weary of her
company, which distaste had more power over me then the pricks of my conscience.
I resolved to separate my self from her impure and lascivious conversation, and
for reasons seemed to me very just, I attempted to persuade her to consent to
this design: but she thereupon grew in choler, and answered me, that I should
take heed what I did, and never hereafter hold her such discourse, for if I
passed further, she would use such extremities as should extremely scandalize
all that should be spectators thereof, yea, and those that should but hear
them recounted. Oh if all the World could but hear the success of this
History, they would find by experience in my person, how dangerous it is to
persevere in unlawful affections, and know to what excesses a woman corrupted
does abandon her self. I made no great matter of her threatenings, believing
that in time she would be appeased, and agree to my propositions, so that I
quit her from that time; but as I fled her, she followed me, yet she lost her
pains. The ablest woman finds her self a fool when she is once hated, and
reduced to sue to a man; the more she travails, the less she profits; the more
she loves, the less she is beloved; the more she testifies her passion, the
less she obliges, and it may be renders her self more odious. Seeing then my
neglects, or rather my disdaines, and the little power her love had over me,
she invented the most horrible cruelty that is possible for a humane heart to
commit. She entreated me by a Letter to come see her at the least once, that
she might resolve with more patience upon our divorce: I thought that I should
have been too rigorous to have denied her this contentment; so that to satisfy
her, I went one night to her, accompanied with two of my friends, who stayed
for me at the door; I found her all alone in her chamber, with a look very
desolate; she commanded her servant to retire, then she made me a studied
discourse, where Art and Eloquence were so ingeniously joined, that it would
have shaken a constancy weaker then mine. In the end feeing that her endeavors
were too weak, she arose up and bad me good night; at the same time I took
leave of her, and went down from her chamber; I was scarcely in the Court, when
she appeared at the window of another chamber, and calling to me, set a torch
in the window, holding a poniard in one hand, and in the other one of the
children I had by her, to the which she gave two stabs in the breast, and cast
it at my feet upon the pavement. And as I begun to cry out, full of horror and
amazement, seeing the action of this Fury, she took the other child and served
it as she had done the first, saying that she would not keep the images of a
faithless and ungrateful person. Alas! the cruel Tygresse had enticed them
to her house by subtilty for this tragic end. I was at the charge to have them
brought up in another place: I ran into the chamber again with my sword in my
hand, but I found that she had shut the door. I set upon it to break it, and
thereupon appeared an unknown man in arms, which she had hidden for to murder
me; but at the noise we made, my friends came running in with a torch, and he
seeing them approach, leapt out of a Balconia into the street for to save
himself; my friends went down to follow him, and at the instant this imaged
woman, all bloody, holding her poniard in her hand, who thinking that I was
taken by her catch-pole, came to serve him as Second, and plunge her dagger in
my heart if she had been able; but my fury prevented her rage, and caused me to
give her two great blows with my sword, wherewith I cast her to the ground,
where she immediately died. This being done, I went after my friends, and found
that they had catched and mortally wounded their man, who demanded for
confession: In approaching to them, I saw him fall to the ground, and at the
same time we perceived another, who knocked at a door, which obliged us to a
sudden retreat, and the next day to leave the Town. At these words Fenise made
reflection, and acknowledged that there are few murderers which are presently
discovered; for he remembered himself that these were they that had fled for
killing the man that fell dead before the door of Laure, when he knocked for to
enter there the night that he had revenged himself of his treacherous friends
Don Jouan.

These follies were the cause that I left my Country continued Marcell. I took
the way to Barcelone, where I stayed six months; from thence I came into this
Realm of Naples, in a vessel full of men belonging to the Viceroy. Two days
after my imbarkment, I perceived a woman in this company, fair in perfection:
I informed my self who she was, and I was told that one of the principal
Gentlemen of the Viceroy conducted her, which obliged me to retain my self,
and hindered me from suing to her, for she begun to move my desires. We arrived
happily at Naples, where this Gentleman hired a house, and then I begun to
court her. During this time, she sent one night to seek me, and told me that I
could hope nothing from her if I did not carry her out of Naples; that she
would choose no place, but that I should carry her whither I would.

This proportion joined to some other marks made me judge that she was of a
changeable humor; but forasmuch as my love regarded nothing but to be
satisfied, I disposed my self to obey her in what she would wish; I stole her
from Naples the same night that she had spoken to me thereof, and in all the
Towns we passed I found none so fair as she: I hired a house, and furnished it
with all things necessary for a Family; but whatsoever familiarity I had with
her, I could not possibly obtain the last satisfaction of my desires, she put
me off from day to day, and when I thought I was arrived at the term, she found
inventions to prolong it anew, yet without making my passion exceed the limits
of respect. It happened at that time that the Viceroy gave you the charge of
Governor of this Town, which you execute so worthily, to his honor, and your
own glory, and the general satisfaction of all the people; and Laure having
known your arrival, and seen your person, (so this charming beauty is called)
she told me, that if I would do her a signal service, and oblige her to accord
to me the accomplishment of my desires, I must take away your life, telling me
that she mortally hated you, because you had slain one of her Brothers, and
that she should never be at rest until she was revenged of you; this was
without doubt the cause that moved her to leave Naples, having known that you
was there. But I, who have always had a certain inclination to honor you,
both seeing on one side that she would not consent to my wishes if I did not
execute what she had ordained me, and also on the other side, that I could not
enterprise nor commit so extreme a cowardice against your person, which I
perfectly esteem and affect, we thus made our complot. That I should use all
possible diligence to accomplish her revenge, until I could discharge a
pistol upon you, and although you should not dye thereby, she should accord
unto me what I demanded, since that I had done my duty to execute her will. She
accepted this bargain upon condition that she might see the pistol discharged,
which was easy for her to do, since that you passed very often by her street
and windows: our treaty being thus concluded, I disguised my self in a woman's
garment, and she saw me in her presence charge my pistol with two good
bullets, but in expecting you I drew out the two bullets, to the end that if it
had taken fire, you might have received no damage, those that took up the
pistol can verify what I say. Seeing you enter into the street, I gave a
certain sign to give her advice thereof; at the instant I heard her open her
window to see this tragic action, which she hoped for, and wherein she was
deceived, since that it passed as you know. If this stratagem merit punishment,
having been invented to enjoy a beauty passionately beloved, I deserve to be
chastised with such punishment as you shall please to ordain, and therefore
dispose of me as you please.

Since Fenise had heard the name of Laure, his Spirit was in perpetual
perplexity, knowing the extreme wickedness of this woman, whom he had dearly
loved, and resolving to revenge himself of her; to the purpose he praised the
invention wherewith Marcel had abused her to save his life. He embraced him,
and thanked him for the affection he had testified to him, and which he had
rendered him in an occasion so dangerous, and in the same time he commanded that
his irons should be taken away, saying that since there was none offended but
himself, he would pardon himself withal his heart.

In the interim Laure who saw her self fallen into Fenise his hands, would have
enterprised a thousand times to have destroyed her self by poison, steel, or
cord, if the old woman that was with her had not hindered her, telling her that
she should net despair, and that the evil could not be so great as she could
not remedy. Fenise on the other side beat his brains how to invent how he
might revenge himself of this cruel without noise. He would not see her in
her prison, for fear the violence of his anger should cause him to commit some
public excess: a thing extreme ill in a governor and magistrate: but he
resolved to convey her into some place where without witnesses he might examine
her, and make her give account of her life. The better to accomplish his
design, he delivered the old woman that accompanied her who seeing her self at
liberty, gave new hopes to Laure to solicit and and obtain her deliverance at
what price so ever it should be. After having tried all means possible, and
seeing she advanced nothing, she addressed her self to a Magician, from whom
she got a writing and a ring which she brought her assuring her, that if she
took it from her finger when she found her self in any danger in speaking
words contained in that paper which she gave her, she should surmount it. That
she should not at all be afraid of what should be presented before her, that
she should be assisted with succors more then humane, which should overcome
the force of her adversary.

Fenise impatient to execute his revengfull project, made ingeniously to be
reported amongst those that knew of the imprisonment of Laure; that having
found her innocent by the depositions of the delivered prisoner and Alcinoe her
companion, he would also oblige her with the same favor. For this effect he
sent for her one night by a man he confided in, who told her that he had charge
from the governor to conduct her to a town four leagues from Tarente, where
he was to leave her. She trusting in the charms which Alcinoe had given her,
presently resolved to go with this man. He set her upon his horse behind him,
and by night carried her to a Rendez-vouse where Fenise was to meet him as he
did, being there he commanded the conductor of Laure to leave him, and to
return to Tarente. Laure seeing her self thus abused; and abandoned to the
mercy of Fenise, whom the passion of vengeance furiously inflamed, began to
take off her enchanted ring, and speak the words which were given her. Upon
the instant before that Fenise could speak any word, he saw himself environed
with a whirlewinde and dust so thick that he could see nothing about him;
presently he imagined that there was some magique in this accident: he armed
himself with the sign of a christian, and incontinent, this obscurity was
changed into lightness; which nevertheless frighted him more then the
darkness, for he saw himself environed with fire, whose flames seemed to
mount unto the clouds, and although he was in so terrible a danger he did not
forbear to look about where Laure was, but the he saw her no more, not
knowing whether the flames had devoured her, or some devil had carried her
away in the whirlewinde and dust. In fine having stayed some time to consider
this prodigious vision, from whence he knew not how to escape, he he heard a
fearful thunder in the air, and at the same instant the fire went out, and
he found himself all alone without having suffered any hurt, but that of
fear; heaven grew clear and the moon very bright, which gave him means to
find his horse, he came on, he got on horse back and returned to Tarente, his
mind filled with a thousand confusions, as well with what he had seen, as the
doubt he was in that the devils had carried away Laure, to chastise her
themselves, or if they were so much her friends, that they had ravished her to
defend her from the effects of his vengeance. Being arrived at his house, he
sent for Marcel, and told him all that had passed, whereupon they discoursed
together some time; without being able to judge any thing certainly.

At that time Marcel took leave of Fenise, with a thousand fair complements
and as many protestations of amity made of one side and of the other. He
returned to Naples, and Fenise stayed yet a year in his government. Then he
received a letter from the Viceroy which obliged him to go presently to him;
and at his arrival he gave him a packet which he had received from Don
Ambrosio his father, who finding himself old and feeble desired to see him yet
once before he left this world. The Viceroy approving this paternall feeling
and seeing the good nature of Fenise who was very willing to obey his father,
permitted him to go for Spain upon condition he would return as soon as he
could possible; promising also of his part to render him at his return more
signal testimonies of the esteem he made of his merit. With this civil leave
Fenise left Naples and went toward Rome, the town he desired to see before he
returned into his country, judging that he might be accused of little
curiosity to have left Italy, without seeing so marvailous a City.

From thence he went to Florence; and continuing his voyage, he arrived at the
foot of the Alps, where night took him far from the place where he hoped to
have lodged. And whether it was he knew not the way, or that Fortune would yet
play with him, he lost himself, if one may call that a loss, which caused him
to obtain the greatest treasure his spirit could have knowledge of. Besides
the coming on of the night, he was accompanied with a violent tempest of
thunder and lightning (which made him remember that wherein he was when he had
design to be revenged of Laure.) After which heaven poured down such torrents
of rain, which gliding down the Mountains, threatened our adventerour to
force him into the precipices. In the end, after having suffered much pain and
apprehension, he saw himself (by the light of a flash of lightning) near the
mouth of a deep caverne; he approached it, yet fearing by saving himself from
one danger, to cast himself into a greater, imagining that this place under
ground, was the retreat of some Bears or Lions; he had no intention to enter
therein, but only so far as to guard himself from the rain that fell from
the clouds: but he had scarcely begun to stay and take breath, when he
perceived a light within the cave. Diverse thoughts came into his mind,
believing that he was fallen into the hands of some Brigands, and after having
consulted a little what he ought to do, he resolved to try his fortune in
this occasion; he called two or three times, but there was nothing but the
echo of his voice which answered him. Then animating his resolution, he tied
his horse to a bush, and approaching to the light, he saw extended upon the
ground a humane person, having a face yellow, lean, and wasted; in brief, so
hideous, that she seemed to be death it self. Her body was covered with a coat
of haire-cloth, rude, and pricking, her hair was yellow, and so long, that it
was able to cover her whole body; her hands dry, and without flesh, being
crossed upon her breast, embracing a Cross of a mean greatness, which leaned
upon her mouth: finally, all her body was an original of death, and a lively
image of a sharp penance. Our Cavalier beheld this body with a great deal of
pity, and a great desire to have a more clear knowledge thereof. When Aurora
begun to lend him her feeble light, the better to distinguish the particulars
of this strange solitude, or rather this living Sepulcher, he saw upon a seat
of the Rock, a bloody discipline, and a larum bell, under which were written
these words, Remember thy end; near the Lamp, from whence proceeded the light
he had seen, was a Crucifix, accompanied with the images of the Virgin, and
Saint John the well-beloved Disciple, where these Letters were engraven, T. I.
T. B. O. A. P. W. I. D. T. R. A. Fenise would have given them diverse
interpretations, but he could not find one that would come near the
signification of what he saw. After he had a long time contemplated these sad
objects, not daring to touch the body, for fear of profaning it. He judged
that since there was fire maintained by oil, there must needs be some one
about this cave, that had care to furnish, and entertain it with that element.
He went out for to satisfy this desire, but he was scarcely out of the den,
when the mouth thereof was suddenly shut by a great piece of stone which
seemed to be miraculously fallen from the Rock for that purpose, as he went by
little and little from this cave, by the same paces he came which were printed
in the slimy earth, he perceived (the day being then begun) a man of so
strange a form, that he had doubted what creature he was, if his motion had
not given him a more particular knowledge, having approached him, he saw an old
man, tall, his hair white, and very long, his face lean, his beard reached
unto his girdle, a patched coat that covered his body unto his knees, holding
a Rozaire in one hand, and a little book in the other. Fenise called him, he
lifted up his eyes (for yet he had not seen him) and stayed, astonished to see
another man then himself, yet he was not froward nor fled, but approached
softly to Fenise, and informed himself by what adventure he was come into a
place so far from the highwayes, then he carried him into his Cell made
betwixt two Rocks, the door whereof was so little, that with great
difficulty could a man enter therein, without going upon his knees, there was
a window made by nature, by which he had so much light as was necessary,
although he enjoyed almost none thereof; he made him sit down upon his bed,
which was a long stone made like a Tomb, and after many discourses, this good
penitent to satisfy the desires of the Cavalier recited unto him this
prodigious history.

THE HISTORY OF SOLITARY SIMEON.
ABout threescore years ago, I was borne in the City of Capoue, issued of
rich Parents, and at the same time a Magistrate of the town of Luques had a
son so like me, as if nature had formed us in the same mould, his face, hair,
voice, proportion, and gesture, did so much resemble mine, or mine so parallel
his, that it was wonderful. In receiving Baptism, I was called Charles, and
my parallel Albert; we grew up during our tender age in equality of manners,
and also of constellations, which disposed of our persons in such sort, that
having attained the age of twenty years, we met at Venice, where we grew
acquainted one with another, or rather with our selves. From this perfect
resemblance, grew a strict amity, which was never broken, we dwelt together,
we had but one table, and one bed.

After a little time, there happened an affliction to me, which obliged me to
absent my self, my mother dyed in the middle of her youth, and quit this sad
habitation to go to heaven; I may so presume from her virtues and beauty; for
there is no commendation so proper to express her worth, as to say she was
fair, and also virtuous. Albert left Venice with me, and went to Luques. We
conserved our affections by the means of Letters, which are the sweetest
entertaines of absent friends; but we were not absent one from another; for
Albert never looked in his glass, nor I in mine, that he saw not me, and I
likewise him. I was twenty two years old, when my Father followed my Mother,
leaving me his benediction for heritage, with some small temporal goods which
he possessed; he charged me with the fear of God, Charity toward the poor,
and fidelity to my friends, and principally toward Albert, and gave up the
ghost, in giving me this wholesome counsel; he was laid in the Sepulcher of
his ancient predecessors: I succeeded him in his possessions, which I enjoyed
not long in quiet, the malice and envy of some of my kindred, so rigorously
persecuted me, that I was forced to spend the greatest part of my goods in
suites and pettifoggings, until I was forced to leave my country. I left it to
seek repose elsewhere, and being followed with ten men, which I treated as my
friends, I went toward Luques, where I thought to find my dear Albert, but
he was gone to comfort me, having heard of the death of my father. This
testimony of his affection made me swear not to return into my country
until I had found him, to give him thanks, and renew our sored vows. He did
the same having learned that I was gone to seek him; for it seemed our souls
had consulted their designs together. In execution of this project, I visited
many towns, where amongst others, I met with one of the ancient friends of my
father, who having courteously received me, and kept me a long time at his
house, he gave me his only daughter in marriage called Lesbie, with a great
portion. A year and a half after I had married her, I was told that Albert
was in France, in the Province now called Gascoigne, and that one might hear
of him at Bourdeaux, or at Toulouse: This news awakened the design and desire
I had to see him. I departed, accompanied with the same men that came with me
from Capoue, and as we approached near Toulouse, we met in a spacious field,
near to the side of a wood, a little troop of men of equal number to ours,
they stayed as soon as they had perceived us; we believing they were thieves,
whereof this country was full, and they having the same opinion of us; our
ignorance made us betake our selves to our arms, and came to the shock one
against another, where there had been a bloody encounter, if Gob had not put
himself into the middle. The greatest part of us, as well of the one side as
of the other, had upon our heads (as they then commonly wore in France, and
wherewith they serve themselves to this day) Bocquincans or Tapabors, which
covers the most part of the face, so that we being mingled together, we could
scarcely know one another: then fearing some great disorder amongst my men, I
discovered my face, and put my Tapabor upon my shoulders and under my chinne,
to be the better known to my friends, and immediately one of my adversaries
came to me in a respectfull manner, Seigneur Albert, said he, it would be well
for you to give the sign of retreat, that our party may separate themselves
from our enemies, and that we may discern them, we shall be thereby the
stronger. At the same time he heard the sign given whereof he spoke, and
seeing that I was not Albert, as he believed, and that his companions being
reunited, came to set upon us again, he turned himself toward them, being
already cenfused; What do you mean by this Gentlemen, said he, are you mad or
blind, that you will needs offend our Chief? Do you not see Seigneur Albert?
At that name they all stayed, and I having heard him name Albert twice, I cried
out, peace, peace, friends, friends. Thereupon Albert, who heard my voice,
abandoned his Tapabor, and his Sword, and came to cast himself about my neck,
and I knowing him, we remained so fast locked together, that there had like to
have come mischief thereby; for our horses who did not know one the other,
began to rage one against the other, but our friends prevented it; for our
joys were so excessive, that we took no heed thereof, we lighted and
entertained one another alone, with our most particular secrets; afterward
with extreme joy of both fides, we entered into Toulouse. I made a little stay
with him, but the affection I bore to my wife obliged me to leave him, with
promise to see him again very shortly. Albert habited himself afer the French
fashion, to testify the esteem he had of that nation, which gave him access
into the house of a great Lord of that Realm, which bore the title of a Duke,
and who ordinarily dwelt at Toulouse, the eminent qualities of Albert, who was
expert in all exercises fit for a Gentleman, besides his wit and sweet
disposition (which made him welcome into all companies whatsoever) got so great
familiarity with this Duke, that after he knew his wit, he would have him
always in his company, and at his table. He had a daughter perfectly fair, as
well of body as mind: And as the conversation with Ladies is much more free in
France then in Italy, Albert had the honor to be often in her company with
other companions, where they reciprocally knew one another merits, in such
manner that within a little time they thought well one of another. Albert was
willing to take the occasion which seemed to invite him to a good fortune, he
begun to court this young Lady, and testify to her that he had vowed his
liberty to her service, sometimes by Letters, sometimes by verses, which he
recited in singing and playing upon the Lute in the very presence of her
Father; for amongst the other fair parts wherewith he was accomplished, he
possessed these two graces from the Muses of Poetry and Music, to which I also
took pleasure to addict my self, to the end that our likeness might be the
more perfect. In the end he explicated himself so intelligibly, and played his
part so well, that he insinuated himself into her favor, so far as she
permitted him one night to come see her in her chamber. A great impudence in a
Maid of such condition, which ought to be so much the more careful to keep her
self having more to lose then one of less quality; but there is no retinue nor
limits to a woman that suffers her self to be blinded with that foolish
passion. There was in this Dukes Court a certain Gasconian Cavalier, called
Arnalt, which had obtained Alberts affection, and the place of confident which
he before had, and knew so well how to play his part, that he got out of
Alberts heart all his secrets, whose freedom presumed he would never betray
him; but it happened to him as it does ordinarily to those who discover
themselves too freely unto others whom they have not proved. Albert did not only
content himself to declare unto him his affections, but he made use of him as a
Scout, when he went to receive the greatest favors from Matilda (so was the
Dukes daughter called) thus was he punished by this confident, so injudiciously
chosen. This perfidious friend, envious of Alberts contentment, excited by the
inclination he had to do mischief, and to publish the secrets which were
revealed unto him, being one day near the Duke, who praised the merits of
Albert, audaciously interrupted him, saying, that he was sorry his bounty
should be so abused by a treacherous stranger, which violated the honor of his
Lineage, and who by his pernicious cunning had abused his daughter Matilda. The
Duke, who held Albert for a virtuous Gentleman, and his daughter to be too wise
and retained to fall into such an inconvenience, and on the other side
considering Arnalts reputation, from whom every one fled as from a wicked
spirit, told him he was rash and insolent, to use such impudent language;
thereupon Albert arrived, to whom the Duke told this prodigious accusation of
Arnalt, wherewith he was extremely surprised. Yet without testifying
exteriourly the motion of his heart, he answered to the Duke, that he should
think he did wrong to the esteem and honor which he had testified to him, if
he should go about to excuse the crime wherewith this traitor accused him, but
that if he pleased to permit him to have satisfaction from him, his innocence
should be known, to the confusion of his accuser. The Duke seeing Albert speak
with so much resolution, answered him, that he never believed it, and that the
offense was his: But that since he took part in the injury, and would take
vengeance for it, he praised his generosity, and granted him the combat for
the next day. Immediately after that Albert had obtained this permission, and
that he was retired to prepare himself for the duel, I arrived at Toulouse,
and sent to let him know thereof; he came to me, and after our reciprocal
embracements, he told me the trouble wherein traitor Arnalt had engaged him,
and that he did a little doubt of the success, not for want of valor, but
because the truth was not of his side, so he was to fight against double arms.
Having heard all these circumstances, my heart was seized with extreme
sadness, considering that his sensuality had caused him to stain the House of
this Seignior with so great infamy. I would willingly have shown him his fault,
but when things are passed, they are without remedy. In conclusion, after
having long time reasoned and consulted together, I found no course so
expedient as that I should undertake the combat for him, and convert the
verity which Arnalt maintained into a lie, justifying that I had never violated
the honor of Matilda, and that by force of Arms. But Albert too courageous,
and who felt his conscience charged with this crime, would never permit me to
expose my life for his expiation: We contested some time thereupon, but seeing
that I could not make him condescend to my proposition, I bethought my self of
another course, and counseled him to persuade his enemy to take a second; but
he answered me as he had before done, that he would not engage others innocence
with his sin, that he was resolved to hazard his fortune alone; that he would
put himself in good state before he entered the Lists, and would ask God pardon
for his crime; and if it pleased him to give him the Victory over the traitor,
in whom he had too lightly confided, he would content himself in making him ask
his life; and at the worst of the ill chance fell upon him, he hoped that his
blood would wash away his iniquity, and that he should dye with extreme
repentance for having don so infamous an injury to a Seigneur that dearly loved
him, and to whom he was so beholding. In saying this, he left me, and went to
the place assigned, with tears in mine eyes, and sorrow in my heart, seeing him
go to maintain so ill a quarrel. Two hours after I heard the public rumor
of the success of this combat, where I learned that the two enemies had no
advantage the one over the other, since that either of them had by his death
received the just punishment of his offense; Arnalt of his treason, and Albert
for violating the virginity of Matilda; they pierced one an others bodies with
their lances, and fell upon the place, where they expired almost at the same
instant to the great astonishment of the spectators. You may better imagine the
displeasure which seized my heart, then I can represent it unto you by words, I
will only tell you that I was so sensible thereof that I fell sick, which
hindered me from rendering him the last honors which we owe to our friends, and
that I should have rendered to him as to the half of my self, But as one
misfortune serves ordinarily for Harbinger to another, being recovered and
returned to my house, I found it altogether desolate and in disorder by the
decease of her who was the joy of my family. At my arrival I wanted not much
of committing some outrage upon my person, through despair, seeing my self
deprived of two such precious things, as I had not the like in the world, my
friend and wife, I had a son by her, who hindered me from this fury: after I
had constituted him heir and universal possessor of the estate fortune had
given me, and not being willing to survive after the death of Albert and
Lesbie; I resolved to enterre my self alive in this desert, where I have made
my retreat this twenty years, enjoying most sweet repose, and proving all the
felicities that I have heretofore heard or read of solitude. Since which time I
have always lived alone, but about a year ago, going amongst the rocks to
search herbs and roots to sustain this poor life, when the night begun to
banish the light, I perceived amongst the broom a person whose feeble and
plantife voice invited me to succor her. I presently advanced and saw a woman
of good fashion who as soon as she had perceived me, asked me if I was not
called Simeon, for inchanging my life and manners, I also changed my name. Yes
said I in approaching to her, for my age being deprived of feelings of
sensuallity, and where concupiscentiall heats were extinct, pemitted me to come
to her with out any scruple, and to bring her where we now are: and then
demanding of her what she was, she made me this discourse

I am a poor unfortunate and unhappy sinner, whose life heaven has conserved
to oblige me to dispose of it in these deserts. I was borne at Toledo in
Spain, where I was called Laure. It would be too troublesome and offensive to
your holiness to declare to you the particulars how I have spent my young
years, I shall only tell you, that I have run diverse hazards in flying from
the terror that I had of a Cavalier who was offended with me, as in effect he
had cause. Thinking to shun the danger which I feared, I cast my self therein.
It is but four days a gone since I was in the presence of the Cavalier, in
quality of Judge, for a crime which I had committed, having attempted to make
him be treacherously slain. His countenance made me apprehend his rigor, his
feeling my punishment, and his injury his vengance. Then esteeming it
impossible to satisfy him by my submissions; I had recourse to an
Inchantresse, to deliver me out of his hands, thinking it impossible to escape
by any other means. This Cavalier having caused me to be brought into his
company in a secret place, for to tak away my life with this proper hands, I
served my self with the charms which the Inchantresse had given me, which
made me see fearful things, and without knowing which way I went, whether by
earth, air or the sea I found my self in Florence. But although I saw my
self free from him that threatened me, I was nevertheles a slave to my proper
conscience which tortured me without ceasing. I made a general confession and
from that hour, I found my self touched with a holy repentance of my faults,
and with an acknowledgment of my proper miseries. Desiring then to vow the rest
of my days to God, by the means of a severe penance, I have renounced the
world and all the vanities thereof, and I do not know by what instinct I have
been conducted, into this sharp and remote place, where I desire to imprison
my body to deliver my soul, which I fear is in great danger to be destined to
the prisons of perpetual darkness. In finishing this last word, sobs and
tears came into her mouth and eyes, in so great abundance that it was
impossible for her to speak more. I was astonished to see so great contrition,
in so young a heart, and an election of a life so different from that I
imagined she had before lead. My good friend said I to her, your proposition is
very wholesome, but I fear your delicateness and the ordinary inconstancy of
your sex will hinder you from the execution thereof. At the least having begun
you will find this change too rigorous to support. Yet if you have a good
courage, God will fortify you, and by little and little you will have cause to
give him thanks, for the holy inspirations he has given you. Alas my
daughter, a soul is happy that is disposed for death before she is called to
it! It is the general port of all humanes, but many have there suffered
shipwreck for want of the guide which leads to safety, which is called
penance. If you then will save your self, and march under his conduct: I
offer you all that you shall judge I can contribute to this design, hoping by
the grace and assistance of God that you will attain life everlasting. She
answered me that since I would use so much charity toward her, she would be
governed by my counsel, and would resign me all her will. After which she
chose that dwelling, which you say you have seen, where she leads an
Angelical life. I could tell you the particulars thereof, but worldly persons
as you are, take no great pleasure in such entertaines, and also that person
being but indifferent to you, it would be but a trouble to you. You shall only
know that three days since, she rendered her soul to God, which I believe he
has received to recompense the sharp penance which she has undergone. She
has left me here envious of her virtues, happy if I can well imitate them. But
I being with her when she expired; I have graven thirteen letters which you
saw in the stone, for it was not spacious enough to put more, they signify
according to my sense; This is the body of a Phoenix which is dead to rise
again.

For as much as the death of just persons is not called their death but birth;
for as the humane creature in his birth leaves the sesible habitation of his
mothers womb, to come and live abroad; so the souls of them which leave this
world in the grace of God, leave the corruptible prisons of their bodies, to
enjoy eternal felicity. Sir I have made you this troublesome discourse, as
well to satisfy your desire as to recreate my memory with things past; for you
know it is a singular pleasure to old people to recount the adventures of their
youths.

Since that venerable Simeon had pronounced the name of Laure, Fenise had much
to do to forbear breaking the thread of his discourse, to let him know how
much he was interessed in this history. He sighed at every word Simeon stayed,
and complained of his hard fortune, having so passionately loved this maid by
whom he had been so ingratefully used. But in the end considering that God had
called her to him by this salutary penance, he was extremely sorry he had not
known her in this cell, to have rendered her his last honors, in bedewing her
feet with his tears, and asking her pardon for the design which he had to
kill her, and by that means deprive her of the saving of her soul.

When Simeon left speaking, Feanise begun to weep, and for to explicate from
whence proceeded this tenderness, he told him the extraction of Laure, and the
course of her life until the time she had retired her self into that
solitude, at which the solitary much wondered. Our Cavalier desiring to continue
his voyage, thanked Simeon for the entertainment he had given him; he prayed
him to guide him to the foot of the rock where the cave was, that served for
tomb to this happy penitent, to take again his horse which he had left there,
to the which the good man accorded, and more, conducted him into a foot way
which led him into his way where having embraced and taken their last leaves,
Simeon hastily returned into his Cell repenting that he had employed too much
time in discoursing upon worldly vanities.

The end of the second Book
THE THIRD BOOK OF FENISE.
He that is once embarked upon the Sea, and arrives happily to Shore, is
much bounden to his fortune; and he consideth in her too much, that puts
himself a second time upon that fearful element. For my part, I think there
is no greater proof of courage, then to enterprise to pass a Gulf without
necessity, or without being thereunto incited by covetousness. Fortune bears
sovereign sway over four things, which are, Marriages, great Men's Favorites,
Wars, and Navigations. But according to the opinion of many, the last is the
most perilous: And from thence I draw this consequence, That if courage be so
necessary for the War, as being a peril much to be feared; the same courage is
yet more requisite in Navigation; forasmuch as the danger there is altogether
evident, having but the thickness of a planke betwixt life and death. An
author of reputation reported, that a certain Consul of Rome, durst never
hazard himself upon the sea, and being demanded from whence proceeded this
fear, he answered, The vessel is a fool, since that she is always in
motion, the Navigator is a fool, being never of the same opinion, the sea is a
fool since that she is never in repose, and the air is a fool, since that it
runs perpetually: And supposing that all these things are true, and that
being upon the earth we fly from a fool, why would you have me trust my life
amongst four fools, being upon the sea? This argument deserves to be known,
but not imitated; for if the Consul is esteemed prudent, he may also be accused
of cowardliness.

Our Cavalier was not of the sect of this Philosopher, nor of his opinion, the
desire he had to advance in his journey, made him resolve to imbarque himself
at the port of Liuorne, and again trust his life to Neptune, he there found a
French Merchants ship, where he was welcome, and civilly lodged; for although
it be hard to be so upon the sea, yet money finds all commodities. Fenise was
then well enough furnished therewith, as well by the liberality of the
Viceroy of Naples, as the lawful gain he had made of the government of
Tarente. And the opinion which those of the ship had that he was rich, obliged
them to bear him a certain respect, as he gave them cause, for having laid in
good stoore of provision in the vessel, he parted it liberally amongst the
company, by which means he gained the hearts and affections of the Mariners
and Patrons. All those in the vessel being familiar together, endeavored to
pass the troubles of navigation with the sweet witty divertisements they could
devise. The Merchants were men of subtle understanding, and besides there were
in this company two young Italians, good humanists, and well knowing in the
Laws, with whom Fenise grew familiar, finding their conversations very
pleasant. Every one wakened his wit to find matter to entertain himself. One
amongst them propounded, that he would maintain that Denis the Tyrant of Sicily
was the most humane and courteous of all the Gentiles of his time; another, that
he would maintain, that there was neither ingratitude nor ungrateful men in
the World, and Fenise offered to answer to all the problems and questions the
others could make him. The two Italians begun to discourse upon the subjects
propounded, where they brought such apparent and wel-grounded reasons, that
although they were sophistical and false, they were capable to persuade those
who did not truly understand them, but they used them rather to show the
subtilty of their wits, then to have them believed. After they invited Fenise
to satisfy them in what he had promised; and as he was going to make them
admire those fair curiosities he had reaped by reading, the Pilot stayed him,
in crying to the Saylors, that they should fold up the sails; for they should
immediately have a great storm. At this fearful advertisement every one quit
the attention of these profane discourses, and begun to look to his
conscience, and to be troubled with the apprehension of shipwreck. They entered
into the Gulf of Leon, when Heaven begun to be troubled with a double
obscurity, that of the night, and that of the storm, wherein the winds were
so violent, that they seemed to move the sea unto the very bottom. In a little
time the tempest became so furious, that all in the ship were fearful; every
one cried out with a good heart for divine assistance, and demanded pardon for
his faults. The Mariners themselves were so amazed, that they knew not their
compass, nor what to do or command, the cords, masts, and sails were broken
one from another; sometimes the waves lifted up the ship to the clouds, and
then again cast it down into the most profound deeps: It thundered and hailed,
and the air produced lightning, which served them but for to see things
fearful. In the end, after having suffered a long storm, a wave cast them
against a Rock, where the ship was split, and then some were buried quick in
the waves, and others ran to the last remedy of Shipwreck, endeavoring to
prolong their lives as long as they could, floating upon tables and packs:
Fenise seized upon a square chest, wherein was his equipage, and so abandoned
himself to divine mercy, and to the misericord of the waves. Heaven
favorable to his vows, would not let him serve for food to the sea Monsters,
but had care to conduct him; for after having felt all the evils that fear
could cause, about break of day, he saw himself near to shore, which yet he
could not come to, because the waves seemed to sport with him, sometimes they
made him almost to touch the land, and then cast him much further off then he
was before: In the end, having again invoked divine assistance, the necessity
wherein he was taught him to make use of his arms in stead of oars, he
employed the last vigor of his courage, and took port betwixt two Rocks,
kissing the ground, and giving God thanks for the miracle he had done in
delivering him, and from this instant he accounted himself a second time borne
into the world. The sea grew calm, and the day by little and little grew
light, and let him see the pitiful relicts of the Ship, and the spoils of
his companions, which floated upon the waters. He looked about him of all sides
to see if he could perceive the top of some Tower, or Steeple of some Town or
Village, that he might go thither to demand some sustenance, but he saw nothing
that could give him any hope of relief; he had wherewithal to recompense those
that should assist him; for in this extreme misfortune he had resting a good
sum of money, which he had in gold about him and in his coffer, but at this
time it was unserviceable unto him. After he had consulted what he ought to
do, he left the sea shore, sometimes turning back, as well to lament his
companions who were drowned, as for fear the sea should yet follow him to make
him suffer the same shipwreck; he advanced into a field, not knowing whither
he went, nor in what land he was; he heard, in approaching to a grove, a man
lamenting, which spoke Spanish; then joy glided into his heart, thinking that
he was arrived upon the coast of Spain, and coming near him by little and
little, he heard him speak these words, Oh great God! the only recourse of
afflicted souls, have thou resolved to abandon me, amongst these barbarians
for to finish here my days, without enjoying that dear consolation administered
unto those who are born under the knowledge of thy Laws, and the true
Religion? Lord thy will be done, if it be thy pleasure, I must resolve to
suffer it. Ending these last words, he gave a great sigh, and held his peace,
because he had perceived our unfortunate Cavalier. Fenise, who at first
imagined himself to be in Spain his own country, now learning the contrary
by these words, converted his joy into sadness, presuming that he was upon the
coast of Barbary; he approached to him that complained, and thus saluted him;
My friend, if you find alleadgement to your troubles, in complaining to these
trees, do not leave to continue, behold here another unfortunate, which may
keep you company, and help you to weep, if you please, since that it seems by
your language that we are of the same country: For me I am a Spaniard and
native of Madrid. Oh God, answered the other, who was a venerable old man, a
strange encounter! And in embracing him with tears in his eyes; what
misfortune, continued he, or what divine power is it that has conducted you
hither? Then Fenise asked him in what country he was, and then told him of
his Shipwreck, the most succinctly that he could; for he was so weak that he
could scarcely speak. After he prayed him to give him something to eat, and
presently Fredrikc, so was this old man called, prayed Fenise to expect him
amongst the trees, and went in diligence to fetch him bread and drink made of
Lemmons and Sugar, wherewith Fenise refreshed himself. Having thus taken
acquaintance one of the other, our Cavalier prayed Fredric to tell him by what
accident he came there, and was obliged to pass the rest of his life in that
barbarous region, as his complaints had let him understand. The old man
desiring to satisfy the curiosity of Fenise, made him this discourse.

THE HISTORY OF FREDERICK.
The illustrious town where the Court of Spain is ordinarily kept, is the
place where I saw my first day, as well as you, if you be of Madrid, as you
say; I am of noble lineage; yet I never saw my father, he being taken from me by
a dangerous sickness before I could have knowledge of him. He left me his only
heir and under the conduct of a mother, who neglected too much to keep in my
youth, to which my riches gave me more liberty than was reasonable. Amongst
these liberties I made such debauches, as I will not recount unto you; having
been so excessive, that to compare that time with the life I lead now, I have
cause to esteem my self happy, although I am far from it, and besides it
would augment your weariness by a troublesome attention. In this age my heart
begun to be warmed by love, by the perfections of a Gentlewoman of a great
family, whose carriage was civility it self, and whose beauty was the object
which made all admire its author. It Would be superfluous to tell you the arts,
inventions, and subtilties I used to declare unto her my passion, and the
pains I took to find a favorable occasion to persuade her to compassionate
my torments; you may imagine them in representing unto your self that she was
the most recluse of her time. You shall only know, that whatsoever services or
testimonies of fidelity I could render her for the space of two years, it was
impossible for me to hear one word from her mouth, to obtain one favor from
her hands, or to perceive any hopeful sign. In the end she was overcome by my
perseverance, and not by her negligence; but who could resist so long a pursuit
without being an insensible rock? the strongest places and Towers inaccessible,
have been gained rather by industry then valor: Troy, Numance, and Carthage,
serve us for examples thereof; what marvel was it then that adorable Persinde
could always resist against the art, force, and courage wherewith I daily
assaulted her? She was under the guard of a Mother, the most sharp and austere
woman that was in all Madrid: Persinde feared so much, that she never looked
upon her without trembling. Nevertheless by succession of time, and increasing
of obstacles, our loves grew so great, that I obtained what I desired. I saw
Persinde in her chamber by the intermission of certain women her Governors,
who often betray the honors of Maids, in making show to defend them. In one
word, our private meetings were so familiar, that within a few days Persinde
possessed a living gage of our affections. Love, that had made her commit this
fault, inspired her with industry to hide it, and means to remedy it when it
should be time. She approached her term, when her Father had a fancy to send
her to Toledo to see one of her Cousins which she had there, and to recreate
her self with the famous sports which the Citizens then made. Persinde
discovered to her her secret as to her most confident friend, and after that,
Agarise (so was her Cousin called) had testified the displeasure she had for
this accident; She promised to assist her in all she could possible to avid the
scandal; the season being come of reaping that fruit into her hands, which had
taken maturity in her womb, Agarise writ to the Father and Mother of Persinde,
praying them to be pleased that she might yet keep her Cousin with her, and
that her leave might be prolonged for some time, which they easily granted. I
rendered my self Burgois of Toledo the day of her arrival, to the end to serve
her, and contribute all that should depend upon me to her assistance when there
should be occasion; and for this cause I saw her almost every night in the
presence of her Cousin. But one day, when Persinde begun to be set upon with
ordinary pains, her Cousin and she determined to leave the Town, and go to the
Farms near Toledo, which are called Cigarales, where Agarise had acquainted a
woman with this affair, who was prepared to receive them when they should
come. But they were scarcely got half way when violent pain seized poor
Persinde. Then Agarise feigning another pressing necessity, left the Coach with
her, and retiring themselves amongst some bushes which were happily there,
Persinde was delivered of a Son, they wrapped him in linnens, and covered him
with a little mantle of silk and gold which they had brought for that purpose,
rather taking care to make have, then to trim up the Infant. This being done,
Persinde drew out of her pocket a paper, and having diligently blotted out all
that was written therein, shewrit these few words.

Christian, this Infant demands Baptism, have a care thereof, and let him be
called Louis. She hung this note about his neck with a silk ribband, and
abandoned him to celestial mercy: They returned speedily to their Coach, and
without going further, returned to Toledo, feigning that Persinde was sick by
the way: There was a great space of time betwixt their return and the hour I
was accustomed to visit them, which was the cause of a misfortune, which makes
me yet sigh. The night being come, I went to make mine ordinary visit, where I
learned this news, and the place where I should find this poor little
innocent. I departed in diligence, and sought on all sides with a torch; I
visited the inside and outside of every bush that was in the place whither they
had directed me, but without finding any thing. Fear seized my soul at the
beginning, fearing that he was devoured by some wild beast, and yet seeing no
blood spilt, nor any of the clothes of the child, I imagined that some
charicable person, having heard it cry, had taken it away to give it a better
lodging. After I had passed almost the whole night in visiting three or four
times the same place, to the end I might not be accused of negligence, I
returned to Toledo, with intention to report otherwise to Persinde, for fear of
killing her with grief. The time of my going to see her being come, I made her
believe that I had put the infant in a place of security, and that she needed
not further think thereof. Not long after, Persinde having recovered her
color, returned to Madrid, with letters from Agarise her Cousin, which thanked
her Uncle and Aunt for the honor she had received from them in the visit of
her Cousin, let them know that she had been a little sick, so that all this
affair was happily overpassed, if the absence of the child had not afflicted
us.

My Mother deceased incontinently after this success, and by her loss I
remained in full liberty to match where I thought good. I then determined to
demand Persinde in marriage; but having acquainted her therewith, she
counseled me not to do it, for fear I should thereby receive some
coffeehouse, seeing that her Mother pretended to make her religious: And
although she knew not that Persindes inclinations stood that way, yet she used
all possible diligence to make her condescend to her will. A great tyranny, to
make a person by constraint take a condition against heart.

Having had certain advice of the intention of thy rigorous mother, and being
assured of the affections of? Persinde, I stole her away one night, an carried
her to Cartagene, a town situate upon the sea shore, and where the greatest
part of my estate was, I stayed with her there some years, we leading a very
happy life. Heaven gave me another child, which was a daughter fair as an
Angel, she had all the features of her mother, but yet more sweet and
charming, I loved her above all things in the world, J could not be a moment
without seeing her, and nothing pleased me so much as her innocence. She was
about three years old when on a summers evening I had a great desire to walk
with her in a little place which I had near the town of Cartagene, and stay
there until the next day at the same hour; but I departed too late, for the
night took me by the way. I held this little minion in mine arms, having
taken her from her nurse which carried her, and without thinking thereof I was
environed with a troop of pirates, who took her with my heart out of mine
arms, presently I found my self in a vessel companion to many slaves,
deprived of my dear child and servants who were with me, and presently after I
found my self a captive in Algier which you see now. Consider in what port you
are arrived, and whether you had not better to have served for food to sea
monsters, then to have fallen into the hands of these earthly ones. I have
languished fourteen years in this misery, where it seems my life has taken
another nature, since that I dye not to avoid so many displeasures. I have many
times written to Madrid, and sent my wife word of my sad disafter, but what
ever diligence I have used, I could never receive an answer. I do not excuse
her of negligence, nor ill nature, I have too much proof of her goodness and
virtue, but I think my letters never went so far, I fear that the King of
Algier, who will not put my daughter nor me in the number of slaves to be
ransomed, has stayed them, for these infidells are most faithful to their
sovereign; so that I know not now if I have yet any body for me, nor whether
my wife be in heaven or earth.

My daughter I have told you of, is called Magdelene; but the barbarian that
ravished her from me, has taken from her that name, and called her Cirife, at
the end of six years of our captivity, the pirate seeing day by day the
beauty of this little one increase, made her serve him as an instrument to get
the favor of Selin, King of Algier, he gave her to him to dispose of her as he
thought good. The Prince was much pleased with this present, and to testify
the esteem he had thereof, he promised to gratify him upon all occasions;
when she was taken out of mine arms her clothes were not so poor, but that
they rendered her considerable, and testified that she was issued from
christians of great quality, which obliged the King to esteem her as much as
if she had been his proper child. He has brought her up like a queen, in
effect I know he pretends to qualify her with that greatness and marry her. I
apprehend, that that will be executed sooner then is thought of, and so there
may be a soul lost, and a desolation for mine old age.

The only good that I have resting amongst so many displeasures, is that I see
her sometimes, by a window of a Tower, where by good fortune, the King has
lodged her, the half of the circum ference of this tower comes from the Kings
lodgings against the gardens of the Citizens; having betwixt them but a little
lane of five or six paces over, full of briers and bushes. With diligent
searching some means to approach this prison, I have found a breach in a wall,
which seems to have been made for me by some angel: by it I go to the
foot of the tower, and ^hiding my self in the thorns and grass, I speak
sometimes to Magdalene, whilst she makes a show to recreate her self in
taking the air by the window, and by the veiw of the gardens; In the little
time we enjoy this common contentment, I speak to her of no other thing, but
that she remember she is a christian, that she take heed of violating her
faith, whatsoever is offered her or said to her, and that she hope that God who
never leaves his, will receive our vows, and one day give us the recompense
of our travells and constancy. See dear country man the subject of my
afflictions and misery, which you may help me to lament as you told me at
your arrival, if peradventure you have not particulars, which oblige you to
employ your tears for your self; and if it was nothing but the loss you have
made of your liberty, you will not want cause of tears Alas! there is so long
a death prepared for you amongst chains and travells, that I assure my self
that you will be sorry you were not buried in the waters as your companions,
which I esteem much happier then your self. Hitherto Fenise had harkened to
the afflictions of others, but from that moment he begun to fear those that
threatened him: but when the courage is firm, there is no adversity that can
astonish a man, nor danger capable to terrify him. Fenise having a while
considered the finistre predictions of Frederick, and studied by what industry
he might prevent these future disgraces, he made him this discourse. In
harkening to the recital you have made me of your misfortunes, I have
conceived in my mind what may remedy you, and it may be you will judge so, when
I have communicated it unto you. But to oblige you the more to second my
intentions, I will tell you news of the child you went to search amongst the
bushes near Toledo. He was named Louis as his mother desired, I have not only
known him, but that knowledge is passed into an affection, he is one of my
intimate friends. I have left him at Valence at a gentleman's house a friend of
mine, called Leonard, in whose house he has recounted to me his whole life,
whose beginning answers to all the particulars you have told me thereof. A
labourer found him in the place where you went to seek him, he had care to
bring him up, and entertain him until his decease; and in making him
inheritour of all his estate, he gave him a little purse, wherein was the paper
that you saw his mother hung about his neck, which he yet carefully keeps. So
great a transport of joy seized the heart of Frederick, that he wanted not much
of falling at the feet of Fenise, when when he told this news: But after a
little silence, it is possible said he, that my stars begin to be weary with
persecuting me, what will heaven give me this contentment in my last days and
assure me that my child lives? Alas! if I could persuade my self as you say,
I should no longer esteem my self unhappy, although I be a slave and charged
with chains. Yet you give me so many marks thereof and your manner of
speaking has so much appearance of truth, that I willingly believe it. For
that which concerns the proposition you make to execute a design which may
produce some happy success; do not doubt my fidelity; I engage to you my
faith to expose my self to all sorts of hazards, to serve you until the
loss of my life if there be need, assuring my self, that before any thing is
undertaken you will judge that it is all that a slave can offer. Do not
believe answered Fenise, that I make so little esteem thereof, as only to
hazard it; on the contrary the industry I have advised my self of, tends only
to its conservation and safety. I can speak the Arabic language in
perfection, having learned it of a slave of my fathers, by a secret providence
of heaven, who foresaw this present necessity. With that I have some money
which is saved with me from the passed shipwreck. I put it into my bosom when
I entered into the ship at Livorne. My design is, to buy by your means a
turkish habit, and cloth my self therein: I will say that I am Citizen of Fez,
and will buy you of your master; when you shall be out of your captivity you
shall also change your clothes, and by the favor of the Arabique language, we
will save our selves as well as we can possibly. By this means you shall be
delivered from the miseries wherein you are, you will give a new life to your
wife, and see him for whom you both have shed so many tears. I believe answered
Frederick, that heaven has expressly preserved you from shipwreck, to deliver
me from the miseries wherein I am, this encounter could not have been without
the sovereign appointment of God. There are many circumstances which may help
the execution of your project: this day they solemnize the nativity of my
master, who is a Bacha, the second person after the King, and his favorite;
and because of this feast, we slaves have more liberty then upon other days,
every one makes holiday, and is at rest, therefore you have found me here
aside complaining my disaster, besides because I belong to this seignieur; we
have a little more privilege then other captives, the guards that are at the
gates take not so much heed of us, so that all these things being considered I
hope to satisfy you in what you desire to our common contentment. Fenise at
the same time gave him as much money as was necessary for that purpose, and in
the mean while he remained hidden in an old great hollow oak, which it seemed
years had prepared for this act of hospitality. Frederick was not long in
returning with such habits as he judged most proper for their design, being
discharged of his packet, Fenise told him that he had left a box upon the sea
shore, wherein was a part of his equipage, and upon the which he had saved
himself, and having consulted together what was to be done, they went to seek
it, bringing it with much pain, and burying it in a remarquable place, to have
recourse to it if there should be occasion. Then without losing time Fenise
took the turbant and other Turkish habits, put a Cimiter by his side, and
disguised himself so properly, that the most subtle Turk would have taken him
for his natural countryman. The same day a Merchante ship a Jew landed at
Algier laden with great riches, as Velvets, Scarlets, Spanish clothes, and
other rare Merchandises of Tire and Caire, whither they make great traffic,
this happened well for Fenise; for at the hour that it arrived, which was
toward the evening, he and Frederick approached near the gates of the Town,
and our Cavalier mingled himself amongst the new comers, and was taken by the
Citizens for a Merchant, and by the Merchants for one of the town, so that he
entered freely without any one taking notice of him. Frederick served him for
guide and Harbinger, finding him lodging for his money where Fredrick left him,
having before resolved together, that Fenise should go the next day to his
Master to treat about his ransom.

Fenise slept but very little that night, his mind was busied with a thousand
several thoughts, one while he considered the danger which he had run and from
which he had been saved, to fall into the hands of Barbarians; another while he
thought upon the discourse Frederick had made him, imagining that his daughter
must needs be rarely fair, since that the King of Algier pretended to marry
her, and as he occupied his spirit in this entertain, he grew extremely
desirous to see this beauty when he should have delivered the father: The day
being come, he informed himself where the Bacha's house was, where Frederick
was slave, he was conducted thither, and being arrived at the gate, he
courteously demanded to speak to him, saying he would buy one of his slaves.
He was brought before the Bacha, and when they were face to face, they were
both mute, and without motion as statues. Fenise knew that this was his fathers
slave which had taught him the Arabique Language, which was called Mahomet
Zeran, and respected as Bacha, and the greatest favorite of the King of
Algier. Fenise was then sorry that he had presented himself in person to
treat upon the liberty of Frederick having means to have done it otherwise,
but dissembling the extreme confusion he was in, for fear of being
discovered, he broke silence, and propounded what he demanded. Before Mahomet
answered him, he asked him what he was, of what country, and how he was called,
faigning to believe he was a a Turk, although he knew him well enough. Fenise
being reassured, boldly answered him in the African language, that he was a
Turk of an illustrious family and native of Fez, and come to seek Sanctuary
near him, flying the cruelty of two brothers, which would have killed him, and
that he was called Gomhor; Mahomet admired the wit and carriage of Fenise, who
disguised the truth with such art; but without playing further with him, he
came to him and told him in his ear in Spanish, whatsoever cause has brought
you hither, you are welcome; in saying so, he took him by the hand, and made
him sit down by him, a favor which he did to no body. Fenise saw by his
proceeding and language, that he knew him: And Mahomet continuing to speak,
Fenise, said he, you little esteem the sincerity of my heart, since you use so
much art to disguise a truth so evident. I am sorry you hinder me so long from
perfectly enjoying the joy I have to see you in a place where I have power to
serve you, and testify by some occasion the sensible obligations I have to you
and your father, whom I shall respect all my life, as mine own, saying so he
cast himself, upon Fenise his neck and straightly embraced him. Our Cavalier
touched with these singular proofs of the good nature of Mahomet, was
constrained to declare himself, and yield to his courtesy, he bowed himself
very low, and embraced his knees, and by the most civil complements his good
wit could invent, made him understand, that respect had engaged him to this
dissimulation, and as he was about to explicate his reasons, Mahomet made a
sign with his eye, that he should hold his peace. All that saw their actions,
knew not what to think thereof, principally that Mahomet should show himself
so affable toward this man, who was accustomed to be severe toward them. The
Bacha would not that they should know more, commanded them to retire, and leave
them alone, as they did, and then Fenise having rendered him a thousand
testimonies of his joy, briefly told him all the history of his life, since he
had left Toledo until this happy encounter. Mahomet full of astonishment and
admiration with the recital of these strange misfortunes, promised to employ
all his wealth and credit for his contentment, and to furnish him with means to
return into Spain, upon the first occasion that should be offered; after
having learned that Frederick the slave he demanded to buy, was father to one
of his intimate friends, he gave him to him to do with him what he pleased;
then he invited him to lodge in his house, but Fenise excused himself
therefrom, judging that that might hinder the effect of his intentions; yet he
could not defend himself from staying dinner with him. They begun to spread
upon the ground a great piece of Tapistry, upon which they dined. Then he was
obliged to receive the visit of a Turk of quality who came to speak to him
about an affair of importance, which caused Fenise to retire himself into an
Antichamber, to let them devise more freely together. He walked there, and
thanked God that Mahomet had treated him so humanely; and as he was upon these
thoughts, he saw a little door open into the Antichamber where he was, out of
which came a fair Moore, richly habited, who seemed to be melancholique. Our
Cavalier saluted her with an action full of respect and humility. The Moore
made him a reverence after the mode of Spain, whereat Fenise was astonished,
but yet more, when she approached him, saying in the Spanish tongue.

THE CONTINVANCE OF THE HISTORY OF EUFEMIE.
CAvalier, said she, with a deep sigh, I have heard all the recital of the
history you told to Mahomet, wherein by having named Leonard, a high Cavalier
of the town of Valence, you have moved my memory to discourse upon the
misfortunes of my life, and obliged my reason to acknowledge the faults which
my impudence has made me commit, from whence I suffer a most rigorous
unquietness of spirit. I am the unfortunate Eufemie, I am that unhappy cause
of the troubles of Leonard my brother, having preferred my sensual pleasures
before the duties of my birth and quality: I will not cloak my miscarriages,
though love might render them excusable; on the contrary, I desire to make you
a naked description thereof, yet as short as I can possible, whilst the absence
of Mahomet gives me leisure, that by mine own shame, I may in your person
render some satisfaction to my brother, since you say you are his friend.

I loved passionately a Cavalier, which you have known from the mouth of my
brother, as your discourses have given me cause to presume; but so passionately
that I left my house to follow him, he carried me to Madrid (I ought to hide my
face, in telling you the infamous commerce that that man made me do) where he
rendered me a public Courtizan, not so much to satisfy his necessity, as
the vengeance he would take of my brother in my person and honor. From Madrid,
for to save our selves from my brother who had discovered us, we went to
Saragoce, where we stayed some months, and there I had the reputation of the
most fair and famous Courtezan of that age, and as such a one was visited by
the greatest Gallants of the town. During our stay there, Don Pedro, which you
know to be the name of the cruel enemy of my brother, and my renown, made
friendship with a young Gentleman, whose merits were were cherished and
esteemed by a most noble Lady of an excellent wit and beauty, and the better to
express her perfections, I pray you consider, that they must needs be rare,
since that being of my sex, and the original of my misfortunes, I am yet
constrained to praise her.

Alexander, so was this Cavalier called which she loved, discovered part of the
secrets of his soul, and amongst others that of his flame to Don Pedro his new
friend. I may well say he gave him part of his fire, since that he rendered him
taken with the love of Cerinthe, she was called so, nevertheless durst not
enterprise to declare unto her his feeling for fear Alexander should be
offended therewith; and to avoid this inconvenience, he betook himself to
art, in all occasion wherein I was spoke of in the presence of Alexander, Don
Pedro spoke marvells of me, as if I had been the most accomplished with
beauty, wit, and merit, to the end to move him to love me, and oblige him to
break that mutual band of amity that was vowed betwixt them, and thereby to
imitate him and make Cerinthe his mistress also to change. In a word he
conducted his design so cunningly, that it took as he imagined, Alexander
courted me, Don Pedro seemed discontent therewith, and to revenge himself, got
access near Cerinthe, which he found easy enough at the beginning: there is
no woman that is offended with being beloved, and she that does not disapprove
of the service of a lover, begins already to love. Alexander taken with this
new affection, scarcely stirred from my lodging, neglecting by this means to
visit Cerinthe, and she knowing his inconstancy rendered him the like, making
love with Don Pedro. By succession of time Alexanders father was advertised of
his debauches, he was told that his son entertained a courtezan a stranger
which cost him much. And forasmuch as old people are covetous, and forget the
follies of their youths, he could not excuse this of his sons. He employed
his credit so well, that the Justice commanded me to quit the town in a
certain time. I seeing my self constrained to obey, gave notice thereof to
Don Pedro; but instead of being sorry for it, he seemed to be very well pleased
with this news, because my absence gave him more liberty to pass his time
with Cerinthe, so that one day he told me that I might go whither I would, and
that he could not then leave Sarragose. I seeing my self so unworthily used by
this perfidious, and considering the resolution which he took to abandon me,
being distasted with my person, I imagined he loved else where: in this opinion
I used such exact diligence; that I discovered the cause of his disdain, as I
have now told you. I did not leave to require his assistance in this
necessity, adding imbracements to words, and representing unto him the
obligations which he had to me, yea employing some times, threats; for my
jelousie and his contempt carried me to furious extreamities. In the end either
by reasons or fear I made him resolve to quit Sarragoce, and leave Cerinthe,
but with design to revenge himself cruelly of my persecutions, as I have
since learned. He deferred our departure as long as he could possible, and
stayed until the very last day the Justice had given me for that effect. In
the end we took together the way to Valence, he did nothing but curse by the
way, there came nothing out of his mouth but insolences, injuries, and
threatenings; he drew his poynard and presented it unto me, then he put it
again into the scabbard; in brief he so affrighted me, that every moment I
believed he was about to open my breast and pull out my heart, he seemed to be
so full of fury and rage: being arrived at our first Inn, it was impossible
for me to take any food. I went to bed weeping bitterly for my faults, and
endeavoring to invent some way to deliver my self from this traitor: the next
morning he pressed me to be gone on our voyage, and I, fearing he would put me
to some tragique end, fained to be sick, and prayed him to defer it one day,
which he granted at the solicitation of the host and hostess who had pity of
me seeing me weep, but it was not without many curses. Heaven which desires
not always the loss of those that offend it, which lets them live to amend
and repent, yea and assists them to oblige them the more to acknowledge it in
the midst of their extreme necessities, conducted Mahomet to the same Inn
where we were. And because he arrived at a time when Don Pedro was gone to
walk by the side of a little river, which was near thereunto, not being able
to stay in my company, I had leisure to consider his fashion and behavior: I
saw he had a good countenance that he was of a proportion big and strong; and
joining to these circumstances that he was well mounted, and very well habited,
I took him for a gentleman or a man of honor; In this thought without knowing
him to be an infidel and no christian, I went to ask his assistance. I
succinctly told him my history, and the extreme trouble I was in, beseeching
him, since that he went the same way, to follow us unto the first town,
without losing sight of us to hinder that my perfidious conductor might not do
me some displeasure. Mahomet having considered my language and countenance, had
his heart touched with compassion as he has since told me and promised me very
courteously, to satisfy all that I could desire from his service; with this
assurance, I told Don Pedro that I was ready to depart when he would, he took
me at my word, and about two hours before sun setting, we left this lodging
following on our way. At the beginning of the night we arrived at the entry of
a wood; then I looked behind me and perceived Mahomet, who had not yet
appeared, which a little moderated my fear. We were scarcely in this wood when
I knew that we had left the great way, and that we were in a little path, we
are out of the way cried I to Don Pedro, no, no, answered he, follow me; it is
the nearest for our journey. I who was in perpetual distrust, believed these
words were equivocall, and that the nearest which he meant, was to find the
issue of my life. I turned my self yet once, and saw my defendor follow us, I
took courage, and a little time after Son Pedro turned toward me. You are in
the right said he; I believe we are out of the way, and since that there is no
way more here, let us light. What need is there of that said I. Away, away we
must, replied he with a tone extraordinary. I will take here the last vengeance
of the hatred I bear to thy blood and person which has rendered it self too
odious to mine eyes by contradicting my pleasures; saying so, he took his
poiniard in his hand, and attempted to strike me down from the Mule whereupon I
was mounted; seeing the rage of this action, and the glittering of the iron,
wherewith be would have sacrificed me to his felony; I cried out, Ah cruel,
what think thou to do? and endeavored to stay his arm, or at least to
slacken the blow. At the same time I was succored by valiant Mahomet, who came
running with his sword in his hand, crying, Traitor what will thou do? Mine
enemy seeing the sudden apparition of this protector, knew not if it was not an
angel in the figure of a man; yet he drew his sword to defend his life, but
the other assailed him so furiously, that his endeavors were unprofitable, he
made him give up his soul in the same place where he thought to have murdered
me. At the echo of these clamours and my lamentings, an unknown man came in, it
may be with design to succor those he heard complain, but Mahomet took a
pistol which was at, his saddle bow, prayed this unknown to pass no further,
and to suffer him to go without further informing himself of any thing. I am
much deceived if you be not he of whom I speak, the discourse which I heard
you hold to Mahomet gives me a great presumption thereof. We took our horses,
and went toward the town of Tortose, I saw I ought my life to this Cavalier,
and for that reason it seemed to me I was obliged to follow him whither he
would lead me; without knowing either his nation or religion; I took him for a
Spaniard, because he spoke the language perfectly well. Coming near Tortose,
he told me, that he did not think it expedient for us to go thither, for
fear of some ill success, because of the homicide committed; so that turning
out of the right way, he carried me to a Bourge near to the sea shore, and in
a place called the neck of Balagouer, where are little arms, where the Moors
hide themselves, and from whence they make sallies and courses upon the
Christian countries. In fine, whether he had notice to be there, or that
fortune conducted him thither, he found a Galley of Pirates, whereof the chief
came with great respect to speak to him, and upon the instant they prepared
themselves to return. Then Mahomet let me know, that he intended to carry me
along with him, he declared unto me his country, and promised the sweetest
entertainment that I could hope for amongst my Kindred. I seeing my self
obliged to satisfy him either by fair means or constraint, I heaved up my
shoulders, and testified to him a silent consentment, though it was not without
shedding many tears, and making many sobs, considering to what misfortune my
faults would engage me, as amongst others to go finish the rest of my days
amongst barbarian infidels, far from the exercise of the christian faith, being
altogether abandoned to the mercy of Mahomet, I esteemed my self as his slave;
but although he was of a barbarous nation, yet he was of so courteous a
nature, that he used me with all the respect he could possibly render to a Lady
to whom he was inferior. He saw well that I had cause to weep and afflict my
self as I did, therefore he used no violence, to make me forget my disgraces,
he only attempted to divert my troubles, with much modesty and discretion. In
brief considering the extreme misery whereunto my stars had reduced me, I
might esteem my self very happy; for there are disasters, which ought to be
esteemed as felicities, when one knows they have been in danger to suffer
greater. One day during our navigation, he related unto me the nobleness of
his extraction, the courses which he had made upon the Christians, that in the
same Gally where we were he had been made a slave, and sold to a Spanish
Gentleman of the town of Madrid, who finding himself beholden to him for
great services he had done him in a certain quarrel, and that seeing he would
not turn Christian, had given him his liberty with money and a good horse, for
to return into his country, having before disguised him like a Spaniard to
the end he might pass more securely, and not be known what he was. And this
was the cause that I demanded his assistance, believing him by his habits to be
a Gentleman of our nation. Having much lamented my misfortunes. I must resolve
to have patience, and refer all to divine mercy, in comforting my self that
I am fallen into the hands of a man of excellent behavior which he learned in
Castile. We arrived in this town, where being received by his father with open
arms, and cherished by the King, he is now his only favorite. I hold the
same place toward him, he loves me with passion, as being as he says, the
only pleasure of his life; he has never spoken to me to change my religion,
for he believes that ought to come voluntarily without any force or
restraint. The contentments which he gives me, and the care he has to see
me served, are so great, that there are but two things which trouble me, the
profession of my faith, and my dear Country, without that there is no felicity
in the world that can be entire. The reception he has made of you accompanied
with so many honors testify, that he esteems you much. I have often heard
him speak of you before your arrival, as of a Gentleman most accomplished;
therefore you may assure your self of his amity, and believe that he will
employ himself in all occasions where you shall have need of his credit, and
also for your return into Spain when you shall desire it. If I could but
follow you, and that you would but carry me thither with you, I assure my self
you would have cause to commend the acknowledgment my brother and I should make
you for it. Fenise was about to answer her, but upon the instant a servant came
to advertise them, that the Bacha their Lord was coming thither, which obliged
him to attend another occasion. Eusemie retired into her chamber by the same
door she came, which she shut as before; and leaving Fenise in great
admiration, made him know in the end, that Mahomet and she had been the cause
of the pains which he had suffered, having been like to have lost his life
shamefully, being accused for killing Don Pedro, and kept prisoner for that
subject. Mahomet excused himself to Fenise for having left him so long alone;
Fenise replied by those civilities which are ordinarily used in such
complements, then they continued to speak of times passed, wherein they both
took great pleasure. Thereupon they came to tell them that dinner was ready,
where the stranger was magnificently treated after the fashion of the country.
In the interim Mahomet made a lodging to be prepared for him in the town,
sending all things necessary for a household. The evening being come, he was
carried to take possession of his house, whereof he remained absolute master.

Here one may find occasion to marvel at the inconstancy of things, and the
strange mutation of fortune. It is not Long since Fenise was tossed by the fury
of contrary winds, and at the present he has the wind of favor in poape,
not long since he was tumbled and tormented in a ship, and now he is
courteously received in a Palace, yesterday he was naked, and to day clothed
with rich ornaments, yesterday in a storm at sea, and to day honored upon
earth, yesterday fearing to be made a slave, and to day possessing the graces
and favors of a prince. He had an extreme passion to see the daughter of
Frederick, which we call Magdalene, as well because it was her proper name, as
also being more pleasant to the ear then that of Catife, which they had given
her at Algier.

Fenise was become amorous of her, without seeing her, but by the simple
relation of her beauties, which he had heard her Father make. He dyed with
impatience to attain to this pleasant vision. But forasmuch as the passions of
love are wounds that reach to the very bottom of the breast, they must have a
long time to be cured, so that to think to arrive at the end without passing by
the middle, is either a thing impossible, or very dangerous, so that his
discretion was willing to give leisure to time to work with her, without using
violence.

Whilst Fenise renewed his acquaintance with the Bacha Mahomet, and received
his favors. Frederick ravished with joy for the happy encounter he had made,
and the fair hopes which were given him, would carry news thereof to his
daughter, that she might partake in his contentment, but he found the breach of
the wall made up, and his passage stopped; the owner of this Garden had
repaired this breach it may be for his proper commodity, or it may be because
he had seen him pass that way. Seeing himself thus deprived of this little
good that rested to him, he begun again to lament his misfortunes, and with
tears in his eyes, came to seek his consolation in the wits of generous
Fenise. His dwelling was not now where he had lodged, he passessed the house
which Mahomet had made to be accommodated for him. He received him there with
the most courteous welcome that was possible, and told him that he had obtained
his liberty, having let Mahomet know that he was father to one of his most
intimate friends, and from that hour he retained him to dwell with him, in
expecting some means for the deliverance of his daughter Magdelene. Frederick
embraced him anew with a thousand thanks, for the affection which he had
testified to him: But Fenise observed the sadness which he had in his
countenance, and asked him the cause thereof. Then Frederick declared unto him
that his last consolation was taken from him, the place being stopped by which
he passed to see his daughter.

Fenise having known the cause of his displeasure, led him into a Gallery which
was on the back side of his lodging from whence one might see the Kings house
on that side the tower was, which was over against it, and in showing it to
him, he said, If that be the tovver whereof you have spoken to me, you need
not so much despair as you do. Alas, it is the same answered Frederick, but
the distance from hence thither, is too great to speak to her, if we had
occasion to give her advice of any thing, yet we are happy replied Fenise, that
we are no further from it, but that from the one place to the other we may
easily know and distinguish the features of the face; let us then content our
selves with what it pleases heaven to give us, perhaps it will furnish us with
some invention from whence we may draw more benefit then we can imagine.
Frederick suffered himself to be persuaded by this consolation, and determined
to keep watch in this Gallery, looking every moment if Magdelene or the
Christian slave which served her should come to the window. But because she had
there presented her self three or four times, without seeing Frederick,
because of the accident that was happened, she made no more account to appear
there, judging that there was some great impediment happened to their felicity.

This opinion was the cause that Frederick passed a whole week in measuring the
length of this Gallery, and counting the minutes of every day. In the end as he
was deploring his misery, being out of all hope of ever seeing again his dear
daughter; for the last time he cast his eyes upon the window, and saw Magdelene
and her slave, who looked upon him contesting together whether it was he or no;
for the unknown house and gallery where he was, put them in this doubt. Then
Frederick lifting up his eyes to heaven in action of thankfulness, and
extending his arms toward her, leaning over the parapet made himself known,
and put them out of doubt. He let them understand as well as he could by his
actions why he could come no more to the foot of the Tower, and that from
thenceforwards he might see her from the place where he was, because he dwelt
there, and was no longer slave; then after a little time, Magdalene made to him
the sign of farewell until the next day, and shut her window, for fear of
abusing the favors of fortune, or that Selin should perceive them.

Fenise at that time stirred not from Mahomet, courting and entertaining his
affections, and when the night obliged him to retreat, Frederick made him the
recital of what he had seen, and that he hoped to have the same contentment
the next day: That he thought it would not be amiss to make Magdalen believe
that he was her Brother of whom he had many times spoken to her, to the end she
might present her self more freely. Our Cavalier found this no ill invention,
because it suited to his desires; he told him he should absolutely dispose of
his person and life: But dear Frederick (said he) when a man enterpriseth an
affair, difficult, dangerous, and serious, he ought to foresee all the
inconveniences imaginable, which may hinder his design, for to attempt to
surmount them, and come to a happy success. We must then go here with great
wariness, and take exact heed to our selves in the beginning, for fear of
failing in the end. You said (as I remember) that Magdalene is so recluse, and
retired, that no one sees her but the King, and from thence I fear that she
will not show her self, seeing me with you, imagining that I am some Turk; but
to warrant us from this danger, I think it fit to change my habits, I have
found an invention to get the box brought hither, which we buried at the entry
of the forest, where I found you after my shipwreck; I will take an habit that
is therein, and then when Magdalen shall see me clothed after the Spanish
fashion, you may the better persuade her that I am her Brother. Frederick
approved of his opinion, and Fenise showed him a suit made for the Country, of
gray cloth, covered with plate lace of gold and silver, and complete with all
other furniture. The day being come, so impatiently expected by these two
friends. Frederick set himself upon the watch in the Gallery, and not long
after saw the window open, and Magdalen and her slave appear. He made her a
sign to stay, and went to fetch Fenise to let him see his daughter; he came, he
saw, and was overcome; the imagination which he had formed to himself of the
beauties of Magdalen was very imperfect in comparison of the original which he
admired. During his ravishment, Magdalen carefully considered him, astonished
with this new fashion of habit, and with the grace and good countenance which
he had, yet without knowing who he was.

Her spirit was much troubled to explicate this Aenigma; but in the end, her
father forced her by imbracements and other signs to comprehend that it was
her Brother. She understood it, and then her admiration was converted into
confusion, endeavoring to divine by what means he was come into that place,
for she had learned of her Father the History of his birth and loss. Fenise
made all the gesture? of respect and love he could devise, to testify to her
that he was not only her Brother, but her slave and defendor; she rendered him
those reverences and salutations which courtesy obliged her to, testifying
with her arms, that she embraced him with her heart. Whilst Magdelen and
Fenise entertained themselves with these mute complements, Erimene attentively
considered our Cavalier, this was the name that this Christian slave had taken
to disguise her own; by much regarding him, she thought she knew him, and well
remembering her self, she remembered his name, and the place where she had seen
him. She judged, that since they endeavored to give an impression to her
Mistress that this was her Brother, it was not necessary to declare to her
what she knew, for fear of breaking some favorable project to the contentment
of her Father, she resolved to keep silence, and see to what end would come all
these confusions. In the interim it was not permitted them to stay any longer
in the presence one of another. Erimene careful to manage occasion, made sign
to Frederick and Fenise to retire, yet advising the old man to be at the same
place two hours after, and when the Sun was near setting, Magdelen made them
the sign of adieu, and shut her window, leaving our Cavalier more captive then
all the slaves in Barbary, having sacrificed to her at the very instant of his
first regard, his liberty, heart, and life, resolved to hazard all to deliver
her from the subjection wherein she was. He returned to change his habits, and
take those of a Turk to go visit Mahomet. He was very careful to conserve his
good will, and observe him in every thing, that he might make use of his credit
if there should be occasion thereof, although he had declared nothing to him of
his design, nor of the intelligence he had with Frederick, for fear his zeal
to serve the King might surmount the amity which he bore him. He knew so well
how to make use of the favors of this Moor that he made him believe he took no
care to return into his Country; and that after so many misfortunes received
there, he would renounce it, and was determined to stay there with him as long
as he should please. Mahomet finding himself obliged to his affection, would
testify the esteem that he made thereof, by installing him in the charge of
Subbacha, (an office of justice, as one may say Corrector, or Judge of politic
Government) which Fenise willingly accepted, seeing it was an excellent means
to bring about his design, seeing that this charge made him be feared of the
people, esteemed by the Nobles, and generally beloved and respected of all. The
night begun to extend it self upon the face of the Earth, when venerable
Frederick rendered himself in the gallery, and saw immediately the window open,
and Erimene appear, holding a bow and arrow, which she shot against a wall, a
little further off then the place where he was, making a sign to him that he
should take it up. Erimene having seen him do what she desired, departed, and
shut the window. Frederick perceived that this arrow had a little paper rouled
about the end thereof, instead of a pile, and industriously accommodated; he
judged that there was some mystery hidden; he untied it, and saw that it was a
letter directed to him; he presently went to find Fenise to let him read the
same with him, not being willing to have a secret which he should not have full
knowledge of. They opened it, and saw that it was the Castalian tongue,
containing this discourse.

THE LETTER OF MAGDELENE TO FREDERICK HER FATHER.
Sir,
THe signs and gestures which you have lately made to me, letting me
understand that the Gentleman which accompanied you is my Brother, which was
lost from his birth, has left my spirit in a Labyrinth so confused, that it is
impossible to get out thereof without a more clear and ample explication. I
cannot comprehend how he should be come into this barbarous Country with the
habits he wears, and be in liberty, without having renounced Christianity,
which I cannot believe he has done; for being issued from your blood, he could
not have committed so cowardly a perfidiousnesse, and so infamous an impiety;
and although my just curiosity might merit some satisfaction, yet I do not hope
that you can content it: I am now held so short, that it is scarcely permitted
me to leave the presence of Selin, his passion and jealousy is so violent,
that he yet doubts if I be where he finds me; this is it that has hindered
me so long time from seeing you, and will yet deprive me of that contentment.
But I have found an invention whereby we may entertain one another, by writing
and letters, during the silence and obscurity of the night.

The King has certain birds of the bigness of Black-birds, which sleep all the
day, I know not whether it be by custom which is given them, or their proper
nature; but it seems that Heaven has so ordained it for our consolation
particular. In the night they fly, and feed by candlelight, whither hunger
makes them go as they see it. He has given me one of them, which shall be our
faithful messenger, if you please, this is the industry we will use. The night
being come, you shall be in your Gallery, with a candle in a clear lantern,
and when I shall see that light, I will put out mine in my chamber, and let go
the bird; he shall have a letter delicately fastened under one of his wings, he
will fly strait to you, and perch near your candle; you will easily take him,
for he is very tame; then you may untie his letter, and having seen it, if you
please, answer it; you may fasten it in the same manner you shall see, then
take away your candle, and I will light mine, and come to the window, and
presently the bird will return to me. To proceed therein more securely, and
avoid danger, which may incur, if our art should be discovered; let us make
proof thereof with a little piece of white paper, in stead of a letter. Make
your self ready the night after this, and be in the Gallery about twelve a
clock. God prosper happily the invention to his honor and glory.


Frederick and Fenise embraced one another, seeing so clear an appearance of a
power to communicate and resolve together some great enterprise for their
common liberty, Magdelene being courageous, and Erimene very ingenious. It was
she that had written this Letter; for although the other knew the Castalian
language, having learned it of Erimene, she was not so expert as to write in
that style; they praised and admired this favorable invention, as in truth
they had cause, it being extreme rare, secret, and subtle; but there is
nothing that a woman will not find out to surmount the obstacles which oppose
her contentment: In vain do fathers and husbands shut their doors, and wall up
their windows, and guard their walls, to avoid scandal, and to take from their
Daughters and Wives the intelligence they might have with their Lovers: the
more they are shut up, the more leisure is given them to exercise their wits,
and to invent means to overcome what hinders them; there is no Tower high
enough, nor locks, nor doors, nor walls strong enough to conserve their
honors, if they do not guard them themselves.

Fenise glad to see so fair a way laid open to his hopes, prepared an answer to
this sweet letter, that the messenger might not stay that came to fetch it. The
time assigned to Frederick being come, he rendered himself at the place
assigned, with a candle in a lanthorn, for fear the wind of the birds wings
should put it out, or that she might offend her self, and without attending
long, he heard a sign given at the window of the Tower, and at the same
instant the angelical bird came, and pearched upon his arm, which he presented
to her for that effect near the candle. Fenise and he took her safely, findding
the white paper, and untying it, put their answer in the place thereof; then
hiding their light, according to the instructions received, they saw that of
the the tower to appear, and let go this faithful and able confident, in the
twinkling of an eye she rendered her self betwixt the hands of her mistress,
who gave her the most sweet and amiable nourishment of her face, accompanied
with a thousand amorous kisses, paid her the portage of the letter she brought.
The hand wherein it was written was known by Erimene; confirming her in the
opinion she had that this Caviler which Frederick would have pass for the
brother of Magdelene was a gentleman of Toledo, to whom she had often times
spoken, and seen verses of his writing, yet she did not declare her thought to
Magdelene, who impatient to know what this letter contained prayed Erimene to
read it.

FREDERICKS ANSWER TO HIS DAVGHTER
MY daughter, it must be some Angelical spirit that has given you this
invention, it is so excellent that I cannot enough praise it, I scarcely
complain any longer my disaster, having this admirable manner of comforting my
self with you; but we must go discreetely to work to prevail in our
deliverance, from the tyranny wherein we are. I hope it by the aid of God and
the courage of your brother, who takes great care for our comune contentment.
A strange adventure has brought him hither, to take part of our miseries, or
to deliver us from them, his liberty is conserved by the means of a powerful
friend he has in this town, let this suffice you for the present. If we can
but conserve this communication, by the intermission of this flying messenger,
and a cipher which I would have us use, we shall presently come to the end of
some high enterprise: the secret of our cipher shall be to take the
neighboring letters to those we have need of; as for example in stead of an A.
take a B. for B. take C. for C. D. and so until Z. for the which Z. we will
take two AA. then for to say, I adore you, I would put these letters, K. BEPSF.
ZPW. yet if you find not this convenient, you may let it alone; but for my
part I shall always much esteem this eypher, as most necessary to my good
fortune and the secret.


Thus ended this letter which left some kind of sorrow in the mind of
Magdalene because she assured her self that this unknown Cavalier was her
brother. This proximitie did not please her, for as much as it did not accord
with the love that begun to take place in her heart. Erimene that penetrated
into her most secret thoughts, perceived well that there was something in the
letter that pleased her not, and to be cleared of the suspicion which she had
conceived, she prayed Magdelene to tell her what it was that troubled her, to
the end she might comfort her. Dear companion of my caprivitie said Magdelene
to her, you have just occasion to complain of me, if I should reserve any
secret from you, and to testify that my heart is open to you, I will tell you
truly, that since the hour that my father made me to see the Cavalier, I have
had extraordinary troubles. I know not whether it proceed from the influence of
the stars, Blood, or the graces of that gentleman, but I have suffered since
that moment, unquietnesses which I have hitherto been ignorant of, and also I
have a certain sorrow that he is so near unto me, I have said enough I am
ashamed that I have so freely confessed my fragilitie unto you.

The ingenious Erimene having heard these words, which confirmed what she had
before imagined, thought that this was a proper occasion to declare
reciprocally to Magdelene, the secret which she had hidden from her, to
encourage her love which ought to serve as a foundation to the edifice of their
liberty. Since that you have spoken to me with so much freedom, said Erimene,
J am obliged to imitate you, lest J give you occasion to accuse me of
ingratitud, and this shall be now to acquit me of that which J owe to the
affection which you have so particularly testified unto me. Until this present
J have concealed from you, my true name, birth and country; not to follow the
ordinary custom of those, who seeing themselves in a miserable condition,
vaunt to be of a greater extraction then they are, to the end to move
compassion or courtesy in others. J told you at our first meeting that J was
called Erimene, that J was of the kingdom of Aragon, and of mean condition,
at this present J will confess the truth to you. J am called Leonor Velazquez;
J am of Toledo and of noble birth. Then she made him an ample narration of all
the history which we have already recited, of the death of Felix and her
servant, and the cruelty of Don Jouan her brother; as it has been said in the
first book, then she continued saying. Having then considered by the tragique
end of this unhappy lover (which dyed for being disguised in my person) by the
cruelty of Don Jouan my brother, and seeing also that he had slain her in
thinking to have killed me, J conceived so great a hatred against him, and his
presence was so odious to me, that since that time it was impossible for me to
stay in his company. For to separate my self entirely from him, J lest Toledo,
and went with one of my cosens to the town of Leride situate in the province
of Catalogna. Amongst the pleasant conversations of this town, J saw a
Cavalier whose perfections and good offices which he rendered me, obliged me
to give him my heart and soul, that J might not be reputed scornful nor
ungrateful. But with your permission J will attend a more convenient time to
recount unto you how J came to see him, what engaged me to love him, what
adventure brought me into this region, and what subject has ravished from me
this object of my affection. J will not for the present entertain you with
other things but what may be proper to comfort you in the pain you are in, and
moderate the unquietness of your spirit. For this cause J tell you that this
Cavalier, which they disguise with the name of Don Louis, is called Fenise. J
have diverse times spoken and discoursed with him, as being the intimate friend
of my brother Don Jouan. J knew then all his kindred, and as soon as your
father let us see him with him, in Spanish habits, J knew him to be the same J
have now told you. But having reasoned upon the disguisement under the which
your father presented him to us, J do imagine that he did it for fear his
presence which was unknown to you should give you some apprehension. To tell
you by what means he is come hither, how he has made friendship with your
father, nor by what title he possesses the house where he dwells, I cannot,
for they are things I have no knowledge of, but of his valor, generositie,
discretion and wit I can much commend; although not so much as his merits
deserve, so that if your sorrow proceed from the fear you have he is too
near you, you may banish it at this instant, and place instead or it, a hope
to arive one day at a glorious success, provided that we can but recover our
dear liberty. I this day see, answered Magdalene, that heaven is interessed
in the alliance of our amity, I receive so much consolation from you, that I
do no longer fear what troubles can befall me, the knowledge which you have
given me of this Cavalier, disperseth all the confusions wherewith my spirit
was troubled. In the pain which I had to believe what my father would make me
understand, I was a little moved to wish him well, but for the present, I must
confess to you that he possesses my heart, and that I take an extreme
pleasure hi the increase of my affection. I perceive now nothing that can
trouble me upon this subject but fear that he should want inclination to
esteem my amity. No, No, answered Leonor, you must not trouble your self a
new, I have experience enough, to judge of him the just contrary to that
thought: I can assure you that he loves you: And that it must be so, I will
give you a testimony clear enough, let us look again upon the letter, look
you, regard this example which he gives you, to use the Cipher: it is not
without mystery that he uses these words, I adore you: ading afterward yet if
you find this not convenient, you are not constrained, the will ought to be
free: but for my part I shall always much esteem these Ciphers as most
necessary to my good fortune; All these words are equivocall, and written by
him with design to explicate unto you his feelings.

Magdelene easily believed what Leonor persuaded her, because her discourse
sympathized with her desires, she prayed her to make an answer for her to
Fenise, and to use the propounded cipher, as well to disguise her thoughts to
her father, as to let her lover see the esteem she made of his counsel.
Leonor was not much prayed to render her this service, die was interessed
therein by the desire she had to leave her captivity; for she knew Fenise to
be so hardy and able a man, that he would not spare his life to attempt their
deliverance. She writ to him discreetly the thoughts of her friend, leting him
understand that she was the secretary; that she would serve him in all honest
things he could desire; and in the end conjured him, that in case there was any
hopes of liberty, to remember her in the quality of the sister of Don Jouan.

This letter was sent him hy the air as the former, Fenise received it with
joy, and read it with ravishment, his love and courage augmented to the
double:love is the son of Mars as well as of Venus. What gladness felt he
when he knew that Leonor was companion to his mistress, he promised himself
better success in all his designs, as well for that which regarded his
passion, as for the project he had to ravish Magdelene from the possession of
the king of Algier. He knew Leonor to have an excellent wit, and to be very
capable to help in a great enterprise: adding also, that in procuring her
liberty he should deserve pardon for the death of her brother.

The next day after the receipt of this letter, Fese went to visit the Bacha
Mahomet, to entertain his amity, and not to be unthankful for the favors
which he continually received from him: and because Mahomet loved much his
conversation he kept him to sup with him, so that he was long before he
returned to his own house. In the interim, Frederick stayed there to watch if
there was any news from Magdelene and as he walked in the Gallery, regarding
from to time this amiable window, about a leaven of the clock at night he there
perceived a light, this made him think that the messenger, might well have
some dispatch, to bring to him, and thereupon he went to fetch a light, placed
it in the gallery as a countersigne, it was scarcely seen when that of the
window appeared no more, and immediately the faithful bird arrived with this
writing which was directed to Fenise, yet Frederick, opened it, for they were
in so good intelligence that there was no secret betwixt them.

THE LETTER OF MAGDELENE TO DON FENISE.
I Do not know whether or no my father has told you, that for a long time the
King of Algier, has prosecuted and solicited me to consent to the proposition
which he daily makes me to marry me. If yon do not already know it, I now
tell you of it. At the present his passion presses him so violently, that
since yesterday he has threatened me to convert his love into anger, and
instead of respects and favors, which I may hope from him, I shall receive
cruel rigours, if I do not resolve to content him within a month. He has
represented unto me, that for the love of me he has used my father with less
severitie then all the other slaves, that he goes and comes where and when he
will, but if I do not adhere to his desires within the time limited, he has
protested unto me to make him feel what a power angered can do, and to finish
upon me the vengeance of the contempt which he says I have made, of the
honor he would raise me to; and the good he procures me. Judge then in what
alarm I am, consider what apprehensions I have to arrive at the limits of the
time he has prescribed to me for fear of being abandoned to the greatest
misfortunes that can arrive, seeing my father suffer upon my occasion. But if
heaven inspire you with some industry to deliver me from the extreme torment
which my soul suffers, in the name of God execute it betwixt this, and the
prefixed term which is given me. And if we can ( Leonor and I) contribute any
thing to this diligence, advertise us, and believe that we will be most hardy
and courageous, to enterprise it, and to dye generously for want of good
success. Make haft then, if you love me, and if you esteem the irrevocable
gift I make you of my heart.


Fenise being returned to his house, Frederick showed him the letter he had
received, the which caused great disquietnesse in them both the rest of the
night. They labored with their spirits to invent some stratagem to deliver
this beauty from the pain wherein she was, but as many designs as they plotted
so many difficulties they found in the execution thereof. In the end after
diverse propositions, they could not foresee any good success, by reason of the
recluse life which Selin made them lead; yet they were resolved to undermine
the tower where Magdelene lodged, and steal her away with Leonor, when there
should any vessel arrive, wherein they might carry them into Spain. The house
of Fenise was in a situation very favorable to their enterprise, near to the
Palace, and without any obstacle betwixt them, the space was nothing but a
garden, which appertained to Fenise; besides, the earth was sandy and easy to
dig. All the difficulty was to find an invention to sustain the earth; for
being sandy, it was subject to fall in, and capable to overthrow them and choke
them in their work. But Frederick was of opinion to break up a boarded floor in
Fenise his house, to take the boards and joists to serve for that business.
Having ripely consulted the execution of this project, and seeing that this was
the only means for their safety, they resolved to try their fortune; they
gave advice thereof to the prisoners, counselling Magdelene to change her
lodging, and to pray the King to give her the lowest room of the tower where
she was, and also to take the extent of her lodging with a thread, and to send
it by their ordinary post, to the end they might not open the mouth of the mine
in any other place but her chamber. All this was executed as it was devised,
the King agreed with a good heart, that Magdelene should lodge where she
thought good, so that she and Leonor took justly the measure, and sent it to
them. In the mean time Frederick and Fenise were provided of instruments
proper for their design, they set their level to the which the knowledge of
the Mathematiques serves perfectly which comprehends Geometry, which Fenise
understood excellently, and during the silence of the night, whilst men slept
they wrought with an incomparable courage underproping the earth as they
hollowed it. Heaven which had inspired them with this invention, conducted
their hands so happily, that within a little distance from the place where they
begun their work, and the first night they found a straight cave, which
extended it self in length directly toward the end of their design. Ravished
with joy they fell incontinently upon their knees, and gave thanks to God being
persuaded that this could not have happened but by miracle. They entered boldly
therein, and law that it was the work of man, and ended at the foundation of
the wall of the Palace; this foundation was so large and strong, that other
courarages less constant then theirs, would have given over the enterprise,
there were such terrible stones, that for to demolish and displace only one,
they must consume all their force, tools and time; they gave not over, for all
that, they visited, searched, and groped all over with their irons, in the end
they knocked in a place which founded not like stone, they regarded more
carefully, and knew that it was a little door covered with bars of iron, so
rusty that it was not to be distinguished from the stone, but only with the
touch of a hammer. They contented themselves with their labor for this time,
and went to repose the rest of the night, with resolution to continue the next
day, and labor to break this door with croes of Iron, and force the bolts
wherewith it was shut. The beginning of the night following, as Frederick
walked in the Gallery, expecting the hour to go to work, he received a
Letter, wherein was enclosed the third which contained the necessary measure,
for the better conducting of the opening of the mine, by which letter they
learned, that it was be done under the chamber of Leonor, because that of
Magdelene advanced more into the Palace by two fathoms. Animated with an
extraordinary courage, they went into their mine, furnished with files, croes,
pincers, and other irons proper to break and beat in pieces all obstacles that
they should meet with. They had not so much trouble as they apprehended, time
and moisture had wrought for them, and taken away more than the half of their
pains, the bolts and locks were so old, rusty, and consumed, that they scarcely
presented their irons to them, but they yielded to them, and opened upon them,
they found the entry stopped with plankes, and a certain kind of matter like
plaster, which did not much resist them, passing further they saw a greater
concavitie, which extended it self two ways, they took that they judged most
fit for their project; after they visited the other in every corner, but
amongst all these turnings under ground, they could not find any issue nor
entrance, but that which they had made, they were both ravished with
astonishment, and yet very glad, thinking they might now work securely, without
being surprised or discovered, as they apprehended before they had broken the
door, not knowing what they should find on the other side. They begun to
consider for what use these caverns were, and in the end imagined, that some
Tyrant of Algier, fearing he should lose his Kingdom, and have his person
seized upon, had caused them to be made to save himself, if there should be
occasion, and that time had taken away the memory thereof, and filled up the
entry. Then they took the measure which was sent them, and multiplying it as
often as the Letter spoke of, found that one of the arms of these Caves
reached just under the Lodging of Leonor, being twelve Foot distant from that
of Magdelene.

They gave over work and retired, to give notice thereof to those for whom they
did it; they sent them word that it seemed that God wrought for them, and
conducted their enterprise, having found all their work almost done, by the
means of caves which they found, telling them also, that they believed they
were come under the lodging of Leonor: These two friends, ravished with joy of
this comfortable news, answered them, that the night following Leonor would
knock with a piece of wood upon the floor of her chamber, to give them a
certain sign of the place where she was.

With this intelligence Frederick and Fenise continued their exercise of
laboring pioners, and when those planks and boards they were provided of, were
useful unto them, they underpropped the vault for fear of being overthrown,
and at the end of their work to end their lives. This work was extreme painful
for these men which were not accustomed to it, besides, being but two, they
could have done no great matter: In effect, without meeting with these hollow
places which they found, they had died in the enterprise. All they did, during
six nights, was only to underprop as well as they could that compass of the
vault where they pretended to make the hole; and yet they were careful to
advertise Magdelene and Leonor thereof, to the end they should not lose the
hope they had given them; having underpropped it, they yet employed three
nights to break the vault, ever and anon listening to judge of the thickness by
the blows which they expected must be given by Leonor or Magdelene. In the end
they heard them, which made a harmony which charmed their senses; this animated
their courages, but their forces failed them, so that for to take new vigor
they remitted the rest of their travail until another night; it was
impatiently expected, but it came according to its order, they began again to
break, but they had scarcely employed a quarter of an hour, when they saw they
had no more need of croes and hammers, and that the earth fell down of it self.
Then Leonor, who had heard the noise of their hammers, knocked upon the floor
of her lodging, and made her self to be heard so clearly to our workmen, that
they judged than they had not above two foot of thickness left; they continued
vigorously, and the stones and earth came so fast toward their center, that in
a little time they pierced and entered into the chamber of Leonor, whom they
found alone, and who received them with amorous imbracements. Having thanked
God for this happy event, they went to repose, deferring until the next day
the seeing of Magdelene, who was retired, not believing that they could this
night finish their enterprise, and because It was three a clock, Leonor judged
they ought not to waken her, for fear that some unexpected misfortune might
discover their secret. This judicious consideration obliged the two friends to
moderate the vehemence of their desires, not for to hazard that in a moment,
which they hoped to possess many years; when they were departed, Leonor set a
table over the mouth of the Mine, and put a great Turkey Carpet upon it, and as
soon as it was day she went into the chamber of Magdalene, and saluted her with
this pleasant and miraculous news; Magdelene would scarcely take time to
dress her self, she was so impatient to see this happy hole. She considered
with joy and admiration, figuring to her self, that although it tended toward
the center of the earth, yet it was the way to Paradise, and a favorable issue
to escape out of the hands of these Infidels, and come again into the exercise
of the sovereign and only Religion. She was a little troubled that Leonor had
enjoyed alone the presence of her Father and Lover, reproaching her for not
calling her; but Leonor satisfied her, letting her understand, as it was true,
that they did but only enter into the chamber, and went out again, for the day
approached, which would not suffer them to stay longer there, and that she
should see them with more convenience the night follovving: This hope
contented and disquieted her at the same time, for when one approaches the
possession of a benefit, they desire it with more violence, forasmuch as they
better know the value thereof, and also presume that there is no more trouble
to attain it. This night so impatiently expected being come, in the greatest
silence thereof, Frederick and Fenise entered into their Cave, with a staff they
knocked softly under the table that covered the mouth of the Mine, to let them
know that they were there, and to know if they might enter, at the same instant
they saw appear Magdelene and Leonor with a light, who stretched out their arms
to them, crying for joy, and pitying the pains that this Father and Lover had
taken for their sakes; necessity, which is the mother of invention, taught
Femose to knock nails into the planks they had brought to serve for a ladder,
to mount to the center of his affections, he made Fredrick pass the first, he
climbing to assist him, because his age took away his agility. It is impossible
to express here the joy of these four persons, and particularly of Magdelene
and Fenise; she did not know whom she should embrace first, her Father, or her
over; blood counseled her to go to the one, and love to the other; but after
having suffered this little combat in spirit, as most wife and discreet, she
cast her self upon her knees before her Father, and held his knees embraced
long time, and in the interim courteously cast her eyes upon glorious Fenise
who commended the action of his mistress, as testifying an acknowledgment of
the obligations she had to this venerable old man who had suffered himself to
be a slave so many years for the love of her. Frederick had enjoyed longer
time, the ravishing imbracements of his daughter, if Fenise had not been
present, but desiring he should partake of his contentment, he made Magdelene
rise and presented her to our Cavalier. He wanted not much at that time of
prostrating himself, upon the earth to adore her, for she was so shining with
attractions of beauty and joy, which is the most excellent paint, and which had
given her complexion so lively a luster, that he believed he saw a goddess
before him. She came toward him with a grave modesty, and Fenise saluted her
withal the respect and reverence she merited; having rendered her this homage,
he ran to embrace Leonor, to whom Frederick had made his complement, they held
no superfluous discourse for fear of losing time which was so dear to them.
Fenise would willingly have exaggerated his passion, and testified his
Eloquence in this action, but it behoved him to leave amorous devises, and to
discourse upon the means to finish that which they had so happily begun; their
resolution was to dispose their flight for the third night after, and that
Magdelene and Leonor should disguise themselves in Turkish habits which Fenise
should bring them, who charged himself with that diligence, and all others
that should be necessary for the stealing of them away. Upon this
determination, they begun their embracements and tears, and took leave one of
another to dispose of themselves to finish the work they had so well begun;
whosoever had diligently held the countenances of Magdelene and Leonor might
well have observed the secret joy of their hearts.

The King seeing the time approach that he had given Magdelene to resolve to
consent to his will, visited her more often then ordinary, thinking to learn
by her carriage her determination. He came the next day after this dear
meeting into her chamber, to see her new lodging, and seeing him arrive, she
met him with such cherefullnesse, that the King was astonished at this pleasant
change, for he never saw her before but with tears in her eyes, and sighs in
her mouth. He knew not to what to attribute these gracious actions, whether to
the fear she had to see her father suffer as he had threatened, or her
sensiblenesse of the honor he intended to do her in taking her for his wife.
But without examining more curiously the original of this alteration, he was
infinitely satisfied, as well with her good reception as charming
entertainment: for there is no creature in the world so proper to make a
deception as a woman.

The King being retired, believing that he had won her heart and affections,
and that she was disposed to accomplish his desires, would testify unto her
the good and profit she should in time receive from his liberality. He sent
her a box of gold inamelled, wherein there was two bracelets and a gar^and of
Diamonds of very great value. She received them with all her heart in making a
thousand humble complements; saying this magnificence was prodigious, seeing
that a Lord and master made presents to his slave. Leonor felt also the good
humor of the King, she had for her part a chain of pearl which was not of
much less value then the gift he had made to Magdelene.

All things hapened as happily as they could wish for Fortune who had bin so
contrary to them, and who had proved their courages upon a thousand occasions,
then treated them most couteously and showed her self favorable upon all
occasions. At that time she conducted to the port of Algier two vessels of
Pirates, who used no other exercise, but rob upon the sea all the vessels they
could render themselves masters of, sharing their booty with the King Selin.
The one of these pirates was called Roustan and the other Nazouf. Fenise being
informed of their arrival, made a design to serve himself of the ship of
Nazouf to steal away the captives; for this purpose he suborned with silver
two Moors which came with this Pirate, and made them declare upon oath, that
Nazouf defrauded daily the King of the tribute which was due to him, concealing
and hiding the better half of the booty which he made at sea, without giving
him partas he was bound. Upon this deposition they seized upon the Pirate, and
made him prisoner, and thereby his voyage was stayed. Roustan which was the
head of the other ship departed immediately to exercise his ordinary trade.
Fenise visited the ship of Nazouf, informed himself what arms was therein, of
the men that kept it, and of all other things that he judged necessary to his
intention.

The term being come so impatiently desired by our four christians, the night
rendered her self guilty of their design, she assembled all her darknesses to
warrant them from the danger they might run. Frederick and Fenise went by the
same way they had traced with so much pain into the chamber of Leonor,
carrying with them the two turkish habits, wherein it was determined that
Magdelene and she should cloth themselves as they did. Having hidden in many
places of their habits those precious jewels which the King had given them, in
the hope he had that Magdelene should be his wife; they found themselves ready
to leave the the palace, and abandon themselves to the discretion of Fortune.
Then without losing time, Fenise made but one leap into the floor of the
mine, being strong and disposed, to the end he might help this fearful troop
to descend, who marched under his conduct. Frederick descended after him, to
whom Fenise gave his hand, and a dark lantern which he held, then he mounted
again for fear his mistress or Leonor should hurt themselves; having safely
let them down, he lightly threw himself after them and carefully guiding
them, they begun their way by these horrible places under ground. They had
scarcely passed six or eight paces, when they perceived the earth to fall upon
them, as if they should be overthrown and buried quick, which terrified them
very much, not knowing whether they should advance or recule, but they were
delivered from this terrible apprehension, by another alarm which was not
less fearful. As they begun again their way, animated by the courage of
Fenise, which had taken the candle out of the lantern to see more clearly,
the earth fell down a second time upon their heads, and a man fell before them
at their feet crying Jesus, the air he moved in falling put out the candle
which Fenise carried. Oh heaven, what fear! yet this generous Cavalier was not
astonished; it is a dead man said he, let us go on, and going the first held
his mistress by the hand, the others followed. He would have continued his
way, and advanced toward the vaulted caves; but Leonor made him stay; saying
they should assist him that was fallen, and that it was some christian slave;
since that at the very instant of his fall he had called upon the holy name of
God: that (that being so as it was very probable) he would help them the
sooner to their ship, her advice was approved; they helped him to rise, and
went on leading him with them, without troubling themselves to interrogate him,
contenting themselves to believe he was a christian. They had much incommodity
to get out of these caves for want of light not knowing which way to take; at
every step they stumbled, and fell one upon the other by reason of the stones
and clods of the earth that were under their feet. In the end they got to the
house of Fenise where Magdelene and Leonor took breath which they had lost by
weariness and fear in this terrible passage. Fenise begun to approach this
slave with a candle in his hand to see who it was they had received unto their
company, when he heard a violent knocking at the door of this house. Fear
begun then to seize upon the hearts of the most determined of the company, they
look one upon another without speaking word, or knowing what to resolve. And
Fenise seeing that the blows doubled, animated his resolution, and went to see
who knocked so impatiently at his door: he knew that it was the slave
savourite to Mahomet, who prayed him from his master to come presently to him,
for an affair wherein diligence was so necessary, that it would save him his
life. Fenise sent away the slave assuring him that he would presently follow
him.

This news troubled our Cavalier more then all the passed alarmes had done, on
one side, he was called to the succor of his friend and benefactor, and on the
other side he was retained by his passion and honor not to abandon the troop
that had no hope but in his assistance.

Then he feared that as soon as day should appear Magdelenes flight would be
perceived in the Kings lodging. In fine, he found means to perform the one and
the other obligation, he armed the two women, as Frederick already was, with
Carabines and Cymitars, and left his lodging, taking what he had the most
precious, of silver and jewels and the most easy to carry, and carried them to
the vessel of Nazouf, as faigning to give them in guard, by the Kings
commandment, until that Nazouf who was prisoner, should be convinced or
justified of the accusation he was charged with, advertising them that as soon
as he had seen Mahomet he would return to them, and put them to sea, as they
went to execute this project, they saw the same slave come running to them,
conjuring Fenise to make have, otherwise his Master was lost. So that seeing
himself thus pressed, he broke the determination which he had taken, and went
to the lodging of Mahomet, taking with him these four persons, letting the
slave know that they were men of confidence and valor wherewith he was
accompanied to serve Mahomet in case of need; being arrived at the door, Fenise
made his company attend at a mean distance, whilst he went to speak to the
Bacha: He found him at the entry of his house, and by a very short discourse,
let Fenise know the pain he was in; Dear friend, said he, I am fallen into a
misfortune, wherein I have need of the assistance of a man of valor and
loyalty as you are, to help me to save my life. It is the merit of this fair
Christian here (showing him Eufemie which accompanied him) which has obliged
me to an action wherewith the King will be offended: She has been a long time
persecuted by the passion of a Moore cosen to the King, to adhere to his
sensualities, and although she has often prayed him to desist from these
importunities, and impertinent pursuites, he forbore not to go on. This
insolent would try his good fortune, and to the contempt of my respect, is
entered into my house by the means of a servant which he had gained, to the end
to obtain what he desired of Eufemie, or else to render her some notorious
displeasure. And I knowing her innocence, and the rashness of this Moore, I
surprised him as he put the first foot into the chamher of this fair one, and
have made him find in the same place the last step of his life, his body is
hidden, but this Homicide will be discovered, as soon as it shall be day. The
King will not pardon me, since that I have violated the respect due to his
blood, whereof he is proudly jealous. These considerations hinder me now from
reasoning, and looking after means to warrant me from the danger wherein I am;
therefore I have recourse to your good wit, and cast my self into your arms
with this Christian Lady to assist me with your counsel, and generous effects.
Fenise having heard this discourse, setting aside complements, told him, that
he must put Eufemie into man's apparel; Mahomet did it incontinently; then
seizing upon many stones, and a good quantity of sequines, with the aid and
assistance of his faithful slave which he took with them, he abandoned
himself to the faith and conduct of Fenise.

They went together to get the gate open, where they stood in need of no small
credit; for there is a mavelous care observed in keeping the gates of this
Town, but the Officers and Porters knowing the Bacha and Subbacha, believed
that they were going to execute some command of the Kings, as they told them,
they were going to seize upon a great booty, which Nazouf had concealed, with
design to frustrate the King of his right, and for this cause they took with
them these men which accompanied them, and particularly this slave, which knew
where the riches were hidden; in saying so, they showed him that fell into the
Mine. This dissimulation agreed very well with the imprisonment of Nazouf,
which every one already knew, so that the gate was freely opened unto them,
besides Mahomet being the Kings favorite, they durst not doubt of what he
said. The Bacba being out of the Town (whereof the gate was incontinently shut
after them) took notice of the company which were with Fenise, fearing that so
great a number might cause some confusion in their enterprise; he prayed our
Cavalier to rid himself of these people, and send them back again; but Fenise
assured him of them, and prayed him to take care for nothing, but to follow him
and confide in him, and in those that accompanied him. Thereupon they came near
the vessel, Fenise called to those that guarded it; for he had informed
himself of their names when he visited it; presently Fenise and his unknown
troop entered, which were courteously received by the Mariners, if there can
be any courtesy amongst those people. They were scarcely entered, when by the
aid and intelligence of some of those of the ship, which Fenise had gained, or
rather suborned with money and fair promises, they seized upon all the Moors
which were in the ship, and disarmed them, they loosed the captives which were
at the oars, and put the Moors in their places, making them also to prove the
strange changes of fortune. This being done, without provision of victuals or
arms, but what they found in the ship; Fenise cut the cord that held the
vessel to the port, and by force of arms they got out of the shallow road
into the main sea. The women were put into the best room of the vessel, where
they entertained themselves with their prodigious adventures, their long
captivity, and the hopes they had shortly to see again their dear country
Spain, and there to enjoy the sweet repose of life. In the interim Fenise,
Frederick, and Mahomet, with the two slaves, that is to say, he they found in
the Mine, and he belonging to Mahomet which he had brought with him, being
guilty of the death of the King of Algiers cosen, were all upon the watch, as
well to see if they were followed, as to make the Moors, whom they had
chained, to row with all their force, that they might get away the sooner. The
day being come, Fenise regarding all those in the vessel, considered the
fashion and carriage of the slave of the Mine, admiring that his fortune had
served her self of so strange a means to give him his liberty; by considering
of him, he judged him to be of some noble birth, and in this imagination, he
came to him, praying him to content his curiosity, and let him know how he had
been taken by these Barbarians, and made slave, and by what happy accident he
was fallen into the mine there to find his liberty. Then this unknown, with a
modest smile, testifying his willingness to satisfy the desire of Fenise,
begun his history with this honest Complement, speaking in the Castilian
tongue.

Generous Cavalier, I would willingly beseech you to dispense with me for this
obedience, the recital you command me to make, requires so much patience and
time to hear it, and there are so many sad and tragique accidents therein, that
I am afraid you will be much troubled before I shall be at the middle thereof,
or that the end will make you extremely melancholique. Yet since it is your
pleasure, I will begin this sad discourse, to finish it when you command me
silence.

THE HISTORY OF DON JAME
THere is a famous and rich Town in the Kingdom of Catalogne, called Leride. It
pleased Heaven about twenty four years agone to let me be born there, of a
noble Family, and of good reputation; the greatest part of those who are far
from their Country speak in this manner of their extractions, although very
often one may know their lying; but whosoever will inform himself of my Line,
when we shall arrive at the Port, if God conduct us thither, shall find my
words true. The excesses of youth, which very few men escape, carried away my
Father to lascivious affections, from whence I had a bastard Brother; he was of
appearance good enough, but of ill effects. My Father caused him to be brought
very young into the arms of my Mother, to bring him up, which was an action
more rash then civil. She was more charitable then she ought to have been, for
Wives sometimes are guilty of the faults of their Husbands, not that they love
them, but because in supporting their first debauches, they give occasion for
seconds. She took as great care to bring him up as if he had been her proper
child; nevertheless she loved him but as a stranger. I had, some few years
more then he, but although I was in an age of innocence, I was as indifferent
to my Father as if I had not been his child, or to say better, as odious to see
as an enemy: There are Fathers that have less humanity then savage beasts; he
loved Lucian as much as he hated me, this was the name of this bastard brother;
I cannot better exaggerate the affection which he bore him, then in saying so.
We had a Sister which was a little younger then we, but advantagiously fair,
and we were all three brought up at the same place, our Fathers house. During
our infancy, Lucian and I were almost always in debate, but being but for
slight things, our dissentions were incontinently appeased, sometimes for fear
of our Father, and sometimes for fear of being punished by those who had care
of our educations. But when we had attained to the age of twenty years, he
became more audacious, and I more choleric; he envied the demonstrations of
amity which my mother used toward me, and I was as envious of the affection my
Father bore him; these favors gave him a licentious liberty, liberty
boldness, and boldness insolence to do so many evil actions, that he got
the reputation of a most perfidious and infamous person; he had no other
exercise then to ruin the honors of those he could meet with, for whether
their simplicities suffered him to surprise them, or that they resisted his
dishonest desires, he did not forbear to slander them; his tongue was so
dangerous, that he spoke ill indifferently of all women, publishing as soon
lies as truths, and vaunting of that which he did not, as well as of that which
he did. The disorders of his life mounted to such an excess, that he had a
design to enterprise upon the honor of his own Sister, the sacred limits of
blood, her proper virtue, nor my vigilant care, could not retain him; I was
advertised of his pernicious project by a servant whom he thought to have
rendered adherent to his abominable intentions, because she had suffered him to
communicate them unto her; but this was a discreet Maid, who had given him this
audience, but only that he might confide in her, and hinder him from seeking to
another, who it might be would not have carried her self so discreetly therein.
She did but hear him to learn his resolutions, and give me notice thereof, that
I might prudently prevent them. When this Maid had told me what she knew
thereof, I could scarcely believe her, the thing was so prodigious; but
considering the manners of the person, and comparing them with the discourse of
this Maid, I found he was capable to commit actions yet more monstrous. I would
be wise in this affair, and inform my self of the truth, to the end that the
vengeance I hoped to take, might be esteemed just, and not rash. From that hour
mine eyes were Sentinels over the words and actions of Lucian; he made no step,
nor ever approached near the place where Olinde was, so mine innocent Sister
was called, that I did not discreetly watch him, from whence I found more
confirmation of the truth of the report which was made me then I would have
done; yet I dissembled the trouble of my mind, with intention to govern my self
with such industry, that at the same time his designs should be broken, my
Sister delivered from his persecutions, his impudence chastised, my vengeance
accomplished, and my self without fear of being known for the Author of his
death. I disguised my self in the night, and followed him when he went about
the streets, to attrap him all alone, and let him feel the violence of my
choler, in killing him. One time amongst others, when I went to search him with
this design, after having long time walked about the Town, and the places of
debauches, where I knew he ordinarily frequented, without meeting with him, in
entering into the street where the house of Don Ignigo Orozco is situate, one of
the principal Cavaliers of the City, I heard a confused noise of voices; I
went toward this house, and knew that it was there where the rumor was, but
yet I knew not what was the cause thereof at the same time. I saw two men
unknown, which approached as I did with like curiosity; I came to the door,
and perceived the house all within to be on fire, which did not only threaten
to consume the Edifice, but also the goods and persons which were therein, and
all this misfortune came by the negligence of a Lacquey, who had fastened a
candle against a wooden seeling.

From moment to moment the flames augmented with so much fury that some of the
men were constrained to leap out of the windows, seeing the stairs on fire;
the women being less courageous, stayed besieged in their chambers, crying for
mercy, and causing great pity to those who heard them. Amongst the rest which
suffered these fears, I perceived through the flames and smoke, a Lady, whose
beauty and clothes testified her to be a person of esteem; and seeing the
extreme necessity which pressed them, I cast my self into the house, and
taking a great hammer from a man that I met, which was come to give succor, I
broke a thin wall and entered into the chamber where the poor desolates were,
amongst the which I saw saw the original of my first admiration, which was in
a swound, I took her in mine arms, and carried her cut of this fearful
danger which threatened her, making all the rest which were prisoners with her
to come out. As this accident happened, during the first sleep of the whole
family, this lady was wakened in a fright, and being presently cast into the
floor, was not clothed but only with a petticoate and wast coat, the one of
satin richly embroydered with flowers of gold and silver, and the other
pinked, through the which appeared a breast of snow capable to inflame ice it
self. Seeing her so little covered, I cast my cloak over her body. I do not
know whether it was to keep her warm; or for fear she should inflame the
heart of some other as she had done mine, for what marble could have been
insensible of so many attractions? As I carried her away being yet in her
swound, those two men which I met in coming to the door, came to me with their
swords in their hands, and one of them who had his face covered with cipres,
because he would not be known, put himself in action to ravish from me the
conquest which I had made with so much courage, and to take from me the worthy
object of my love. In this violence seeing my self without my sword; which I
had quitted having no use thereof against the fire, I knew not what to do, but
to use words, and represent to them, that their enterprise was not only
incivill, but very cowardly and infamous, to set upon a man without arms, and
in saving a lady of her condition from the fire. The other woman which
accompanied her, alarmed with this insolence begun to cry for help, then the
companion of him that had set upon me in the cypres mask gave me a great
thrust in the right side which passed quite through my body, then turning his
face he fled with the other, I would have run after them, but the blood which
issued in abundance out of the wound rendered me so feeble that I fell down at
the second step. In the interim this lady returned from her swound much more
vigorous then before, having two souls for one, for I had given her mine. Yet
she was like to dye for fear, opening her eyes, and seeing a man at her feet
all covered with blood, and whose habits testified that he was not of base
condition. Whilst she was in this new astonishment, the master and servants of
a neighboring house came out, some to help this lady, and others to assist to
quench the fire: which whilst they did, the others carried away this beauty to
their house with one of her cosens which accompanied her. At the same instant
Don Jgnigo was told of the disaster which was arrived me in saving from the
fire, the most preticus goods of his house; And without knowing who I was, he
ran presently to cause me to be succored, having known me, he had his heart
seized with extreme sorrow, seeing that this misfortune came by raeson of the
good office I had rendered him. He made me incontinently be carried to my
lodging, accompanying me, and protesting to revenge me rigorously if he could
discover the infamous culpable, finding himself extremely interessed in the
offense. As soon as they begun to look to my wounds, Lucian arrived faining to
be extremely afflicted for my misfortune, he informed himself of whom I had
received this injury, promising to employ his life to be revenged of them.
There were so skillful operators about this cure that in a few days I was
perfectly healed, for the blow did not offend any inward part, nor entered much
within the body; the servant which had given me the first notice of the
pernicious projects of Lucian, seeing me ready to to go abroad, came to me
into my chamber telling me that she had a new secret to communicate to me: and
after she was assured that no body could hear her, she held me this discourse,
speaking softly. Sir said she, I should esteem my self confederate with with
your enemies, if after having discovered a conspiration they have made against
you, I should not advertise you thereof; herein you shall know how much I
esteem the conservation of your person, as you have already made proof of the
respect I bear to your honor in what I have heretofore told you. You must
know then, that the night after you were hurt, about twelve a clock, I heard a
talking in in the chamber of Lucian by reason of some indisposition I had which
would not suffer me to sleeep, I arose and put my head to my window (which you
know looks into the court over against that of Lucian, which has the same
view but a little lower then mine) I could easily see thorough the glass what
they did there, because there was a light. I saw there was ashes upon the
table, and that with the end of a flat stick he made clean his sword, full of
certain rusty spots^, and in doing thereof, I heard him hold this discourse to
Fabrice, the man that serves him, and whom he trusts with his incestuous
designs, since that which we did the last night, there are two things which
trouble my spirit. The first, that mine arm had no more force nor address but
to leave in doubt the life of Don Jame, that was the name I bore when I was
happier then I now am.

Scarcely was this name spoken, when fair Leenor which heard it, and who being
at the door of the chamber of the poope had also heard the beginning of this
recital, came with her arms open and cast them about the neck of Don Jame,
ah, my dear husband, said she, in crying out, it is possible that thou art
this day so near me? he knowing the voice and countenance of her that spoke;
Ah God! is it you my dear Leonor? saying so he embraced her reciprocally, and
they remained fastened together without being able to speak any more. They
were so ravished with joy, that they wanted not much of giving up their souls
in this transport. After a good space of time, they opened their arms, and
beheld one another with tears in their eyes, Don Jame to dissemble his,
endeavored to reprove those of Leonor, telling her that those that weep for
joy, ought to have no tears for their troubles. All those that saw these
amorous actions, marvelled at this prodigious encounter, which gave Fenise the
more curiosity to know the end of the history begun, the which Don Jame
(having reunited his spirits moved with the sudden apparition of this Angel)
continued thus.

The second discontent which troubles me, said Lucian, is that thou could
not steal away Leonor the Niece of Don Ignigo, whom I thought to have kept in
some secret place as a stranger and a very fair Maid. I thought to have come
to the end of my design in despite of her and her resistance. See Sir, what
insolent words: If we should have stolen her away, answered Fabrice, I believe
that you would not have received thereby much pleasure; for I do not know how
one can find it, where there is no correspondence in desires, nor that one can
exercise such rigor upon a beauty, who is seen with tears in her eyes to
lament the loss of her honor. Pity, then answered Lucian, has hindered thee
from satisfying my will. Fabrice made excuses which Lucian received for that
time; yet propounding to himself to search occasion to accomplish his rash
design, as far as to take the boldness to entreat an unseasonable hour into
the house where Leonor should be, although he should be forced to scale the
window of her chamber, or force the door. Fabrice answered him nothing, it may
be not approving what his Master said, as being too rash and dangerous to
execute: From whence it happened that two days after, this unfortunate
confident was found dead, with three stabs of a poniard in the breast, which I
presume was given him by the hand of Lucian, through rage and revenge, as well
for the cowardlinesse wherewith he accused him, as seeing him not disposed to
assist him in the last proposition which he had made. Since your growing well I
have observed his disquietnesse, as being troubled therewith, and lately
knowing that you begun to rise and walk in your chamber, he stamped upon the
ground, and lifted his eyes to Heaven, as if he had made some secreet threats.
But yesterday he came to me, and made me this discourse. Glicere, said he, thou
art not ignorant of the damage I received in the recovery of Don Iame, since
that the effect of my desires is thereby stayed, and extremely delayed; his
presence hinders me from satisfying the passion I have for Olinde, in enjoying
her beauty, I do not say her love, though I have always perceived that she
has loved me as a brother, but at the present I am as odious to her as an
enemy, which makes me at this time to be pricked on as much with vengeance as
love, and that I seek to content my desires to satisfy the one and the other
passion. For this cause I have recourse to thee, having already communicated
unto thee my secrets, that thou may serve me in a new project which I have
made, wherein I have need of a most particular confident, which I desire thou
should est be, assuring thee that thy recompense shall exceed much what thou
shalt'st think to have merited. See here a certain powder, said he, in drawing
a paper out of his pocket, which you must make Don Iame to swallow amongst his
meat, or in some broth, the which will cause a mavelous effect. He will fall
into a languishing, and fall away from day to day, so that in a month I shall
be rid of him. Do not fear that any one shall be troubled therefore, the cause
of his death will be attributed to his wound, upon the opinion that the
Chyrurgeons closed it up too soon. Consider how much this secreet imports me;
for having declared to thee, if thou deferrest the execution thereof, and that
I do not see the effect of the powder which I put into thy hands in the time
that it ought to operate, thy life shall suffer for it, and thou shall pay for
the fault of having disobeyed my will. The impatience I had to get out of the
hands of this devil incarnate, obliged me to take the powder which he
presented to me, and to assure him of my fidelity, praising God, that he had
declared unto me these abominable intentions. Behold this diabolical powder,
and I discover nakedly unto you, the damnable enterprises of this wicked man,
assuring my self that your wit and prudence, will so ingeniously carry the
business, that neither you nor my self run any danger. You ought to be the
protector of my life, since that I show my self infidel to this Traitor, for
the conservation of yours.

At the end of this discourse I remained so confused, and so moved against this
monster of abominations, that if I had been in case to have risen out of my
bed, I had then attempted to do it, to go find this cursed man, and satisfy
my self by his blood. But having passed this first motion of choler, I said to
Glicere, that since that the effect of this venomous powder was so slow, that
she must make him believe that I had taken it, and for my part I would seem to
be indisposed, complaining to feel my self fall away every day, and that in
the interim I would search means and occasion to catch this piper in the snares
which he had laid for me. Glicere retired upon this assurance, and I had a
desire to give this empoysoner the same venom which had prepared for me; but
because the effect thereof was so slow, I feared that he should perceive the
double intelligence of Glicere, and so his rage might cause him to serve her as
he had done Fabrice, for not having executed his will; and again, that in
taking the preservative against the powder, knowing the composition thereof, he
might escape my hands, and find some other more ready invention to make me
perish under his. I determined then to seek some other way to revenge my self,
imagining with my self, that since that the term was thirty days, I should
find one, wherein no one but himself should be in danger. During this long
time which I had been deprived of the sight of Leonor, my health and love
increased every moment. She who acknowledged her self my obliged, for the
great service I had done her, wished also to know me, and to testify her
thankfulness, she would willingly have sent me some message, but she was
fearful to be esteemed light, not knowing what judgment I might make of this
liberty. After having contended with these irresolutions, she laid all her
fears on one side, and her love on another, but the last carried her beyond all
considerations. She made me a complement by a maid that served her, excusing
her self for having been so negligent in sending to enquire of my health.
Lucian saw her enter into my chamber, and envious of the honor which I
received, remembered himself of his first design to ravish Leonor in the house
of Don Ignigo, which made him observe the behavior and words of the Maid; she
afterward told me, that her Mistress was extremely troubled in her very soul
for the evil that was befalne me upon her occasion, and that she would esteem
her self extremely happy to know the person to whom she was engaged for so
great a benefit, as that was to have saved her from the fire, and from those
that would have ravished her person; in fine that when I should be permitted to
go abroad, if I would take the pains to visit her, I should be very welcome.

These pleasant words ravished my soul by mine ears, mine eyes testified what
joy I received thereby, and my tongue answered with courteous words, that the
first time I should go abroad I would not fail to come kiss her hands and
receive her commands. Two days after I executed this promise, went to salute
this ravishing beauty, which heaven has let me see again, this day, either to
verify my narration, or to give me an incomparable joy, after three years
absence. I saw her then at her lodging, I discoursed with her, where I found
the excellency of her wit, and gave up my soul to her which she shall possess
as long as it shall be lawful for me to dispose thereof. In acknowledging my
submissions, she was content that I should call her my mistress, keeping
always the same respect toward her which I have done in your presence. Yet in
time the access which I had to her grew so familiar, that one time I was so
charmed with her conversation, and stayed so late with her, that the night
surprised us before we thought thereof, for being together hours seemed but
moments unto us, her Uncle at that time came out of the town, he had a custom
to shut the door of his house in entering; and to keep the keys until the
next morning, he did the same then, so that it was impossible for me to get out
to the great displeasure of Leonor, fearing that I might be so rash as to
attempt upon her honor, though she might have been well assured of the
reverence I bore her, yet seeing her self forced by necessity, she was
constrained to suffer me to stay in her chamber until the time was come I
might descend by a cord from a Balcony window which was over the street; the
time came of my departing from her lodging by this way. Leonor looked out of a
window to see if there no body appeared that might discover me; she perceived
two men to stand still in a corner, and told me that I might stay yet a little.
She was in perpetual disquietnesse to get me out, doing nothing but go and
come from the window to the place where I was* and putting her head a new into
the street, she saw a third man with the two others, one of them having a
lantern, they approached together, the house of Don Ignigo, and stayed at the
sellar window, then one of the three begun with a croe of iron, to force and
break the bars of iron wherewith it was shut whilst the other two kept the
watch, looking all about if any one saw them, or if there passed any body that
might hinder their enterprise. Leonor came presently to advertise me thereof, I
came softly to the window, and saw that the grate was broken, and that they put
down a ladder into the window, Leonor was upon the point of wakening all the
household servants, but she was fearful I should be discovered, if
peradventure the lodging should be searched, and also that finding her in her
clothes at this hour, something might be suspected to her disadvantage Whilst
we consulted of what was to be done, we^ saw one of these men to descend by the
ladder into the cellar, carrying in his hand a dark lanthorn shut, and the
other stayed in the street to attend him then we persuaded our selves that they
were no^ thieves, and atributed this action to love, thinking that it was some
servant to one of the Maids of the house: upon this imagination Leonor was a
little more at quiet, esteeming that (provided that he^ honor was safe) she
ought not to torment her self with what others did, so we took patience
without making noise; but presently after we heard one approach to our
chamber, and put a key into the lock; thereupon I put out a candle which was
within the chimney, to the end I might not be seen by the person which was
entering, and prayed Leonor to take courage, and not to cry out, for if she did,
she would undo her self and me also. Thereupon the door was opened, and we
savv the same man to enter, that had before gone down into the cellar with
his lanthorn; I was then hidden under the Tapistry near the bed of Leonor,
where she was laid down, who seemed to vvaken in starting, and to be ready
to cry out. At the instant this unknown came to her, with his face masked,
bidding her make no noise, nor awake any one, saying it was a robbery of
honor which he would make, and that his love had engaged him to this
enterprise. Leonor sat up, and laid her hands upon his stomach to put him
back; no, no, said he, in embracing her, your resistance will serve to no
purpose, you must either willingly or unwillingly adhere to my passion, or lose
your life: The mask which covered his infamous face, could not so disguise his
voice, but that I knew it was Lucian, and withal I remembr^d what Glicere had
told me, so that full of wrath and indignation I cast my self upon him before
he could put himself in defense, or know with whom he had to do: I plunged the
blade of a great poniard into his breast, wherewith he was so surprised and
frightened, that without staying for a second blow, he left his hold, and fled
to the Balcony window, by the which I was to have gone out, and cast himself
down into the street upon the pavement, almost dead with his hurt and fall, and
all soyled with his blood. His two companions which attended him, seeing that
there was a man fallen from that window, came to see who it was; and as they
returned in the obscurity, they touched the tricker of a pistol which Lucian
had hanging at his girdle, and which was so well directed, that it blew two
bullets into the head of one of his confederates, which fell down dead by him,
so paying for the charity which he had in being his Scout. The other seeing his
companion so ill treated, believed that he which had leaped from the window,
had used this stratagem for to kill them both by foul play, so that fearing to
have the like misfortune with his Comrade, he fled hastily away.

Seeing things in this estate, and the peril which we ran both of us; Leonor,
if it should be discovered that the murder was done in her house, and I being
known for the homicide, I resolved to warrant my self from all inconveniences,
by absenting my self from Leride, and taking Leonor with me, for after the
first fault a hundred others are committed. For this effect I went down from
her chamber into the cellar, by which Lucian was got in; I went up the ladder
into the street, drew it from the window, and fastened it to a cord which Leonor
threw me from her window; then she fastened it to the cross bar of the window,
which being done, she courageously descended, but we had not taken heed enough
of the length, and fastening of the ladder, it wanted six or seven steps of
touching the earth, so that Leonor fell this distance, and if I had not half
received her in mine arms, I believe that the tomb of her youth and life would
have been at the foot of this ladder; yet for all my catching her she hurt one
of her feet against the pavement, so much that it was impossible for her to go
one step. I leave you to think in what pain I was then; on the one side I had a
spectacle of two dead men; on another a house broken; with these I found my
self engaged to defend and assist a person which was so dear to me, and to whom
I had so many obligations, and yet constrained to warrant my self from so many
accusations that threatened me. I assure my self that the best wit would have
been much confused amongst so many disgraces; for my part, I do avow that I
found my self extremely amazed, and knew not what to resolve upon: one while I
thought that the most convenient remedy for me was to leave Leride, but
considering that I was unprovided of necessaries for a voyage, I changed my
opinion. After a thousand various thoughts, I determined not to stir yet,
until I saw what brute would be published of this strange success, and also
we thought it expedient that Leonor should return into her chamber; the
resolution was easy; but the execution very difficile, because of the hurt the
had got in falling. I got the ladder again into the window, to the end she
might pass by the same way that Lucian had made for us: But the poor Lady was
extremely afflicted when she saw that she must go down a place so foul and
slimy; yet seeing that there was a necessity, she took courage, I passed the
first, and taking her upon my shoulders, went down the ladder, and carried her
into her chamber; I represented unto her, that she ought not to apprehend any
thing, although she should be accused of the death of these two men; on the
contrary, this action would be esteemed most glorious, when the occasion should
be known; nothing more lawful then to defend life and honor against those
that would set upon them. Having thus resolved her, I took leave, and retired
my self by the same way I descended. Before I went from this house, I came to
the two dead men; I took the pistol from the girdle of Lucian, and put it into
his hand, and did the same with the poyniard to the other, to give cause of
belief that they had killed one another; the invention succeeded happily
enough, since that all that saw them were of that opinion. The Justices having
employed above fifteen days to inform themselves of the fact, believed that
the dead men had been their own proper murderers. During this time, Don Ignigo,
Leonors Uncke, was taken with an apoplexy, which took him away in less then
twenty four hours; and as one misfortune never comes without company, two
days after his death, a Burgois, one of my friends, came to advertise me, that
a certain neighbor of Don Ignigos was extremely glad, as well of his decease,
as of the occasion which he had to be revenged of his race, since he could be
no more of his person, for an ancient injury which he said he had received from
him; and after this troublesome beginning, he told him that Leonor had been the
cause of the murdering of those two men, that she had made them to be slain by
a Gentleman that courted her not long agone, and thereupon he named me, not
knowing that the Burgois was my friend; that he had seen her descend from the
window of her chamber, and me in the street to receive her into mine arms: in
brief, finishing all the other particulars of our actions, he continued saying
that he was determined to go and declare it to the Justice, for in so doing he
should discharge his conscience, be the cause of the chastisement of the fault,
and satisfy his vengeance, which was his principal passion. This Burgois,
which knew the interest that I had in this proceeding, prudently showed him,
that he ought to take heed what he enterprised; that he alone would not be
believed, and befides he was much to be suspected, and reproachable, fince that
every one knew the old hatred which he bore to the house of Don Ignigo
deceased. So it was that he moderated the motion of this accusator, to have
leisure to advertise me thereof, and give me time to remedy these threatenings;
I thanked him for the good office which he had rendered me, and disguising the
truth to him, made him believe that this neighbor was mistaken in me. As soon
as this Burgois was gone from my lodging, at the time when the day begun to
fail, I went to a Lady which was a friend to Leonor, and who knew that I
served her, I desired her that she would use means that I might see her at her
house the next day at the same hour; she promised it me, and performed it
exactly. I saw Leonor, and told h^^ the evil news which was told me, and the
danger wherein this wicked neighbor pretended to put us, from whence it would
be very hard to escape without absenting our selves. For my part, had it not
been for her consideration, I had already been out of the Town, and if that she
would resolve to follow me, I would warrant her from all peril, retiring our
selves into some place where we might live contentedly, having already provided
things necessary. But for to give her full assurance of the sincerity of my
love, I promised her the faith of marriage, and swore to her never to require
the accomplishment of my desires until my word was executed. Moreover, that
her Uncle being deceased, she had more liberty to dispose of her person; and
that her absence would not seem very strange, not being of that Country, it
might be presumed that she would retire her self into her own, and to her own
house.

I employed so many favorable persuasions with those vvherevvith her interior
love solicited her, that she consented to my proposition, under the secret
assurances which I gave her, calling the Divine Majesty to witness, and
beseeching it to be revenged upon me at the instant that I should violate them.
Having received mine oaths, she promised me to be ready the next day to go
vvhither I would carry her. In the interim, I provided a good nag for her, and
took for my self an excellent (...) strong German horse, and the hour
appointed for our departure being come, which was in the evening, we went alone
out of Leride without acquainting either man or maid servant; for it is almost
a miracle when those people know a secret and do not reveal it. We took the
way toward Valence, and for the first we lodged in a little hamlet out of the
way for fear of being known, faining to have lost our way, two days after we
arrived in a very fair village by which I had passed before, distant from
Valence about twenty miles, where we stayed some time, and were as well lodged
and received as in our own country, for with silver Barbarians are tamed, and
friends are bought every where; after some time we grew weary with this country
conversation; I then had design to pass into Castille and communicated it
unto Leonor: but she dissuaded me from it by the recital of the original of
her absence from Toledo, and by the hate of any thing that might put her in
mind of her brother. We had not yet resolved whither we would go, when I
received letters from that Burgois of Leride, (to whom before our departure I
had discovered the whole truth, of the action befaln in the house of Don
Ignigo, and who harkened after all things that was said thereof) whereby I
learnt that this revengfull neighbor, had declared all that he had seen, but
too late for his vengeance, and that they searched after us by horse and foot;
this troublesome news obliged me to leave the kingdom and go into Sicilie; I
made Leonor agree thereunto, to whom countries were natural if I was there,
yet not telling her that was written unto me, for fear of disquieting her
spirit, and changing her good humor. The occasion which invited me to go into
Sicilie, was that J had an uncle there, brother to my mother, whose high merits
had got him the government of a port there, with whom I hoped to find security
again those that sought after me, augmentation of my fortunes, and repose, to
pass happily my time with Leonor. But whosoever grounds his felicity upon
temporal things shall always find himself frustrate of his ends; we were no
sooner imbarqued upon the sea, but we found our selves in the hand of pirates,
Turks, who in despite of our resistance, rendered themselves masters of our
ship, our liberties and lives.

They carried us to Algier, where we were all separated one from another by the
sale they made of our persons, to all those that presented themselves to buy
us. I know not what became then of my deer Leonor, for me, I was sold to a
Turk, one of the chiefest of the country, who having kept me some time,
presented me to Selin King of Algier, in quality of a slave of ransom, where I
dwelt until this last night, in the middle whereof I heard a noise in the
stable, I arose to see what it was, I found that it was two horses which fought
together and furiously bit one another. I came toward them to separate them,
for it was my charge, my masters thinking that I was not capable of any other
employment; but the great haste which I made hindered me from taking heed of a
great hole which the horses had made with stamping with their feet, J went to
put them in their places, and in going the earth failed under me, and feeling
my self to fall, J unvoked the sacred name of Jesus, by whose merits J have
found life in thinking to have fallen into a gulf. Otherwise if J had not
pronounced this high name and had recourse to his aid, it may be you had
killed me, taking me for some Jew, Moore, or Turk; it is then from the virtue
of this divine name, that J hold my life, liberty, and the glory to see again
before mine eyes, that dear Leonor, always loving, and to whom before you,
Gentlemen, J renew the vows of my service promising her to accomplish when she
pleases the faith of marriage which J have given her.

At this last word these contented lovers begun again to continue their
imbracements, and talk together of their adventures, to the great contentment
of the rest of the company, but the pleasures of the one, and of the others,
lasted not long. They perceived afar off, a vessel to come toward them, in so
great have, that although they did all their endeavors to avoid it, it was
impossible for them, so that it behoved them to quit the instruments of flight,
and betake themselves to those of defense. Mahomet upon the instant made all
the Turks put off their habits, and put them upon those which were habited
like slaves, to the end that if the vessel was commanded by some pyrate who
was ignorant of their flight, he might let them pass without setting upon
them, seeing them all in fashion of Turks, and conducted by him, who might
make himself known. They gave arms to them who had none, that they might not
be surprised in case that they must fight, as amongst others, to Don Iame and
the slave of Mahomet which he had brought along with him, in whom he much
confided, who who was named Charles, a man of an advantageous proportion, and
who seemed to be courageous Being then prepared the best they could to sustain
the shock, this vessel which they feared approached them, they presently knew
that it was the Pirate Nazouf, which came to fall upon them. He had order from
Selin to employ all possible industry, for to bring them back alive to Algier,
as well for to chastise them, the more cruelly with long torments, as also to
warrant Magdelene from the hurt that might otherwise arive her, which was the
cause why Nazouf used all his endeavors to board them without using fire, but
he found more resistance then he imagined. Mahomet, Fenise, Don Iame, and
Charles, did marvels, they four alone defended a long time the entrance of
their vessel: Frederick and the other captives which were in the vessel of
Nazouf, when Fenise made himself master thereof, testified also much courage.
The vessels were fastened together, and the heat of the combat, made the
combatants of the one and the other vessel, pass it without thinking thereof,
so that they were together pel mell, when they perceived another ship, who
seeing them together came so near them, that all of them easily knew it. This
was the ship of Roustan, which we have heretofore told you departed from
Algier, when Fenise took that Nazouf, and arrested him prisoner; Roustan was
therein in person, who being known by both parties, was at the same time called
by Mahomet, and by Nazouf to help them, being well assured that the party which
he took would carry the victory. Nazouf cried out to him on on^ side, that
they had betrayed the King, and that they were fugitives; that Selin his Lord
had chosen him to follow after them, being much interessed in his own
particular, honor, and goods, that he might use more care and diligence to
take them. Mahomet and Fenise cried out to him on the other side, that Nazouf
had deceived the King, and that they were sent to take him again, he having
violated his prison, and saved himself for fear of the punishment which he
deserved; that he was a deceiver, and used this artifice to oblige him to
assist him, and that he had best take heed of lending his hand to him, if he
would not be declared a criminal to his Majesty. These last words had so much
power over Roustan, that having considered the authority of those who spoke
them, to whose offices belonged this action which they did; he regarded no more
the reasons of Nazouf, on the contrary he boarded his vessel, and cried to him
that he should render himself, as the rest also did which accompanied him; so
that these confused voices, amazed and troubled so much the spirit of poor
Nazouf, that without any further resistance, he was constrained to yield and
give up his arms. Thereupon Mahomet and Fenise leaped into his vessel, saying
that he must pass into theirs, that they might be the better assured of his
person. Nazouf would not, seeming to be half mad at the foul play which was
played him, not being able to defend himself therefrom (...) nor so much as to
make it known. Roustan seeing these violent contestations, saw that he was
obliged to tell them that he would put him into his, which was instantly
executed, contrary to the will of Fenise, who nevertheless durst not
contradict ^t, for fear of giving some shadow to Roustan. Our Cavalier would
willingly have had Nazouf under his hands, to have diminished the forces of his
adversaries, but it was necessary for him to dissemble his discontent. Part of
those who accompanied Fenise were very glad of the happy success of the
stratagem, the rest were in care how to find means to separate themselves from
Roustan, which pressed them all to return to Algier, Nazouf consented willingly
to the effects of this proposition, but Mahomet which feared the execution
thereof, found an invention to tell him, that he must before visit a little
Isle where the Pirate Nazouf had hidden the booty which he would deceive the
King of. Thereupon Charles his slave came to him, praying him to join his ship
to that of Roustans, that he might leap nimbly thereinto and poniard him.
This resolution did not seem impertinent to Mahomet, judging, that if Charles
could bring it about, they might easily render themselves Masters of the
vessel, forasmuch as there was no other conductor. But as they were about to
execute this conspiration, they discovered a Galley of Malta, as soon as the
Cross was perceived by these Barbarians, a cold fear glided into their veins,
which made them tremble; for (forasmuch as they are slaves to the devil) they
tremble at the sight of the Cross. Fenise and Don Iame feigned to be moved
therewith, and to be in fear of meeting them; but in their souls they were
ravished with joy, seeing that this was the happy sign of their good fortune.
Mahomet made a show of fighting with this Galley, reanimating the courage of
Roustan, who considering the great booty they might make, being three vessels
against one, took again his spirits which were strayed, with the apprehension
he had, and disposed himself to attach this Galley. Who would not be astonished
to see the force of covetousness upon the souls of these Barbarian Pirates,
where the love of riches has greater power, than the fear of losing their
lives? Behold them then ready to go against this Galley, but with designs
much different. They put before them the Ship wherein Nazouf was come, and the
generous and brave Knights of Malta, seeing that they were Turkish vessels,
prepared themselves to give them a brave reception, although they knew their
force to be far inferior, as well because of their three vessels, as of the
great number of Barbarians which exceeded theirs, but their courages and valor
supplied this inequality. As soon as they saw them approach within Cannon shot,
the Maltans gave them a salute with two of their greatest pieces, which
incontinently sunk their first vessel. Then Fenise took away their Turkish
colors, where the Crescents and Halfe-Moones were, and put in their places
Christian colors (as the Turks do sometimes to deceive the christians when
they meet them upon their coasts) and adding to this sign the Castalian
tongue, wherein the implored the grace and assistance of these knights, they
made the effect of their artillery to cease. So that when Roustan knew the
fault which he had committed, in not believing Nazouf, it was impossible for
him to fly, or for to defend himself.

Seeing himself in this extremity, and to take away the glory from the Knights
of triumphing in his taking, and to exempt himself from the pain which he
might receive in their hands, he commanded the bottom of his vessel to be
pierced, and by little and little it made a hole into the sea in the presence
of the Maltans, rather choosing to lose his goods and life, than to see himself
a slave to those who had been at his mercy, if he would have believed Nazouf.

The Knights were very sorry for the loss of this Conquest, but this sadness
was lost in the joy which he received who commanded the Galley, when he knew
Don Iame his Nephew. This was that Uncle that he thought to have found in
Sicily, as it has been already said, who being newly honored with the Knights
of Saint John, went from Malta to Cartagene for an affair of great importance.
Don Iame extremely glad of this good fortune, after having embraced the knees
of his Uncle, named those to him in whose company he was. Fenise and Frederick
saluted him, and after a thousand actions of Grace, and as many testimonies of
a generous rejoicing, they all entered into the Galley, and went to Cartagene,
as well because it was the Port whither this Gally tended, as also not to be
separated from the Knights that had delivered them from so notable a peril,
because they feared to meet other dangers, from which they could not escape
being alone.

The End of the Third Book.
THE FOURTH BOOK OF FENISE.
THE Galley of the Knights of Malta took Port most happily at Cartagene, to the
great pleasure of all that were therein, and particularly of Frederick, because
he expected to there to see again a person with whom he hoped to find
consolation the rest of his days; he also rejoiced, that he had brought again
his dear Daughter to the place of her birth, and to see her served by Fenise,
whom he esteemed to be one of the most accomplished Cavaliers of his Nation;
and for that cause agreed with all his heart to the honest designs which he
had for her. Leonor was also most contented, to find her self out of slavery,
and near Don Iame, as passionately in love with her as in the beginning of
their affections. Mahomet on his side thought himself most happy to see
himself in a country where he might easily perform the intention he had to
become Christian and also to satisfy his desires in marrying Eufemie. She also
thought her self much bound unto him, for his honest proceedings toward her
whilst she was under his power. In brief every one of them was perfectly glad
to be so miraculously escaped from the tyranny of the Barbarians, even Charles
the slave of Mahomet felt his part of this felicity, seeing himself honored
and esteemed by all, as well for his generous actions as for the advantages
which nature had put upon his countenance, which made him suspected to be of
other birth, then what he had reported. They were all so strongly bound
together in affection that they sound their separation extremely troublesome.
The generous Frederick, considering that his house was spacious enough to
receive them, invited them thereunto to repose themselves as long as they
pleased. All those that could habited themselves after the Spanish fashion
doing it before they came out of the vessel, for fear of being overthrown by
the curiosity of the vulgar. The liberality of the knights was shown in this
action in giving clothes to those who had need thereof. Every one of them as
they descended kissed the earth of their dear country, they embraced one
another, all acknowledging themselves to owe their liberty to the wit and
courage of Fenise, who with courteous complements thanked Frederick for the
favor which he offered them, but was of advice that since that it was night
that they might lodge together in an Inn, as strangers, that they might
accomodate themselves the next day with all things necessary, to be civilly
clothed before they made themselves known; besides it was expedient to
inform themselves secretly of their proper affairs after so long absence.
This proposition was approved by all the company, who took their leaves of the
Uncle of Don Jame, assuring the other knights, that they would send them the
next day the clothes which they had lent them; they left them their vessel to
dispose of as they should think good, and having taken out their coffers and
boxes wherein were the Jewels and other things, the most precious which were
brought by Magdelene, Leonor, Eufemie, and Mahomet, they went to that Inn
which was nearest the port. The next day every one accomodated himself with
what he had need of, and the night being come, Frederick prayed Fenise to do
him the honor to accompany him to his house, and under pretext of demanding
news of a Cavalier his kinsman, see if they could know him. In entering into
the street he perceived some people who were before his house, he approached,
and saw great light in the rooms which appeared through the windows, and also
many persons which went in and out moved with joy. Then Frederick regarded
Fenise without speaking a word, being extremely astonished from whence these
testimonies of rejoicing should proceed, and desiring to be cleared therein, he
informed himself by a man which came out of the house without a cloak, and
who had the fashion to be one of the domestiques. You know very little answered
he, if you be ignorant, that the Widow of Seigneur Frederick is married again
to day, since she is a Lady of great renown. Saying so, he briskly passed by,
leaving Don Frederick in greater confusion than before. Then turning himself
toward Fenise; Dear Friend, said he, what do you think of this answer? Is it
possible that he speaks truth? I doubt not of it, replied Fenise, nor you
ought not to think it strange; for after an absence of fifteen years, which
are passed since you were heard of, it is believed you are dead. I do not so
much marvel at this accident, as I am troubled with the trouble we shall
presently bring to the Feast, when you shall make your self known, which we
must go about to do wisely and promptly, for fear of a great disorder. You
have more cause to praise Persinde than to blame her, since that he might have
done this action sooner, without any scruple of conscience, and having attended
until this time, she has given you leisure to come to oppose the last
execution. Frederick approving these judicious reasons, although he had his
spirit much confused; they entered into the hall where the assembly was,
covering their faces, to see secretly the countenance of the future Bride, and
to know him which pretended to enter into the place of Frederick, they put
themselves into a corner, standing upon a bench, where certain people looked
over the heads of others. The first persons that Fenise cast his eyes upon, as
being in the place most eminent, was Don Lovis his dear friend, he who was the
unknown son of Frederick, and Leonard brother of Eufemie the Cavalier, with
whom he had made friendship, after they had fought together near Valence, as we
have said before in the first book. They were near the one to the other, and
with a Cavalier which Fenise could not see well enough to know, but whom he
judged to be of great condition, as well by his rich habits, as also because he
took place of the other two. Frederick nor Fenise knew not which was the
pretended Bridegroom, they demanded of one of those that was mounted upon the
bench near, who being as ignorant as they, showed them Don Lovis, saying that
it was he, and that he was a stranger. Fenise was much astonished at this
prodigious encounter, yet scarcely believed what this man had told him, because
of the inequality of their ages; for he could not have more than twenty fix
years, and the woman might not only have been his mother after the common
manner of speaking, but was indeed truly so. Then he made a new experience of
the ^ertue of Gold, which makes conformity amongst things where there is no
proportion. In the interim Frederick ignorant of the thoughts of Fenise, raised
himself upon his toes, attempting to see the pretended Widow, he saw a troop
of Ladies set in a circle, but he could not distinguish his wife, because they
were all so brave and shining with stones, then casting his eyes upon him they
said should be her husband, he was astonished at his great youth; the more he
considered all these things, the more he was filled with confusion; yet he said
nothing, leaving the conduct of this affair to the prudence of Fenise, his
spirit was moved with a thousand se^erall propositions which he made to
himself, to resolve how he should govern himself to declare the lawful
impediment of this Marriage, without being the cause of some great dissension,
which seemed to be inevitable in this business. In the end he found an
invention to do it without scandal. He turned toward Frederick, and told
him, that for to make this enterprise proceed happily, he would advise him to
return to the Inn, to fetch the three Ladies who were there, making them take
their best attires, and put their Mants upon them, (that is a great vail which
the women have in Spain, which they carry upon their heads, which covers all
their bodies unto their heels;) also to pray Don Jame, and Don Geronime to
accompany them, and if they would, to bring Charles with them, being of their
company, and in the interim he would have a care to hinder the solemnity of the
Marriage, if they went about it whilst he made this little voyage. Frederick,
who had no other will but that of Fenise, whom he knew to be as much
affectionated to his interests, as himself, went incontinently to satisfy his
desire.

Fenise seeing himself alone, would do an action of gallantry, which is
esteemed in Spain upon such occasions: he glided behind the spectators, and
came to the Violins, prayed them to look to his cloak and sword; then he put a
piece of cypress before his face, entered into the middle of the Hall, and
inviting the future Bride to dance, who did not refuse him, although he was
unknown, caused a Galliard to be sounded, where he made himself admired in
many things; for besides his being well clothed, his proportion, disposition,
and action in this exercise, ravished the eyes and affections of all the
Assembly, who died with desire to know who he was; at the end of the dance he
let fall industriously his cypress, as if it had been against his will, and
presently Don Louis knew him. Never man had greater excess of joy without
losing his life then this Cavalier then had; his speech failed him, but his
arms expressed his gladness, he ran to embrace him, and held him locked unto
his neck, until Leonard, who also knew him, came to take part of his
contentment, testifying that he was almost angry that he had not possessed this
felicity the first. Don Fenise knew not which of them to welcome the better, he
looked upon them, and embraced them both at the same time, making them the most
courteous and amiable demonstrations his heart could invent. After all these
actions, he took them out of the middle of the Hall, and whilst the other
Cavaliers and Dames of the Assembly were moved with this joy, and devising
together, endeavoring to divine who it should be; he spoke and testified to
these two friends the astonishment which he had to find them so happily at
Cartagene, and at the hour of his arrival, at Feasts, and Nuptial
Solemnities, which he esteemed (said he) as prodigious as joyful, for he yet
believed that Don Louis was to marry her who brought him into the World. To
bring in the discourse which he had to hold him, he prayed Leonard to permit
him to entertain Don Louis in particular, and when he was retired, he made him
this discourse. I believe that you are not ignorant that you are in the house
of your Father; this is it that has given me an impatient desire to know by
what means you came to the knowledge thereof. At these words Don Louis made a
gesture of admiration, which was followed with this discourse. My dear Fenise,
that which you tell me, fills me with as great aftonishment, as your presence
with joy, so that although we have neither place nor time proper to make long
discourses, yet I have so great a desire to hear you explicate your self more
clearly, that for to oblige you thereunto, I will presently satisfy your
demand.

About two months after you was departed from Valence, being revenged of the
treachery of Don Jouan, I went to Barcelone, with intention to learn news of
Hipolite, and see if there was means to remedy her sickness; two days after
my arrival, I learned of our friend Octave, that her indisposition amended
every day. These news animated my hopes and affections. Octave being willing
to show me the testimonies of the passion which this Lady had for me, let me
see the walls of the chamber where she was, all scored with our Characters, and
my name which she had graven thereupon with her hand; from thence he carried me
near her bed, and as soon as she perceived me, one might see joy called again
into her countenance, where melancholy had reigned before, and from thence,
with a few visits her wits came again into the best estate they had been ever
seen in; so that as I had been the cause of their alienation, I was also the
cause of her curing. After the decease of her father, the administration of his
goods was given to one of her Uncles, called Roderigue, which is the Cavalier
which you see se^ by our friend Leonard; and then Vincence, seeing Hipolite in
perfect health, begun again the pursuit of his pretensions; you know of whom I
speak, having given you knowledge enough thereof, when I told you of the
beginning of my flames. He addressed himself to Roderigue, and demanded his
Niece in marriage for the second time; she, who had then more liberty, then in
the life time of her Father, understanding that he went about to have her
whether she would or no, answered very resolutely, that no man should ever
attain thereunto but my self. This answer being reported to Vincence, wakened
his indignation, and caused him to conspire against my life. Having advise
thereof, I had a design to prevent him, but my friends coming to the knowledge
of it, knew so well how to persuade me, that following their counsels, I should
absent my self for some time, saying, that it was not for her honor, and since
that I was assured of Hipolite, they would order the time for our Marriage,
whereby I should have much more glory over mine enemy, then if I had the
contentment of my revenge, since that I must be forced to leave the Kingdom,
and so lose the hope of en joying my desires. I asked Hipolites opinion, who
approved the counsel that was given me, and following her consentment, I
retired my self into a Village near Valence, from whence I went disguised to
visit her, during the obscurity of the night. Don Roderigue durst not content
the affections of his Niece, for fear of falling at ods, not only with
Vincence, but also with all his kindred. Yet after a little time he determined
to come into this town, where he has a cosen married, and to bring Hipolite
with him, to give us both the recompense due to our pains. The execution of
thi^ project was long time prolonged, since that ther^ is two years and a half
that I have languished in expectation thereof. I know not whether or no h^ did
it expressly, to give leisure to time to make dy^ the passions of Vincence, or
mine; but being upon the point of despair, I heard news which comforted me
wonderfully. It is not much above fifteen^ days, that I was told that his
cosen had made a match betwixt him and a widow her friend, called Persinde, a
woman of most virtuous reputation that is she which you see there in the midst
of the other Ladies; and having known me so perseverant in the service of his
Niece, he defired that hi^ marriage and mine might be celebrated upon the same
day. And to let you judge whether the object, of my love be worthy of so great
constancy, look upon that Lady which you see to have the Posie of Diamonds upon
her head, that is my Mistress. See what has brought me into this town, and
made me desire the Seigneur Leonard to participate of my contentments, and
assist me to celebrate them. I hope we shall be married this night, you being
present, as for the rest I cannot express the joy that environes my heart, for
that Heaven has conduced you hither to honor me with your assistance. Now it
is your part to interpret the aenigma which you gave me to divine at our
meeting. God be praised, answered Fenise, you have delivered me from a great
disquietnesse, I was told in coming into this house, that you was about to
marry the widow, a thing which I found little convenient, by reason of the
inequality ofyour age and hers. And very strange by a history I will tell you,
at the recall whereof this Cavalier which pretends to marry her this night,
will understand that he cannot do it, she being no widow, as it is thought,
since that I will make you presently see her lawful husband living, as well as
you or I, and by the same means you shall see your father and mother, of whom
you never had yet knowledge. Oh God my dear Fenise, what do you tell me! ^yed
out Don Lovis, ah, what do you make me languish in expecting your explication?
Saying so, he spoke so loud, that the greatest part of the assembly turned to
cast their eyes upon them, fea^ing that they had quarrelled. Leonard came to
them again, to know from whence proceeded this exclamation. Come, come, said
Fenise to him, you have interest in the discourse which I have made to Don
Lovis, and having obliged them both to a cutions attention, he continued to
make the recital of his fortunes, from the day that he embarked himself at
Livorne, until that of his arrival at Cartagene. As he ended his discourse,
he perceived Frederick which lead the Ladies, with the Gentlemen strangers, he
feigned to have occasion to speak to one of his men which attended him at the
door, and came to them, leaving Don Lovis and Leonard looking one upon another
without motion or words, with the excess of the astonishment which he had put
them in. Don Rodrigue came to waken them from this ecstasy, and seeing their
countenances a little altered, believed that this Gentleman stranger had told
them something which troubled them: he asked them whither he was gone, and why
they seemed to be so melancholique; and then they briefly told him a part of
that which Fenise had said, and so made him partake of their astonishment, and
prepared him to see a strange change of the success which he hope for.
Thereupon Fenise advanced, leading the three Graces with him, in the persons of
Magdelene, Leonor, and Eufemie, followed by Frederick, Don Iame, Geronime, and
Charles; all the company were mute, considering for what cause this troop o^
unknown people were come into this assembly Some thought that they were some
Mascarads; bu^ Fenise in lifting up the Mantles of the Ladies, presented
Magdelene and Frederick to Persinde, the on^ for Daughter, and the other for
Husband, and Eufemi^ to Leonard in quality of sister. After that he took Do^
Louis by the hand, and put him in the middle amongs^ Frederick Persinde and
Magdelene giving him at this instant, a father, mother, and sister; this happy
meeting, filled the whole company with this astonishment and gladness
together: there was nothing but acclamations of gladness, embracements,
transports, and ravishments of joy. It seemed that amongst all these felicities
there was none but Don Rodrigue which ought not to be contented, but being in
an age, wherein the greatest flames of love were dead, his prudence made him
find contentment in the pleasures of others, that of Don Louis was without
measure, for besides the good fortune which heaven had favored him withal, in
letting him know those who had given him birth, he also enjoyed his loves in
the possession of fair Hipolite. They were married that night, and the wedding
accomplished with astonishment and rejoycings incomparable; it was followed
with a new joy, in the conquest of a soul, which they took from the empire of
the Devil, to put it into the hands of God, by the means of holy baptism
which Geronime the Turk, heretofore called Mahomet solemnly received from the
hands of the Bishop of Cartagene, having chosen for Godfather the venerable Don
Rodrique, who was entreated to give him the name of Geronime, which he had
taken before. The next day he married the unfortunate Eufemie; she being the
cause of the health of his soul, not being willing to consent to his desires,
but in making him christian, and he of the reestablishment of her honor, which
seemed to have been torn in pieces in the courtezans life whereunto she had
been abandoned, and engaged by the baseness and infamy of her ravisher. This
was a particular contentment for Leonor to see his sister so advantagiously
provided for after so many disgraces. Incontinently after was the wedding of
Don Iame, and the virtuous and generous Leonor, who in acknowledgment of the
obligations which she had to Fenise, pardoned him the death of her brother.

More then fifteen days were employed in these joyous magnificences, where
the most remarkable persons of the province were, and the best wits exercised
themselves to write upon the admirable encounters of these persons, and of
their affections. But as there is no pleasure eternal in this world, this
loving troop must be divided, some stayed at Cartagene, others went to Valence
their country, and Don Jame took the way to Leride, whereof he was native.
Fenise was only he of this company, who made a more troublesome experience, of
the instabilitie of worldly felicity. After the sports and plays whereof he
had but a simple part, he must undergo alone, the sadness and sorrow of the
death of his father, deceased long agone. Don Louis was much troubled to take a
time to advertise him thereof, since that, besides the loss which he had made
in his person, he was yet in danger to lose his estate, or at the least to see
much of it diminished, because his kindred believing him to be dead, were
possessed thereof, and had distributed it amongst them. Don Louis used much
discretion to dispose his spirit to receive sweetly these bitter news, but he
had scarcely begun his premeditated discourse, when Fenise who was extremely
foreseeing, well knew to what end it tended and to avoid prolixitie of words,
he prevented him with these; I see well said he, that you would sugar the edge
of the cup, to make me swallow some bitter poison, but you know me too well to
use me with this ceremony and hold me in suspense for to declare to me what
imports me. Then Don Louis discovered nakedly unto him, all he knew, and
although that Fenise had much experience and constancy, yet his eyes must
testify the feeling of his heart, the loss of a father is a grief too
sensible, he ought to have a breast of a rock, that will not be mollified
therewith, or at the least to have desired his death. Don Louis comforted him
in taking part of his sorrow, after that he had suffered, the first motions of
sadness, his friend pressed him to remedy the disorders of of his house. This
solicitation afflicted him almost as much as the news of the death of his
father, he could scarcely resolve to do it, nor believe the counsels of Don
Louis, because he must necessarily absent himself from himself in going from
Magdelene. So that he deferred his departure from day to day, until that his
friend was constrained to tell him that he knew well from whence proceeded his
delays; for Frederick his father had recounted to him the honest suit which he
made to his sister, and how much they were all obliged to his wit and courage,
he prayed him, not to lose time in recovering his estate, and to assure
himself to obtain all he could desire, not only from him his sister, but
also from their whole family, who reputed it a great honor in the design
which he had to convert his amity into kindred; that he knew well that
Magdelene made great esteem of his merits, besides the obligation which she
had for her liberty, that she would always prefer him before all the men in
the world, and that he should never have cause to reproach him of the vice of
ingratitude; these promises were confirmed to him, by the complements and
civilities of Frederick and Persinde, and by the solemn oaths which Magdelene
made him in particular, in conjuring him with tears in her eyes to return as
soon as he could possible, and that he should find her always constant and
always loving; these actions were so charming that Fenise wanted not much of
breaking his design of going to Toledo, but the satisfaction which he was
willing to give his friends, forced him to execute it. The day before his
departure Frederick let him see a country house of pleasure which he had near
Cartagene, where treating him magnifically, he begun to qualify him with the
name of son in law, to the great contentment of the whole family. He took
leave of them in this place, with a thousand imbracements and toward the
evening Don Louis returned with him into the town, at the entry of the port
they saw Charles, the slave that Geronime had brought with him, walking with a
Cavalier very well covered, and followed by six Lacquies clothed in the same
livery: the two future brothers in law approached them, and Fenise knew that it
was Don Antonio de Velazques a cavalier of the court, who had been his
familiar friend, he also having faced him and known him, they ran one to the
other, and locked themselves together for some time with straight embracings.
Charles admiring this great testimony of affection, and seeing they were
parted, Brother, said he to Antonio, if you have embraced this illustrious
Cavalier as your friend, I beseech you begin again, as my benefactor, and him
of whom I hold my liberty: it is the person I have but now praised unto you,
and to whom I shall be always obliged for my life. I could scarcely believe,
said Don Antonio to Fenise, the marvells which he has told me, but at the
present, since that I see it was of you that he spoke, I am in less
admiration, knowing that you can produce none but high actions. Fenise made
many humble complements to answer these high praises, and all their courteous
ceremonies being finished, he prayed Don Antonio to tell him upon what occasion
he had left Madrid to come to Cartagene, which he courteously did. He told him
then that having learned that his brother Charles was a slave at Algier, he was
come to Cartagene to treat of his ransom, but that thanks be to God and his
industry, (speaking to Fenise) he had found him when he expected him the least,
and that having no other business he was ready to return to Madrid. Thereupon
they all entered into the town, where Don Louis showed how he honored him, in
offering him bis fathers house, to the which he would have carried him, but
after a thousand thanks, he went to his Inn with Charles his brother, to
whom Fenise made an infinite of of submissions, demanding his pardon for not
having treated him with that respect which was due to him, praying him in fine
to excuse his ignorance. Our Cavalier was advised by Don Louis not to lose the
occasion of so good company, and to go with them, since that they all went the
same way, this resolution pleased very well Don Antonio, which they put in
execution the next day; they entertained themselves upon the way with many
discourses to divert the trouble and tedioushesse of the voyage, and in talking
together they fell upon this discourse of marriage, saying that it was
necessary for every one, to take a party conformable to his disposition, equal
to his quality, and agreeable to his inclinations, which gave subject to
Fenise, to demand of Don Antonio, what success his amorous passion had, which
he had when he absented himself so long time from Madrid; since that you know
the birth thereof, answered Antonio, I cannot excuse my self from relating
unto you, the diverse accidents thereof, whereby you shall see the most rare and
strange history, that has been ever heard of. If peradventure I tell you some
circumstances which you already know, it shall be for want of memory, or that
I shall judge it necessary to the weaving of my discourse, that if I have named
this history strange and rare, I assure my self that you taking the pains to
hearken to it with attention, will your self repute it, alone, and prodigeous.

THE HISTORY OF DON ANTONIO.
MAdrid our Country, a town recommendable for a thousand diverse
considerations; wholesome by the good temperature of the air; pleasant for the
fair situation, and illustrious for its admirable structures and aedifices,
was almost at the same time the cradle and tomb of a Cavalier, rich in the
gifts of nature, and enough gratified with the goods of Fortune, his name was
Don Fernand de Figueroa. Of twenty three years which he lived, he passed two in
marriage with a Lady of less age than himself, but equal in quality. He left
his dear wife a widow as full of hopes, being ready to lie down, as charged
with troubles for his loss, which was so sensible to her, and her sorrow so
violent, that she was delivered some days before her term. Eugenie, so was
this Lady called, brought into the world an enemy of liberty, in a daughter
perfectly fair, and a lively portrait of her dead husband, in a son
accomplished with all that he could bring from his birth. They were presently
carried to nurses, which were chosen in the villages near Madrid, and who took
upon them to give them necessary nourishment: poverty or profit excite often
times persons to sell their proper blood. These twins arrived at Faith by the
port of sacred Baptism; the son was called after his Father, to the end he
might inherit his name, as well as other things, and the sister had to name
Charity, it may be by mystery, or to express the graces wherewith she was so
liberally stored. The Nurses pleased themselves in taking care of them, and to
exercise themselves with emulation, as well to keep them neatly, as to nourish
them; in a word, they cherished them more than their proper children. A family
cannot be said unhappy, it it suffer not many disasters; for it seems that
the first misfortune is the harbinger that comes to prepare a lodging for
another, as may be well seen by this success, since that the unfortunate youth
of Fernand, and his loss served as an Adamant to draw misfortune into his
house. About two months after the birth of these little ones, one of the
Nurses had news that her husband was in great extremity of sickness, and that
they feared every hour that he should dye. Conjugall amity solicited her on
one side to go have a care of her husband, on the other fide her duty and fear
to lose the recompense she hoped to have for her good service, hindered her from
quitting her place; and leaving this house liberal and abundant in riches.
Tossed with these two contrary considerations, her rustique judgment took a
mean, or to say better, an unhappy end for her self. One afternoon toward the
evening, she asked leave to go see one of her kindred, and as it is not usual
to refuse to such kind of persons what they demanded; for fear of angring
them, and altering the purity of their milk, she easily obtained leave, she
went out, carrying in her arms the little child, having before taken order to
find at the gate of the town the commodity of a cart that returned from the
Market held that day at Madrid, from whence there was but two miles unto her
village. She found her husband less sick in his bed then in his imagination;
and to the end that it might not be perceived that she went so far, she
resolved to return presently, and immediately executed it, not as she came,
but on foot, and alone, the better to hide her fault, carrying the child
asleep in her arms; her judgment mistook the time of the day, the night
surprised her in the way, and comeing to the corner of a hedge, two men came to
her, to take from her the packet which she carried; for the obscurity hindered
them from distinguishing what it was: she begun to cry and call for help, and
because there were houses near thereunto, these two men fearing to be taken,
gave her two stabs into the throat with a poyniard, and took from her that
which she held in her arms, leaving this unfortunate woman upon the ground,
miserably dying. This little infant was no sooner in their hands but he awaked,
and begun to cry. They much astonished to see their hopes of a booty frustrate,
were not yet so barbarous as to hurt him, his tenderness served him as a
Sanctuary, and his innocence for protection. They fled from this place, for
fear of being taken for Murderers, carrying this infant unto another village
out of the way, giving it to a poor woman, making her believe, to oblige her
to receive it, that it appertained to a Lady of great condition, whose
deliverance was kept secret, and the necessity of the secret had constrained
them to bring it to her in this estate, as for the rest, that she should have
care thereof, and that she should have given her whatsoever she should demand.

What is it which profit does not in imaginatition? this woman received it
tenderly, hoping for the promised hire, made her affection increase, which was
the more warmed by the loss of another little child, which was dead a little
before, so that happily she had wherewith to continue his first nutriture. The
ignorance of his true name, and her desire to deceive her memory, made her give
him the name of her son, and attempting to put him in his place, she called
him Antonie. At the beginning she was impatient to know his parents, but
afterward she desired that no body would avow him, for fear he should be taken
out of her arms. In the interim his true mother ceased not to weep, having
known the accident happened to her nurse, she easily persuaded her self, that
he had served for a fair trophy to the triumph of death, and that some beast
had devoured him; it is common to the fearful to believe all which their
imaginations propose horrible.

Nature, which discovers the birth by the inclinations, giving desires to every
one according to the quality of his blood, had not less foresight for Don
Fernand, then for other humanes, we will call this child so in the continuance
of this discourse, since that it is his true name. Although he was rustically
brought up, he did not forbear to do actions which gave notice of the place
from whence he was issued. From his infancy, his ordinary sports was to
assemble the little boys of the Village, arm them with staves in fashion of
swords and pikes, then putting himself in the head of them, made them march
against some place defended by others, which they set upon, and so naturally
begun to give himself to military exercise. Having attained to twelve years of
age, he left the Village, and went to the Court. The King had at that time
created four Regiments to send into Flaunders, whereof one of my Uncles, my
Fathers Brother, had the first. This little boy presented himself to him,
demanding to serve him; my Uncle considered his little resolute countenance,
his proportion and boldness; found him so pretty, that he brought him to my
Fathers house, to the which he was much affected; from the beginning he made
him be clothed otherwise then he had yet been, and after this change of
clothes, he immediately changed his manners and fashion of life, so that within
a little time, he became so different from what he was when he came to our
house, that he knew not himself, making all to admire the truth of this
proverb, Honors change manners. All the whole house much esteemed him; he had
sweetness in his face, and mildness in his actions, which rendered him
pleasant to the eyes of all; we two loved one another passionately, the
equality of years is a strong mediatrix of love; we were of the same age and
height; we went always together to our exercises, whether of body or mind; we
learned the latin tongue at the same time, (a science very proper for
Gentlemen, and Princes; which forms the memory, perfects discourse, and
teaches them eloquence, which charms the hearts of the most barbarous.) And
his spirit was so disposed to learning, that there was none could win the prize
from him in the whole Academy; he left all behind him, which made him to be
beloved of the Master, and envied of the scholars; he had done there wonders,
if his inclination had not carried him to another kind of life. At that time
my Uncle was ready to depart with his Regiment into Flanders, and Fernand
having news thereof, employed all his little industry to oblige him to take him
with him, so that mine Uncle, to content his generous desire, condiscended
thereunto. Two years after the departure of mine Uncle, my Father had a burning
Fever, which carried him to his grave, to render the tribute which all mortals
owe to nature. All our Line was much grieved thereat, but it lasted not long,
principally for my part, I seeing my self installed in my birthright, and in
the possession of a great estate, if I shed tears at my Fathers death, they
were rather of joy then sadness, or for that he had no sooner left me his
succession: humane malice lets us now see many children of so ill dispositions;
and it is not long agone since I heard a young Lord say, being in an assembly
six steps from his Father, that when children had once passed twenty years,
their Fathers did but trouble them. After the year of exterior mourning, I
begun to appear rather by my clothes* then my virtues; I was clothed with
habits, and feathers in my hat, of all the rare colors which could be found, a
vanity wherewith youth is ordinarily carried away.

Charity, the Sister of Don Fernand, was then of mine age, and fair as they
paint an Angel; her discourses were so much above the ablest of her sex, that
adding the divine qualities of her wit, with the luster and attractions of her
countenance, one knew not what judgment to make thereof, since that any of them
did figure her more then mortal. Those that would have doubted of her
nobleness and virtue, might draw witnesses thereof from the majesty of her
carriage, and the recluse life which she lead. She was known to none but the
servants of the house, and went abroad but very rarely, and in a Coach, and yet
was she wrapped in a mantle, so well, that but a shadow of her person could be
seen. Her house was not far from mine, and one day of great devotion, for the
respect of the feast, I found place to see her come out of her house on foot,
accompanying her mother: They went together, followed by two Gentlewomen, to
visit the Churches, and d^ the actions of christian mortification, for it was
the day wherein was represented the tragedy of ^ur redemption, and wherein the
author of life died for the safety of all men. I followed them discr^^tly
rather to satisfy curiosity, then devotion. She went softly, leaning upon the
arm of one of her servants, and in the mean while I considered the beauty of
her proportion. Charity incon^^^^tly perceived my actions and intentions,
which ^bliged her t^ consider by stealth my person and ^^^^^^on: For although a
woman will not love, yet she takes pleasure to see her self beloved. I know
not whether or not she found something in me that pleased her; but either by
artifice or otherwise, she permitted by her mantle a beam of her eyes to shine
upon my face which lasted no longer then a lightning, I never saw a more
ravishing beauty, and from that instant I remained so charmed that for a long
time I was insensible. At the end of this ecstasy I continued to follow after
the shadow of this Sun, and conducted her with mine eye unto the door of her
house, from thence I returned home my spirit troubled with a thousand
confusions, one while forming a design to declare unto her the acquisition
which she had made of my liberty, and another while imagining that this
conquest, was no great glory to her, my humility rendered me fearful. In
these irresolutions I could not hinder my self from making rounds and walks
about her house, endeavoring to see her sometimes at the windows, this issued
very happily, yet after having passed much time therein, almost a whole month
was employed before I could enjoy a little light of this star. In the end, not
for to trouble you with the recital of the pains I took to get acquainted
with her, I will tell you that I persevered so constantly in this passion, and
rendered her such certain testimonies thereof, that after having seen my
flames painted by my writing, she had pity thereof, or to say better she felt
the heat thereof. There are not many women, how cruel so ever they be, that
having hearkened to the plaints of a lover, do not compassionate his grief,
and assay to give him ease. A love which draws nourishment from two breasts of
an infant presently becomes a giant. At the end of two years ours arrived at
so so perfect a grandeur, and Charity knew me so loyal, that she promised me
the last favor upon my word, I engaged to her my faith in calling to witness
the celestial powers to marry her when she pleased, and with this assurance
she consented to accomplishment of my desires the night following; moments
seemed ages in expecting the hour she had given me, the day seemed to be
eternal, or that a new Joshua had stayed the Sun, but in the end light gave
place to darkness; and then, as a generous courage called to fight,
endeavou^s to be the first at the place appointed, so I being called to this
amorous duel; desiring to testify my valor, I came before the hour given,
and rendered my self in a certain place under the windows of Charity, as she
had appointed me. She who kept Seminell seeing me come so soon called me
softly, and prayed me to retire until her mother was in bed, for fear that in
expecting too long time, I might be perceived by some curious person who might
trouble our design. I found her counsel very judicious, and executed it upon
the instant, exercising the virtue of patience without any merit.

Fernand had been in Flanders with mine uncle eight years, and some months,
where he had in the hazards of war rendered a thousand good testimonies, of
his birth and valor, to the great advantage of this Monarchy, when mine uncle
his master of the camp sent him to Madrid, with many letter^ addressed to his
friends, and great persons of the court, in commendation of the merits of
Fernand, who besides these favorable letters brought scars upon his body,
which served for faithful attestations of his generositie; he arrived that
very night, and went to lodge with some young gentlemen, who were come from
Flanders a little before him, and who were at the court, pretending as he
himself did recompenses of their services, they received him very courteously,
and feasted him, but after supper which was thus very late, it was impossible
for him to go to bed without seeing me. Desiring then to satisfy this
impatient desire, he quitted his company to come seek me; for besides his
particular affection, that solicited him thereunto, he had letters for me from
mine uncle.

The assignation which I had made with Charity was the cause that he found me
not at home* which obliged him to return to his lodging, which to do, he must
necessarily pass before Charities house, as he did, and just at the favorable
moment I was expected, and that all the domestiques were asleep. The
proportion of Fernand, the obscurity of the night, the motion of the lover, the
apprehension of shame, the fear of scandal, accompanied with strong
imaginations which represent oftentimes to our intellects, the objects we
desire, troubled so much poor Charity, that seeing Don Fernand approach, she
believed it was I, and then without other ceremony, or longer attending she
threw him down a key wrapped in her handkercheif, and bade him open the door and
enter presently; Don Fernand was so surprised, that he knew not whether it was
a dream, or an illusion; but having taken up the handkercheif and found the key
to open the door, as he was bidden, he knew that it was a reality and ^udged
that he was taken for another. He stayed a little consulting with himself, if
he should prov^ this adventure to enter into this unknown house or to keep on
his way, but thinking it cowardlynesse to doubt if he should enter, he resolved
to adhere to the summons, and hazard the success thereof. He approached and
opened the door, then put i^ too simply without locking of it that he might go^
out again the more easily if there was occasion, he crossed a great court, and
entered into a hall, which Charity had opened, to let me come up to her chamber
which was the first story high, finding himself there in the dark and meeting
no body, he knew not what to do or say: if he went on he knew not whither he
went, and if he should speak he feared to be heard; in brief he was in so
great confusion, that he knew not what to do: immediately after these
irresolutions had ceazed upon his spirit, I whom love called to the recompense
of of my pains came to the street door, I thrust it softly, and seeing that
it yielded to me, and opened so easily, I believed that it was the providence
of Charity which had left it open, to the end that I might enter without noise.

Antonio broke off this discourse at this place, because they arrived at their
lodging for that night, referring the rest until the next morning, that this
history might serve them for divertisement, against the tediousness of the
way; these three friends arrived that night in the town of Mourcia, where
(...) ^^ey were scarcely entered into their cham^^^, when they heard a rumor
in the court of the Inn which their window regarded. Fenise looked to see what
it was, and saw three men with their swords in their hands, who had environed
another, who defended himself generously. Fenise took his sword and ran
incontinently to assist him, or to take up the quarrel; but at soon as the
others saw their adversary assisted they retired themselves, seeming to be
contented, to proceed no further. Our Cavalier having disingaged this stranger
from the danger he was in, carried him into his chamber where Antonio was,
where he was known for his ^osen and Fenise his friend; this was the Cavalier
of Valence, called Marcel of whom we have heretofore spoken in the first and
second books. They were all, extremely glad to meet so happily, and that
they went all the same way, for Marcel went also to Toledo. They asked him from
whence proceeded this quarrel, and who were these three men: he answered that
they were Merchants, and that he was angered with an uncivil word, that they had
spoken to him in alighting; and that he would have his horse put in the stable
in the plac^ where one of theirs stood; saying so the three Merchants came to
demand his pardon for their insolence, excusing themselves in not knowing his
quality, and so the peace was made, and every one passed the night in repose:
the next day they continued their voyage. Being out of the town. Fenise prayed
Marcell to tell him for what cause he went to Toledo^ who desiring to satifie
his curiosity, said thus. Your absence is the cause that you are ignorant that
I am married in that town to a cosen of Seig^e^^ (...) Antonios. This alliance
was treated of betwixt (...) kindred and mine at my return from Italy, whither
I went incontinently after you, and I took leave one of the other; I esteem
my self so happy in this condition, that one may say that God had reserved us,
to unite us together, our affections and wills are so conformable. It may be
you desire to know wherefore I have made this voyage to Cartagene from whence I
come as well as you: the subject thereof is prodigious, I will tell it you by
the way, and assure my self that you heard the like never spoken of, for it is
rare. We will put you in mind of it said Charles, when my brother has
finished the history which he has begun, then Antonio seeing that they all
concurred in the same desire, begun again his discourse in this manner. Since
that Seigneur Marcel has so often heard it recounted, it is not necessary to
say again what I have already told you, I will begin again only where I left.

As I entered then into this hall, Don Fernand heard me, better than he saw me,
he retired aside, for fear of being met, and put himself in a corner near the
door of the stairs which went to the chamber of Charity. I who thought to go
in security, and who knew well the lodging, went right to the stairs, Fernand
who perceived me to approach, drew a Poniard which he wore at his girdle,
thinking I was some of the household servants, or some neighbor that had seen
him enter, who counterfeiting the ignorant would surprise him, and chastise him
for his rashness, so that as I came to pass by him, he fell upon me, and gave
me two stabs with the poyniard, the one upon the other, which (if I had not had
on a Buffe-coat which hindered the iron from entering far) had killed me upon
the instant, I fell nevertheless at his feet, all bloody, and in a swound, and
at the same instant he got the door and fled. In the interim Charity
attended, and seeing so much delay, she believed that I could not find the
stairs of her chamber. In this opinion, she took a little Wax candle, and came
down softly where I was; at the first she saw me along upon the ground, but not
knowing what this should signify, she came nearer, and found the dear object
of her passions almost in the like condition, as heretofore Venus her lover
hurt by a wild Boar. I cannot represent unto you what grief surprised at that
time poor Charity, it is easier for you to imagine it, than me to express it.
She presently judged, that her mother having discovered our secreet
intelligences, had begun her vengeance upon me, which she would finish upon
her. This false opinion made so strong an impression upon her spirits, and
fear possessed her so powerfully, that she thought she saw nothing about her
but the images of death. In fine she suffered her self to be so extremely
troubled with these panique fears, that it was impossible for her to take any
good resolution. Without regarding her condition, without respect of her
honor, or consideration of the danger whereunto she exposed her self, she at
that instant left the house, accompanied only with misfortunes, and adorned
with the jewels which she ordinarily wore, which were, a cross of Diamonds,
which she wore upon her breast, two Pearls like Pears, which hung in her
ears, and a Garland of gold, Emerauds and Rubies, which she had about her
hair. Thus desolate she crossed the whole Town of Madrid, and went to the last
houses which are toward the Meadows of St. Ieronime, where the walks and
projects of Lovers and Courtezans are made. Having put up her stones into her
pocket, she entered without choice or consideration into the house of a poor
woman, not being able to go further, because the day, which begun to break,
might have discovered her.

All this while I remained in the estate and place where Charity had found me,
until the rising of a servant, who coming to make clean the hall, as she did
every day, perceived at the entry thereof a body which she believed to be dead;
affrighted with this spectacle, she went to the chamber of her Mistress, the
mother of Charity, telling her more with astonishment then words what she had
seen. This Lady allarmed with this accident, rose, and made all her servants to
be called, who ran all to me at the same time; they took me from the ground,
and laid me upon a bed, and in the doubt wherein they were, whether I was dead
or alive, sent presently for a Surgeon, in expecting him, none of them
knowing what to do to me, they heated linen clothes towarme me, and cast
water in my face, to waken my spirits if I were swounded: in fine, amongst all
these accurable diligences, they were put out of the pain wherein they were,
seeing me make a great sigh, which testified unto them that I was yet living.
Thereupon the Surgeon arrived, he looked upon my wounds, and putting the
first plaster thereupon, stayed the little blood that refted in my veins.
When my strength was a little come unto me, I prayed Eugenie, that I might be
carried into my lodging, conjuring her not to afflict her self, nor to be
troubled for my disgrace; for although I was ignorant of whom I had received
it, I did not forbear to assure her that all her domestiques were innocent.
She enquired of me how this misfortune had arrived me in her house; but not
knowing what to answer her, I feigned that my pain hindered me from speaking,
as in truth it was very sensible; the Surgeon accomodated himself to my
necessity, told her that I ought not to speak; by this means I avoided my
troublesome examination, and was carried home. This good Lady extremely
troubled with this scandal, went up to Charities chamber, doubting that she
knew something of this misfortune, but the first displeasure was followed with
an affliction much more cruel; she saw the door open, and the chamber void of
that she thought to find therein. They called Charity, they sought her
thorough all the house, but they knew not what was become of her; and when they
had told Eugenie that those who went to fetch the Surgeon had found the
street door open, this poor Lady fell into a fearful despair, she tore her
hair, and rent her garments, and made clamours which touched with grief the
most insensible. She studied to find out conjectures of these prodigeous
events, but amongst all her thoughts, she could find nothing but fears and
confusions. Oh unhappy destiny, cried she, with force of torment, art not thou
content with the misfortunes which thou have made me already suffer, must yet
my heart be tormented with so bitter a wound, is it necessary, that after the
loss of the splendor of our house, and the sweetness of my life, in the
person of my husband, which was ravished from me almost as soon as heaven had
given him to me, and after the loss of a son, which remained for my comfort
and stay, that I must be defamed in honor and reputation by the Rape of a
daughter, whose pretense and company were so dear to me? But what, for the last
loss I can reprove no body but my self! I am the cause of this infamous
disaster, having too much adhered to her will, and using too much mildness in
reproving her foolish desires, now I am exposed to the opprobry of all women of
my condition, abandoned to the last attempts of misfortune, and overwhelmed
with extreme misery. Suffer then my soul since thou have wanted prudence in
the conduct of Charity; and you mine eyes blind your selves with weeping,
since that you have not seen the precipices which environ beauty; and since
that you have not watched to guard a treasure, coveted by so many ingenious
spirits, and so ardent in such conquests. See with what she entertained her
mouth, whilst by her eyes her heart distilled into tears.

The Justice advertised of my disgrace happened in the house of this widow,
stayed not long to run thither, knowing that there was wherewith to pay them
for their pains. Amongst the rumors which these Officers (and the people they
brought with them) made, Don Fernand found invention to mingle himself with
them, desiring to know who he was which he had hurt, and the occasion of this
success; but because they had carried me to my lodging, he could not content
his curiosity. He saw his unknown mother all in tears, and dejected with the
oppression of so many different crosses, his heart was so lively touched with
compassion, that if he could have believed that it would have eased her, he
would freely have confessed his crime; he felt something in his soul which
provoked him to take pity of this poor Lady, the force of the blood whereof
their hearts were formed, gave him the feeling. They put into prison all the
servants of the house, the which was given for a prison to Eugenie, with some
women of her chamber to serve her until the author of this scandal should be
discovered The Judge promised the widow to favor her all that he could, to
discharge her, although the absence of her daughter testified enough her
innocence. These things being done, Don Fernand came to my lodging to give me
mine Uncles Letters, where he understood, in confirmation of what he had heard
at Eugenies, that I was the hurt man, and so seeble by the loss of blood, that
there was no great hopes of my life: his heart bled when he knew himself to
be the author of my misfortune. He went home, not being permitted to speak to
me, he a thousand times cursed the day of his arrival, and the rashness which
he had to enterprise an action so extravagant. Besides his extreme sorrow to
see me reduced to this estate by his little consideration, he might well be
afflicted, for the delay of his affairs at the Court, because the good
success thereof depended partly upon the credit which I had with those who
could favor his pretensions. They would not speak to me of his return,
until they saw my hurts begin a little to amend, then he came to see me, and
presenting me with the letters from mine Uncle, the feeling of the affection
which I bore him, exceeded that of my hurt, although it was great, made me
almost go out of my bed to embrace him; we remained some time with our arms
about one anonecks, which when we quitted, I observed that h^ had great trouble
to retain the tears which grief brought into his eyes. I read my letters,
which in few words contained many recommendations of the merits of Fernand, and
I thereupon told him, that my duty and his virtue so straightly obliged me to
serve him, that these, letters were superfluous; after these civil
complements, the desire which Fernand had to understand by what encounter I
came into the house where this strange accident had happened us, obliged him to
put me upon the discourse of the estate I found my self in: and I who had the
like desire to entertain him with this subject, as being my ancient friend, I
made him the recitalof all my adventure, from the beginning until the very
point where he saw me (amongst friends there need no great prayers, for to
recount the successes caused by ladies) and when I came to speak of his
encounter, and of the time that he hurt me, I believe that I revenged my self
too cruelly, of his ignorance, for in stead of two blows with a poiniard which
he gave me, I gave him more then a hundred, as many words as I spoke, were so
many daggers points wherewith I pierced his heart, so sensible was the grief
he had thereof. I have used, said I to him, all possible diligence to discover
who has so treated me, but neither in thought nor otherwise, can I find any
subject capable of this accusation; so that I am constrained to imagine, that
it is from my self that I have received this rigorous chastisement, or that it
is come to me from some sovereign power; I have some reason to believe, and
call it so, and your self will have the same opinion; see upon what I ground it.

When I took access to Charity, I affected but her beauty, and pretended but
only to delights; for at the same time I courted another Lady, and sought her
in marriage, because of her great riches; in the one I loved pleasure, and in
the other profit, in this the fashion, in that the weight, so that my
covetousness exceeding my love, counseled me that it was better, to have gold
in money then in threads of hair, and to possess pearls that resembled
teeth, then teeth that were like pearls. I propounded also to my self, that in
enjoying Charity, and marrying Cleonte, so was this other Lady called, all my
desires would be contented, and in this project I endeavored to amuse and
abuse with my promises this poor Lover which confided therein. So that under
these perfideous assurances, I went cruelly to ravish her honor, with
intention to glory in her shame, when heaven, the faithful protector of
innocents, and revenger of treason, made me meet with a hand that punished the
will as the effect of the crime: If I dyed not upon the place, I believe that
it was but to give me leisure to repent my fault. A scruple sometimes arises
in my spirit upon the absence of Charity, which that night left her house,
almost presuming that she should not be innocent of the action; and yet when I
represent unto my self the testimonies of h^ love, her constancy, faith, the
graces of her face, an^ the sweetness of her spirit, I condemn my self and
demand of my self reparation for the injur^ which I do her, so that after
having endeavoure to find some clearing to my doubts, I always find^ my
spirit the more oppressed with trouble an^ confusion.

This was the discourse I made to Don Fernand, b^ the which I discovered
nakedly unto him m^ thoughts and secrets. He endeavored to comfort me, in
telling me, that time would one day give me ample satisfaction for my
displeasures; that he took part in my evil, as if it was his own, an^ that he
would always contribute for my servic^ all that did depend upon his honor,
fortune, an^ life. I gave him a thousand honest thanks for h^^ courtesy, and
so we parted for that day: tw^ months after I was entirely healed; my first
goin^ abroad was employed to solicit his affairs, when my credit conjoined to
his merit, made him obtain a Regiment of four companies, wherewit^ he was
much satisfied, and of new obliged to lov^ me. During all this long space of
time, Charit^^ remained shut up in the house of this poor woman as I told you,
as much accompanied with confusion and fear, as separated from consolation and
assurance. Time which destroys and heals al^ things, had no virtue for her,
he rather surcharged her with affliction, than gave her ease. She sometimes
sent her Hostess to Madrid, and into he^ street, to attempt to learn what
brute run of her affairs; but whether it was that this woman had not
industry enough to inform her self thereof, or that those to whom she spoke
were ignorant thereof, she never brought good news to Charity. Seeing then that
she was there destitute of all means to get out of the troubles and
languishings wherein she ^ived, or rather wherein she dyed, she resolved to go
to Seville, where lived one of her Uncles, which possessed the goods of her
house, which had fallen to her, had she been of another sex; for they descended
upon the Males; her brother enjoyed no more thereof then her self; for it was
thought he was dead. Charity hoped that this Uncle would have pity of her
misfortune, and that he would lovingly receive her. She communicated this to
Fregonde, so was her hostess called, who adhered to all her propositions. She
persuaded her to accompany her in this great voyage, that she might give less
suspicion to those that should see so much youth and beauty go all alone
through the country; and to oblige her the more, she showed her her jewels,
which she had not yet seen, saying that she had wherewith to pay her for her
pains, and to warrant her from want. Fregonde was not so stupid but the
brightness of these stones wakened her understanding and covetousness: upon
the instant she propounded to make her self rich, by making these Jewels hers
by some pernicious stratagem, and whilst that Charity prepared her self for
this voyage, the other disposed her self to rob her. Oh too naked innocence!
Oh poor girl too ignorant of worldly malice! who would have said the
unfortunate Charity, that in going in the company of Fregonde, she cast her
self into the claws of a wolf and a Tygresse.

This cursed woman had a husband of her manners, who was unknown to Charity,
not having entered into his house since her coming hither: he had no other
exercise, with four companions which he had, but to watch passengers, into
favorable places, to take from them and lighten them of what they carried.
Fregonde advertised him by a letter, of the voyage which she was about to make,
with a woman, without naming her, it being unnecessary, who carried jewels of
great value, with some pearls of such, and such fashions, that he should
separate himself from his company, for some time, that the enterprise might be
the more secretly executed, and that they might remain the sole masters of the
booty; besides, that they two going alone without defense, there was no need
of other help; the letter being well sealed she directed it to a tavarne,
where this thief and his accomplices frequented, every day, having intelligence
with the master thereof: then she put it into the hands of a Merchants man,
which did nothing but go and come upon the way where her husband was; having
business for his master, and necessarily passing by this tavern, because it
was upon the high way, Fregonde thought that her letter should be faithfully
delivered, because she half knew this servant, having often seen him frequent
the house, next to hers; and also having expressly recommended it to him: but
this messenger who knew the evil reputation of Leon, the name of the husband
of Fregonde, and of the tavern whereunto this letter was directed, by divine
inspiration, as I believe curious to see the contents of this letter, which he
had received, not being too well assured that there was nothing therein to his
disadvantage, whatsoever it was he opened it, and saw the complot which this
wicked woman made with her husband. This man would willingly have returned to
Madrid, to have accused her to the justices, but a dispatch which he carried
for his master could not permit him to return. Yet he determined to prevent,
and hinder this conspiration, in declaring it to the Justice of the town next
to the tavern. In this resolution he went on and continued his voyage, but by
misfortune he lost the letter by the way, before he arrived at Illescas.

One of the people of Eugenies coming from that town upon some business of
mistresses, seeing this letter, lighted, took it up, and read what you have
heard, and put it in his pocket; astonished at the wickedness, that is
committed in this world. Being arrived at Madrid, and having rendered account to
his mistress of his voyage, he showed her this letter, not knowing that she
had interest therein, and told not how he had found it in the high way,
admiring divine providence, for having it may be, hindered the execution of
this theft, by the loss of this letter, this lady read it two or three times,
that seeming still clearer which she suspected, for although there was no name,
the quality of the jewels which she specified, made her presume that they were
those of Charity, she begun again to renew her eyes and groans; she believed
her daughter dead, and her honor violated, imagining that they could not take
away her life, without stripping her of her integrity; after the most violent
apprehensions of these new sorrows, were a little moderated, she forced her
self to resist against the excess of her affliction, to the end to attempt it
by the the means of this letter, she could get notice of the rape of Charity,
for she believed that she was stolen away. She went to the President and
sovereign magistrate of Castile, let him hear her plaints, and recital of
her disaster, producing this letter, which might give some light in these
confusions. There was a Commissary presently deputed to go search the places
about this tavern, and to seize upon the host: but although this ordinance was
promptly made, it could not be so diligently executed, but two or three days
after the messenger arrived at the place where he had design to reveal his
secret to the Justice, but as he thought to have done it, he found not his
letter, which might render testimony of his declaration. then judging that he
should not be believed alone he went on. In following his way he was taken by
the same thieves, amongst whom was the husband of Fregonde; seeing himself
thus in danger to lose his life, and money, he remembered himself of the name
of the person to whom the letter was directed. He demanded if Leon was not in
their company, and they told him that he was their chief; at the instant he
took him aside and told him in this torment of fear, all that was contained
in the letter, the apprehension of death wherein he was made him tell all. Leon
cunningly informed himself of all the circumstances, that seemed important
whereby he knew the riches of the proposed theft, and the terror which
oppressed this unhappy man. He gave him his liberty for his advise, obliging
him by oathe to discover nothing of what he had told him to any one. See this
unhappy messenger escaped from the hands of these thieves whilst on the other
side Leon disbanded himself upon the instant, and went all alone to attend the
prey which he hoped for. Whilst this was done Charity was upon her way,
mounted upon a Mule, and followed by her treacherous companion on foot, going
little journeyes, and advancing toward the rendez-vous of these unhappy
people, where she was to lose in a moment all the gratifications which fortune
had given her in many years; her perfidious guide, measured so well, I would
say so maliciously, her time, that she arrived toward night at Sierca Morena;
poor Charity traveled in fear, the heart, the faithful nuntio of good or
evil, advertised her of the danger she was going to fall into, the effect
thereof was not much delayed, in passing by a close way. Leon came out of a
certain place, full of bushes and thorns: and as a ravenous wolf surpriseth
an innocent sheep, this Lion ceazed with his claws upon fearful Charity,
who fell in a swound for fear upon the instant, the perfidious Fregonde begun
to cry out and faining to run away, she drew aside into the bushes, and then
this barbarian insensible of the grief of this young gentlewoman, without
respect of her beauty, searched her all over: but he had scarcely begun this
insolent action, when he heard a horseman to approach him, who being in this
suspicious place favorable to thieves, gallopped with his pistol in his hand
and the cock up, this thief could not so soon retire himself out of the way,
but this Cavalier was with him, they were both of them in distrust, the one
believing they came to take him, and the other that they would rob him, because
that Leon was equipaged in such manner, that he might be well taken fora
thief. He seeing the posture of the Cavalier, presented him with the mouth of
his carabin which which he wore in a belt, but by good fortune it took not
fire; the Cavalier lost no time, but discharged his pistol against his body
charged with two bullets, before he could draw his sword, as he was going to
do, Leon fell to the ground, not dead but dangerously wounded. Don Fernand
lighted (this was the revenger of the crimes of this thief) and ceazed upon
his arms to serve himself therewith, in case of need. He seeing himself so
happily dispatched, by the assistance of my credit, went toward Seville as
well for the desire he had to see so fair a town, as to make a young
gentleman which dwelt there, it being the place of his birth, the first
captain of his little regiment, being acquainted with him in Flanders, to make
him participate of his good fortune.

Just heaven, which makes us sometime to feel its rigours, to give us
afterward abundance of favors, permitted that Charity came from her mortal
trance, wherein she was fallen. In opening her eyes she saw the trayteresse
Fregonde, with a visage of a fury of hell groaping yet in her breast where she
had put her jewels, and then with feeble voice: What Fregonde said she, are
these the effects of a person, who has sworn to me an amity inviolable? ah
cruel! is it possible that thou art confederate with the thieves which have
robbed me? Don Fernand who seemed to be destinated for the protection of
Charity, hearing this plantive voice, ran presently to the place where she
was, he saw this maid along upon the ground, and this cursed woman, stripping
her of her jewels and clothes. Fergonde had heard the pistol discharged, but
she thought it had been her husband that had shot for some design; for she
had not seen the Cavalier: so that when he came near her, she believed that
it was Leon who returned, so much she was troubled, and attentive to her wicked
action. The cavalier seeing this young beauty thus rudely treated, moved with
compassion, and blinded with choler, or it may be, put forwards by heaven,
which serves it self very often of one man to punish another, gave her three
blows with his sword, which made three issues for her soul to go the sooner
out of her treacherous body. Charity, who saw this action, imagined that she
had done Fregonde wrong to suspecther of infidelity, and believed that this
Cavalier was the same thief that had stayed them: so that she ^xpected the
same misfortune that had befalne her companion, but as death flies ordinarily
from those that expect it, it happened so to her. Finish bloodsucker, said she
to Fernand, finish to glut thy cruelty, and take from me this languishing life.
He knowing that she took him for the thief, answered her, Madame you see the
defendor of your person and life, and a gentleman that will expose his, for
your service if you please. Charity hearing these words found her self more
confounded then before, she knew not what to think thereof, but considering
that so courteous words could not proceed out of the mouth of a thief, she
called again her spirits, and stretched out her arms to the Cavalier, who
raised her from the earth. He conjured her to assure her self upon his person,
and to believe that she was in the hands of a man of honor, where there should
be rendered her no displeasure. Saying so, he approached with her to the place
where he had left Leon, but he had drawn himself into the bushes, hoping that
the Cavalier being gone on his way, his wife would come help him, and make him
to be carried away and looked unto. Fernand not finding him, made no great
diligence to search him, he imagined, that he was not so hurt as he had
believed, and that he was gone to tell his disaster to his companions, to
oblige them to revenge him; in this imagination he made have from thence, and
took Charity with him, he set her upon her mule, and mounted upon his horse,
and took the way by which he was come, returning toward Madrid, because the
nearest place of retreat was that way; otherwise they would have been
benighted (...) the wood, and it may be in danger to find ^^e companions of
Leon; it was a great distance betwixt this place and the town where Fernand
thought to lodge to pass the night in security, which gave him leisure
discreetly to inform himself, who she was, and of the voyage she made, and
who had engaged her into this danger. Charity to testify how much she
esteemed her self bounden to his generositie, recited nakedly unto him all that
she knew of her self, as well her name and condition, as the accident which
was arrived me in her lodgings, moderating in the end the shame of her fault
with the promises of marriage which I had so solemnly made her.

Fernand hearkened to all this discourse with astonishment and admiration,
seeing himself to be one of the principal personages in this tragical
History. He remembered himself that the next day I was to marry Cleonte, the
Gentlewoman whereof I told you, and who was to be esteemed, for having amongst
other good qualities, near twenty thousand pounds for her portion, besides the
hope of inheriting, yet as much more, from her father. Confidering then that it
was in his power, to repair the honor of this fair Gentlewoman, and to bring
again consolation and joy to her mother, he found himself engaged in
conscience and generositie, not to neglect it; being arrived at their Inn and
having taken a little repast, he would let her see how useful his meeting with
her might be to her, yet without declaring what he knew of my project to marry
Cleonte, for fear of surcharging her with new afflict^^^. Madam, said he, I
thank my good fortune, that she has this day given me occasion to serve you
in such manner as none but a brother could do. He did not think to have made
so just a comparison, for this time I will break my voyage to Seville, whither
I was going as well as you, when I met you, and for your sake I will again
take the way to Madrid, hoping there to procure you that contentment which you
desire from Don Antonio. It is a Cavalier whom I know, and whom I hold so
religious, that if he has sworn to marry you, as I believe he has, since
you say so, he will never violate his faith, and it may be he would already
have done it, if he had known where to have found you; it is therefore I would
counsel you to return with me to Madrid. At these words Fernand saw that
Charity lifting her eyes up to heaven, made an action which testified that
she had some repugnance to the effect of this proposition, being ashamed to
go alone with a man; and not daring to speak her feeling, she covered with the
pretext of fear to be known. No, no, Mistress, said he, fear nothing, confide
in me, if your quality and beauty would not oblige me to respect, that which I
bear to Antonio, whose wife I believe you will be, would make me use you with
all sort of reverence. I will lodge you in a place where no body shall know
you; in the interim I will see this Cavalier, and I assure my self, that you
will have cause to praise his loyalty, and my diligence.

Charity was altogether charmed with these spacious consolations; she passed
the rest of the night in some repose of spirit, thanking God every moment, for
having assisted her with so magnanimous a courage, and disposing her self to
be conducted by the prudence of this brave Cavalier. At break of day he went
to knock at the door of her chamber, and told her, that it was time to depart,
and that they must have to Madrid, if she would see a good success of her
affairs, she was presently ready, and they went gladly together. They arrived
that day at dinner time in an Inn, where they found the Commissary deputed by
the President of Castille to apprehend the thieves which upon these ways
robbed all the passengers, who had already taken and hanged up the companions
of Leon.

Don Baptiste father of Cleonte, having appointed and chosen the day of our
marriage, had invited all his friends for that time, amongst the which Don
Ariel the Uncle of Charity was the most considerable after his kindred, this
Uncle that lived at Seville, and to whom she went to sue to his good nature, to
receive her to him, being the only possessour of the estate of her house
settled upon the eldest, as I have already told you. He left Seville to come to
Madrid, and take part of the contentment of his friends. The next day after the
adventure encountered by Don Fernand, he passed that way, near unto which Leon
had drawn and hidden himself. This miserable wretch having been so long time
abandoned from succor, and almost lost all his blood, and mortally hurt,
decayed by little and little; seeing that Fregonde did not come, and that he
heard passengers go that way, he begun to make pitiful cries, at the
instant that Don Ariell passed by the place where he was. Then this charitable
and courteous Cavalier made his train to stay, and alighting the first, went
where he heard this lamentable voice; he saw upon the ground a strong man,
enclining to gray, of about fifty years of age, of a stern visage, full of
scarres, and soiled with blood, as all the rest of his body was, who made him
this broken discourse, being oppressed with pain and weakness. Sir, said he,
through Christian charity have pity of a miserable sinner, to whom just
heaven this day makes its vengeance felt; I have a recital to make you,
whereby I shall discharge my conscience (it God assist me with life and breath
to do it) and give ease to a great family, which I have put in extreme grief
a long while agone, saying so, a great weakness stayed his speech; Don Ariell
curious to know what this hurt man would say, sent for water to a little
rivelet, that ran thereby; they cast it into his face, and he opened his
eyes; then setting him up handsomely against a tree, two men of Don Ariels
holding him up, he begun again his discourse. Which way do you go Sir, said
he? I go to Madrid, answered Ariel. Alas! Sir, replied the hurt man, you may
well oblige then persons of condition that are of that town, and in so doing
render my soul less criminal. Speak, my friend, said Ariel, take courage, I
will do it with all my heart. It is thirty years, continued the hurt man, that
I have lived in the most infamous profession that is possible for a man to
choose. At the beginning I robbed in Towns and Villages, where I sometimes
escaped from the hands of Justice, and sometimes also I received severe
chastisement therefrom, but yet too gentle for my crimes In fine, after a
perpetual banishment from Madrid, I was constrained to inhabit in the fields
and woods, where I robbed the passengers, and many times took away their lives
with their goods; I roved also sometimes about the town, and in the entry of
the night I robbed those that came out thereof, or who arrived late there:
About twenty years agone, one evening, being accompanied with one of my
confederates, I found a country woman going toward the town, who carried a
certain packet, we would have taken it from her, she made resistance, and
begun to cry, and we killed her, this packet was a fair little boy, which
heaven warranted from our cruelty, we contented our selves to take from him
some little ornaments, which gave me knowledge that this infant was of high
birth, we carried him to the next village, and left him in the hands of a poor
woman, in abusing her with a spacious lie, to make her receive him. Some
months after I went disguised into Madrid, and secretly informed my self of
the loss of this infant, they told me the name of his house, and that he was
the heir of five and twenty hundred pounds a year, knowing that, I durst not
expose to sale the little business which I had taken from him, fearing to be
discovered, since that time I have had remorse of conscience for the great
evil and wrong I have done this child, so that having intention to repair one
day my crime, I would never part with these little jewels, what necessity
soever I was in, always reserving them to serve as marks and testimonies to
make the child known; they were an Agnus-Dei enchased with gold enamelled, a
tooth of Corrall, also garnished with gold, and a little chain of the same
metal, which he had hung about his neck, all these are to be found, with the
names of his father and mother, and his own, in an old cupbord in my house,
where I have nevertheless not much inhabited, which is near the Meadows of
Saint Geronime of Madrid, it may be easily found in asking for my name, which
is Leon, known well enough by my infamy, see here the Key of that buffet in my
bosom: Fregonde my wife, in speaking this last word his voice failed him, his
eyes turned, and he rendered his last sigh.

The confusion of Don Ariel is not to be represented, so much the beginning and
end of this discourse had astonished him.

After so ample a declaration, he had almost no need of this key to verify
that this child (whereof Leon had spoken) was his nephew, and the only son
of his brother, lost so many years agone yet for to have a greater clearing
therein, he made it to be taken from his neck, where it hung under his shirt:
this done he got upon horse back, and followed his way, ignorant by what
accident this old thief had been hurt, because he had not time to demand it
of him, which he thought to have done as soon as he had ended his relation. At
the first he passed, he gave notice thereof to the officers of Justice, who
neglected to go thither, thinking there was nothing to pay them for their
pains, as it is ordinary, and so it is believed, that Fregonde and he, were
consumed upon the place, or devoured by savage beasts. Don Ariel traveled with
the greatest impatience that was possible, extremely desirous to discover the
verity of his doubt. In going he felt himself troubled with two contrary
feelings. On the one side covetousness counseled him, to take the advantage
which he had, seeing he only understood this affair, and to reveal nothing,
for fear of being outed of the estate, which he had possessed so long time,
and in danger to be brought to account, having enjoyed this estate, upon the
belief which he had, that he was the lawful successor of his dead brother. On
the other side religion persuaded him to restitution if he should come to the
knowledge of the true heir. After having long time balanced these two
temptations, he generously resolved, to yield to the duty of a good Christian,
and to the honor whereunto his nobleness engaged him. In this intention he
entered into Madrid, the same day that Fernand and Charity arrived there, for
they were but one days journey before him, and in approaching the town they
went very softly, to let the day pass and arrive in the night, for fear that
some one might know Charity. Don Ariel would see no body of his acquaintance,
until he was cleared upon the declaration, which Leon had made him. He lodged
in a remote quarter of the town, and the next day by the authority of justice
he made the house of Leon to be opened, and the cupboard, depositary of the
witnesses of his damage, since that they dispossessed him of a great
succession. They were found in a Box with a writing containing that they were
taken with a child in such a time and place, as also the names of the child,
his faher, and mother. Don Ariel charged himself therewith to represent them
when it should be required. He might well if he would have exempted himself
from making such a search, there being none but he that knew the secret that
the thief had discovered to him, but the generositie of his soul, made him
do a rare action of justice, in this occasion; his design was to go enquire
in all the villages about Madrid, following the instructions which Leon had
given him, thereby to learn something of his nephew, but before he made this
search he would see his sister in law, to know if she heard nothing of her
son, and let also Don Baptiste know of his arrival, who expected him to
assist at the wedding of Cleonte his daughter, and mee^.

Don Fernand and Charity being arrived at Madrid did as Don Ariell had done,
they lodged in quality of (strangers, in a remote Inn, not to be knowner and
whilst Don Ariell made his perquisitions, Fernand informed himself in what
estate, my marriage was with Cleonte, He was told that it was referred from day
to day, expecting the arrival of a Cavalier of Seville the intimate friend of
Don Baptiste This news pleased him very well, seeing that he was come time
enough for the good of Charity. They had scarcely been two days in Madrid,
when Don Ariell appeared to the great contentment of Don Baptiste, who received
him very honorably to his house; the next day he went to visit Eugenie his
sister in law, whom he found much changed, with the extreme displeasure she
took for the loss of Charity, she made him believe, that she had been sick,
the better to dissemble her sadness. After their first complements, he
demanded news, of his niece. I have said she for some time put her into a
religious house, with one of her cosens, to avoid the trouble which one has
to guarde a fair maid, since that they say she may be called so. Don Ariel
believed her and commended her proceedings. Seigneur Baptiste my pretended
father in law, arrived thereupon, taking his time to employ the credit of Don
Ariel, to invite her to my wedding: she excused her self in the beginning, but
in the end not to give knowledge of the cause of her mourning to her brother in
law, she accepted the summons. The night being come, that night I say
destinated to take away my liberty, and to engage me in a voluntary captivity,
the venerable Eugenie, came into the assembly: as soon as she cast her eyes
upon me, she remembered the tragedy passed, and felt her self ceazed with
extreme sorrow, she wept inwardly, and fained joy in appearance.

Don Fernand advertised of the time of the solemnity, made a fair habit to be
brought to Charity, according to her condition: he prayed her to cloth her
self therewith, and to adorn her selse with those jewels, whereof I have
made you a description; then making her to put a mantle upon her, he lead her
to the house of Don Baptiste: he entered with her into the hall where the
company were, and made her sit in a corner; then coming right to me, Seignieur
Don Antonio, said he to me in mine ear, I much commend the preparation you
have made for your wedding, and for to gain time I have brought you her that
must be your wife. Do not ask me other explication, because the place where
we arc is not proper, do only that which you owe to your word and the merit
of her which I present to you. I was much surprised to see Don Fernand so soon
returned, and more with his language, which I judged to be a challenge
disguised, and in this consideration, without thinking of informing my self,
what she was he spoke to me of, I told him softly that I had some reply to make
him upon that subject, and that he should go stay for me at a place which I
named to him. He went out very discreetly, and I incontinently after, but we
were no sooner out of the company, but that they thought that I had a quarrel.
My brother which you see here, ran upon the instant after us, so did also Don
Ariel and Don Baptiste: they overtooke us in the streets and brought us back
again to the house, ye^ ignorant of the cause of our quarrel, for we faine^
to be come out upon another design, but Do^ Charles found us not, we sent
after him, but could hear nothing of him, since that night I have no seen him
until I met him at Cartagene: During al^ these alarmes, Charity kept her
place where Fernand had left her, and when she begun to know tha^ this assembly
was made for my marriage with Cleonte, she learned at the same time, that I was
gone out to fight with a stranger, she judged that it was Don Fernand. Then
seeing me on one side to violate my promises, and on the other side in design
to take away the life of her defendor, so violent a sorrow ceazed upon her
heart, that she fell in aswoond As soon as this weakness was perceived, she
was encompassed with all the ladies, which ran to assist her, and amongst the
rest Eugenie her mother, who (having known her) remained immovable, and dumb
as a statue: I know not whether it was with excess of joy to see her, or with
extreamitie of sorrow, to know that she was come alone with a stranger.

The women confused in the contemplation of this accident, caused Charity and
her mother to be carried into another chamber apart, when another motion
happened at our return: A poor woman that served in the house of Don Bapriste,
as we entered into the hall, knew Don Fernand, and without other ceremony, came
and cast her self upon his neck crying, ah, my son! my dear child! is it
possible that I see thee living? All those that were not busied about Charity
and Eugenie, encompassed Don Fernand, and this woman, astonished to see them
embrace with so much joy. They could not comprehend how a woman of so base
condition should call a young man, who had the port and habits of a Cavalier
her son. Many of those that at the beginning made some esteem of Don Fernand,
regarded him then with scorn and derision. In brief, we were so confused with
so many troubles and strange successes, that we scarcely knew one another. In
fine, Cleonte, adorned as a Bride to be married, presently came to Epinelle, so
this poor woman was called, and demanded of her the explication of this action;
and this woman in the presence of the whole assembly said, that she had
brought up Fernand as her child, having nourished him with her milk, he being
put into her hands by two unknown men, which brought him to her one night,
letting her know, that it was a child of a good family, and the rest, that I
have told you those thieves said to her, adding that her poverty had
constrained him to quit the village, and come and serve in Madrid. Don Ariel,
who behind the others hearkened to this recital with admiration, calculating
the time, and putting all the circumstances together, with those which Leon had
told him, came to finish the interpretation of these aenigma's, he demanded the
name of this woman, and of the village where she dwelt when they brought her
this child, and seeing that they were the same which were contained in the
writing which he had found in Leons cupboard, he looked more carefully upon the
face of Don Fernand, where he observed all the features of his dead brother,
his blood begun to be moved, and not being able longer to resist the force of
his affection, which pressed him, he came with his arms open to Don Fernand
calling him his dear nephew; and without other words, he was so ravished with
joy, he remained long time embracing him, and weeping upon his f^c^: oppressing
all the assistants with new admiration, after the greatest effects of this
transport of joy, Don Ariel sent for the Agnus Dei, and the tooth of coral,
which I have told you of, to make them known to E^genie. They caused her to
come being yet moved with the recovery of her daughter; whose story Don Ariel
her uncle was yet ignorant of, no one daring to tell it him: look here, sister
said he to her in showing her these little ornaments, do ye know this? O
heaven! cried she in regarding them, thou sellest me dear the contentment thou
have now given me, since that without any intermission thou put me in mind
of the loss of my child, in representing to me these little gages. Ah! where
art thou my dear Fernand. There he is replied Don Ariel, in taking him by the
hand, Eugenie had like to have swounded with this sudden apparition, Ah God!
said she: then (remaining as if she had been charmed) she begun to contemplate
him, and felt upon the instant, a motion at her heart which confirmed the
verity of what she heard. On the other side Fernand was in so strange a
confusion, that he knew not how to interpret these words and actions. In fine
after she had remained a good space in this enchantment, she broke silence, and
said, that she knew him to have a perfect resemblance of his father; but to
make her the more certain of the truth, she remembered that at the hour of the
birth of Fernand and Charity, they being twins, they were fastened together by
the heel, and having disjoined them, there then rested to either of them a
mark in that place: then Don Fernand begun to understand all his history,
being overjoyed to know that he was issued of so noble a lineage, fell upon his
knees before Eugenie; Madame said he, if there need no other testimony but
that, to make me to be acknowledged your ^onne, permit me to kiss your feet
in that quality; have the sign you speak of Eugenie transported to ^ee so
many marvels upon the sudden, had like to have given up her soul in kissing
and embracing Don Fernand: having a little given over their embracing, they
went into another chamber, and in the presence of Don Ariel, he let them see
the mark which gave the last clearing to their doubts, and made Don Fernand to
be acknowledged lawful heir of the estate which his uncle had possessed so
many years After this Charity was brought into the chamber to augment this
great joy, and to take part thereof, Eugenie made her to embrace Don Fernand as
her brother, whom she had heard her mother so often lament. In brief they were
all so full of felicity in this prodigious encounter, that they scarcely knew
themselves. They made amongst themselves some short recitalls of their
adventures, for their proper satisfaction, until they should come into a more
convenient place to declare them at large, as I have done; Don Ariel brought
them all three again into the hall? publishing to all the company, the miracle
which God had done in their favor, so that all their friends participated of
their contentment, and I more then their kindred themselves. After this Don
Fernand came to me; sir said he, very modestly, I did not think I had been so
much interessed in the discourse I held you but even now, I made it being urged
thereunto by a^ instinct, whose cause I knew not; but at the present since the
affair touches me so nearly, and that see that it was blood which excited me
to solicit you, I begin it again and with much more affection. I cannot think
that a generous soul, as I have always known yours to be, would disguise a
treachery under honest promises, where heaven was called to witness the
design you had to accomplish them. Words tie men; before they are spoken they
are voluntary, but being given, they are necessary. If you be of another
opinion, you wrong the nobleness of your courage, and much prejudice your
honor: and being your friend so much as I am, i^ would extremely trouble me
that you should do any action whereby your reputation might be stained. You
know the discourse you have held to my sister, and the scandal that is
thereupon arrived, you are now obliged to effect it, as well for her proper
satisfaction, as the general reputation and honor of our family. And for my
part I am persuaded that you had already done it, if you had known whereto
have found Charity. She is of condition equal to yours; her virtue was in a
high degree of perfection before the fault you made her commit, her beauty
comes, not short of the most considerable, and if I say not that she is
incomparable, it is because I would not offend the respect which I bear to
Cleonte. Besides all these considerations, you will add to the quality of
friend which you honor me with, that of brother and most humble servant. If
you have any scruple for her absence, although you are the cause thereof, I
will oblige my self to render you satisfaction.

All these reasons seemed to me so honest and just, and my conscience was so
moved therewith, that ^estifying unto him my consentment by my silence, I went
to embrace Charity, and in the presence of the whole company renewed my vows
to her, wherewith her mother and uncle were greatly rejoiced. Don Ariel made a
voluntary resignation to Don Fernand, of all the estate which by right
appertained to him, and moreover he made him his heir f^er his death: and the
more to oblige me to esteem it is niece, and to take away the trouble I might
have for being excluded from the riches which I might have possessed in
marrying Cleonte, he augmented the portion of Charity with eight thousand
pounds, part of the profits which he had received in enjoying Fernands estate,
who approved this liberality. I went to make complements to Don Baptiste and
Cleonte, excusing my self upon the belief which I had that Charity was dead
when I sought for their alliance, but she being living, my conscience obliged
me to maintain to her the promises which I had made her. That if they would
receive Don Fernand in my place, they would gain much by the change; and
thereupon I exaggerated the praises of his good countenance and merit. Don
Baptiste liked well this proposition; he communicated it to Don Ariel, who
testified that he esteemed himself most happy if Cleonte would permit, that
friendship and kindred might be united; and that for his nephew he did not
doubt but to find him wholly disposed thereunto, it being the greatest honor
and fortune he could aspire unto. Cleonte formed easily her obedience unto the
will of her father, and Fernand praising my invention, consented to the desires
of his uncle, so that we weere married at the same time by the approbation of
all our friends and kindred Behold dear Fenise the success of my loves, if
the recital thereof has been too long pardon me; I did it but to divert you
from thinking of what you have lest at Cartagene. It is now my brothers part to
tell us the occasion, which made him absent himself from Madrid, and not
participate of all these mavelous felicities.

Fenise found this history extremely pretty and well entermixed, saying that
for its raritie it merited to be consecrated to posterity; which gave subject
to Charles to endeavor to merit like praise, in recounting his fortunes: which
he thus begun.

THE HISTORY OF DON CHARLES AND VIOLANTE.
BEing gone out after my brother upon the opinion that we had, that Don Fernand
had called him out to fight with him, as he has already told you, I made many
turns in the town, without meeting with him; In the end I met a servant of a
gentleman a friend of mine, that was in the assembly at Don Baptists house, who
assured me that my brother was returned thither, with him against whom it was
believed he had the qarrell, that Don Baptiste accompanied, with other
Cavaliers amongst whom his master was, had found them, and carried them back to
his house. Upon these words I went no further, but returned toward the house,
^^ing desirous to know the occasion of this rumor. In passing through a street
a little remote from the commerce of people, I saw at the door of a certain
house, a woman covered with a mantle: as I passed she coughed softly which I
took for a sign, that she would stay me, and without expecting a second time
I came to her, and begun like a young man to treat her as a common woman,
thinking that at that hour no other were to be met in? the streets, she
retired her self a little, and said to me, Cavalier, I pardon the evil
opinion you have conceived of me, seeing me alone and so late in this place; I
am a woman of condition afflicted with an extreme displeasure, and have need
of the assistance of a man of valor: the opinion which I have that you are so,
has caused me to call you. This manner of speaking made me give credit to her
words, and although it was night, I saw that which made me judge her to be a
person of respect, so that changing my style and actions, I said, Madame since
that your discretion has prevented my excuses they would be now superfluous, I
will therefore let alone submissive words, and offer you the effect of a most
faithful service. Sir answered she, although I do not doubt of the sincerity
of your offers, I should be yet much more assured, if I had the honor to know
your name. I am called said I Don Charles de Valasquez. Ah God! replied she:
then remaining silent she seemed to doubt if she should discover to me her
design. What is the matter Madame, continued I, is that name odious unto you?
Alas Sir said she, I honored it extremely, but to tell you the truth, the
fear I have to be known makes me to desire, that you bad not stayed, but
passed on your way and followed your first intention This answer made me the
more curious t^ know who she was. I then gave her my word not to inform my
self of any thing, but blindly to obey her in all she would ordain me,
without enterprising any thing that might displease her, praying her not to
fear to declare to me her intentions protesting to serve her courageously, and
never to reveal any secret she should trust me with. Then she told me that she
was intimate friend to Violante, a^ lady whom I served, who triumphed over my
liberty, and treated me rigorously, although I had rendered her a thousand
testimonies of my passion. She had diverse time prayed me by others to desist
from my suit, telling me my labor would be lost. Seeing then that this
gentlewoman said she was the intimate friend of my ungrateful mistress, my
desire to serve her animated my courage, persuading my self that I should
oblige her, to render me some good office toward this cruel one. Upon the
assurances which you give me of your discretion, and the freedom whereunto
your blood obliges you, replied she; follow me, I am going into a house about
an affair of great importance: you must, if you please attend me at the street
door, resolved to let no one enter, and do not trouble your self with the
noise you may hear there if any happen: but if any one offer to go out, let
him go freely, without informing your self of him. As she had finished these
instructions, we arrived at the door of an house of eminency: she entered
thereinto, and I finding my self engaged to assist her, put my self in ambush
near the door to execute her ordinances, I presently heard the noise she told
me of, and almost at the same instant a man came out, having a cloak, and a
colored hat, which came so far upon his head; that the brims covered his
face; for is was not so obscure, but that I could well observe this, he came
out as if he were in choler, which I knew by these words which he spoke, thus
impudent women ought to be treated; there needs no other misfortune to our
blood, but to have it mingled with that of an infamous woman; he was scarcely
gone, when this Lady whom I had accompanied came out also, and coming to me all
in tears, Seigneur Don Charles said she, I come from making the last proof of
my misfortunes; at the present I have need that you carry me to some friends
house of yours, where I may put off the clothes I wear, I presently carried
her to a house, in the Master whereof I had great confidence; she went alone
into a chamber, put off her woman's habit, and came out in man's, she prayed me
to give her my sword, and to take another for my self. I extremely marvelled to
see all these strange actions, yet without enquiring after any thing, I humbly
obeyed in all she required, yet with great desire to know what would become of
these diverse changes. We left the town, she went the first, and I followed her
step by step; she went into a close, a little out of the highway, in the middle
whereof was a Dove-coate, she made me hide my self behind it, and she kept a
little distance from it, as if she expected some one, wishing me to come to her
at the first sign that she should make me, saying that she should then have
need of my person. I remained planted behind the Dove-coate, like a bugbeare of
hemp-stalkes, my spirits much confused with all these mysteries, and without
being able to penetrate into the intentions of this woman, although I had time
enough to meditate upon these actions, for I was near an hour in keeping this
sentinel. In the end, I heard some one to come very deliberately, I watched,
and perceived that it was the same man that I had seen come out of the house
whither this woman had carried me, and left me at the door, he approaching to
her, at a little distance held her this language, Don Charles, said he, before
we come to the effect which has brought us hither, I must tell you, that it
was not necessary to make me come into the field about a thing that I would
easily have done in the town. You stand upon two points in the writing which
was given me this morning from you, the first, that I should know that you love
Violante; the second, that you are resolved to make me quit the pretensions I
have for her; I will satisfy you upon both: For the first head, I will tell
you that I am troubled, that you have passion for so poor a subject; and for
the second, that it will not at all trouble me to quit that which I never had,
and which is as hateful to me as death: You ought therefore to be content for
this regard. But since that you already know, that I never come into these
places to return without doing the action for which we are come, we must
measure our swords with protestation on my part, that I do not this action but
because you have called me thereunto, and that I would not do it for the
consideration of Violante, nor for all the women in the world, not believing
that there is amongst them all one chaste and wise, but she that has never
been courted nor sought after. I did not believe ever to have met with any
thing that could have so astonished me, nor put me in so much choler, as I was
in, to hear this discourse, as well because it was addressed to me, as because
it was made in scorn of Violante, whom I passionately loved, to this being
joined the outrage wherewith he offended the whole sex, saying that there was
no woman that had virtue when she was solicited to vice, I was much moved to
go correct this insolent, but feared to violate the promises which I had made
to her that brought me thither, yet considering that my honor was engaged to
chastise the impudence of this man, I disposed my self to break the
enchantment which held me behind the Dove-coate, when this woman seeing her
adversary come toward her with his sword in his hand, went to him, and being
come almost within the reach of their swords, discharged a Pistol at his
breast, and cast him to the ground, without being able to offend her, or give
her one only word, I immediately ran in to see if there was any means to know
him, but it was not light enough, then going toward this valiant woman; What
is the matter, Madame, said I, what have you done? It is nothing, answered she:
Do you know this man? Not to my knowledge, said I: It is, replied she, the
Traitor Don Baltazar de Orosco. I knew him, then said I, he was a Cavalier
which I have reason to complain of for many evil offices which he has
rendered me. Well, continued she (whilst her enemy rendered his last sigh)
since that you know who he is, you shall also know who I am, and the subject
which has obliged me to treat him thus.

I do not think it strange, that you have not known me, having never yet
spoken to me, nor only heard the sound of my voice until this present. Know
then that I am the same Violante, whose friend I told you I was, it is near
two years agone, that Don Baltazar, covering his treason under civil
propositions, begun to render me proofs of his affections, and to solicit
me to be pleased with his suite, time and perseverance obliged me to hearken to
him, and to wish him well. In that time my mother rendered the tribute which
every one owes to nature, leaving a great succession in the town of Naples, of
which place she was native. My father desiring to take order about that estate,
was constrained to make a voyage thither; at his departure he left me with one
of my Aunts, to have care of me, and divert me from the trouble which I might
have during his absence. All these circumstances gave me more liberty for love
to lodge within my breast, and to Don Baltazar the more easily to find the way
to my chamber. He deceived me with a promise of marriage, which he let me
read, where I saw that he took all the court of Heaven to witness, and
abandoned himself to a thousand curses if he failed to accomplish it, the
least whereof was his prayers to God to make him dye by the hands of the
person, whose life was the most dear to him. Not long after he took possession
of the most precious thing which was in my power, and a few days after he
despised it; and as his design had been but to deceive me, since that he was
satisfied, he made no more account of me, nor to visit me as he had done
before. Seeing my self treated so unworthily, I sought all means possible to
bring him to the accomplishment of his duty and promises, but the more I
endeavored by fair means to oblige him to do me reason, the more I excited
him to derision, and the more I experimented his ingratitude and my misfortune.
In the interim his father treated of a marriage for him, and he did not
forbear to consent thereunto, without thinking that he could not do it,
being already engaged to me. I sent diverse times to pray him to take the pains
to come to see me, to know from his own mouth, if the brute which ran of
his marriage was true, but he always mocked at the message and the person
which carried it; from day to day the term of his marriage approached, and my
despite augmented. I found means to speak with him in a Church, and to put him
in mind of his words, my belief, and his written promise; but the barbarian
impudently answered me, that she that had not merit enough to make a friend of,
was not to be received for a wife. Consider a little the impudence of this
bru^^ll; I think I had then (if the respect of the holy place had not retained
me) scratched him by the face, I was so transported with choler, and so
sensible of this outrage, I knew not what to resolve upon, nor to whom to have
recourse to; and to ^eigh me down with grief and sadness, I was ^old
yesterday, that within three days his propo^ed marriage ought to be effected.
Thereupon I ^ad a desire to hinder it by way of Justice, but upon the instant I
represented to my self, that if my opposition did not take place, I should but
publish my dishonor, and to speak the truth, if this doubt ^ad not retained
me, my despite and courage had dissuaded me, judging it too much honor to this
infamous man, to constrain him to do that which he ought to have entreated
for. After many considerations, I thought that I ought not to communicate it to
any one, for fear of hazarding the innocence of others, betwixt mine error
and his crime; so that this morning I sent him a writing in your name, wherein
J said you would expect him all alone here at this hour, either to see him
with his sword in his hand, or to oblige him to quit the pretensions which he
had for me. In using this stratagem, J imagined, either that he would see me
this day to despite you, knowing that you loved me, or that he would not doubt
but that you called him to combat, knowing that you were his enemy. But having
seen the day pass, without hearing from him, I caused him to be so well
watched this evening, that it was reported to me, that he was in the house
whither I lead you, wherein dwells one of his friends. Having received this
advice, I furnished my self with what was necessary to execute my premeditated
vengeance, or at the worst to sacrifice my life to the reparation of mine
honor. But before I would come to this extremity, I desired to see this
disloyal yet once, to attempt to reduce him to reason and his duty: I
therefore went out by the favor of the night for this effect, but considering
that all men are dispensed from respect when they meet a woman alone in the
streets, and in the dark, J stayed some ten steps from our house, expecting
that there should pass some one, whom J might judge my self able to entreat
to serve me for scout. It seems that heaven, amongst the infelicities which
oppressed me, would gratify me with the good fortune of your encounter, since
that there had already passed three men, of fashion good enough, before you
came, to whom I spoke not a word, but as if you had been reserved for to
render me this pious office, my genius excited me to call you, when you came
near me.

The prayer that I made to you, when you stayed Sentinel at that door, which
was not to trouble your self with the noise which you might hear, was
grounded upon the hope which I had to receive satisfaction in this place, for
the injuries of this disloyal, if he did not content me; but two men that were
with him hindered mine enterprise, for I imagined, they might stay the blow
which I would give him, or at the least having executed it, they would put me
into the hands of justice. Seeing then that I ought not to hazard my self so
rashly; I approached to this ingrate with the action of a suppliant, but in
stead of receiving as he ought; only in consideration of my quality, and to
attribute to an excess of love, the resolution which I had taken to come find
him in this company, he took occasion therefrom, to treat me as a public
woman, adding to the infamy of my violated honor, the shame of seeing my face
massacred, by his rash hands. Is there in the whole world a woman of so little
courage, that could support so many injuries, without giving an exemplary
chastisement to all ingrates? Animated then with a furious and just anger, I
resolved to revenge my self, yet this wicked man is happy amongst his
misfortunes, that he has received his death from a hand which he has so often
kissed and almost adored. If I have not employed you in this action Seigneur
Don Charles, it was not that I believed otherwise, but that you would have
generously enterprised it, but I repute your blood too noble, to balance it
with that of a traitor. Although I have taken away his life with a pistol, I
do not believe that I have used foul play, for without that there would have
been too great inequality betwixt my weakness, and his strength, my rock and
his sword, what ever it was, my victory ought not to have been doubtful,
otherwise I should not have been revenged. In fine he is dead, and God has
permitted i^ to be so, to accomplish the imprecations which he called upon him,
and for to chastise him for having violated the faith, where he had called to
witness the Almighty, his glorious mother, and all angelical powers. There is
no doubt but you and I shall be suspected for his death; you because every one
knows, that you are his enemy and rival; and I for having taken vengeance of
the perfidiousnesse which all the world knows he has done me; for my part I
will enjoy the vain glory of my vengeance, and avoid if I can the pain I may
suffer being accused, before my justifications may be received, therefore I am
resolved to absent my self. Jf you will go with me, J shall testify unto you
the esteem which J have of your person: and how sensible J am of the
obligations which J have to you, I have already provided what is necessary for
that purpose. There is an ancient servant of my fathers which attends me at his
house, with jewels of great price, and some money, which J have given him to
keep, and three good horses. See if your heart wishes to do it: time
presses and permits us to consult no longer, things the least premeditated,
often times issue the best. Admiring her generositie, considering her judicious
reasons, and above all suffering my self to be carried away with the love I
bore her, which was newly increased by the defeat of the enemy, which she had
taken away from m^, I resolved to follow her, with promise never to abandon
her. Upon the instant we went to the man's house she had spoken of, who was well
advanced in years, but yet sound, strong of body, and of great experience. We
took these three horses, which Violante had prepared for to save her self
with this man and a woman, not thinking of encountering me, and with the
pearls, diamonds, and money, we put our selves diligently into the rode of
Toledo and arrived there the next morning. It was not judged expedient for us
to stay there, any longer, but whilst Orambel (so was our guide called) could
buy us poor country habits. With this equigage, we gained the mountains near
to Toledo with design to buy goods and flocks, and inhabit there, as we were
in quality of country people, until we had given order for our affairs. The
age of Orambel agreed very well with ours for our plot we had made, to say that
he was our father, he had the care of all our affairs, and went sometimes
disguised to Madrid, to learn what was said of the things wherein we had
interest; for which cause we were not willing to go further from the court. I
took the name of Lizeron, and Violante, the name of Lacinthe, the better to
disguise us. We lived there in great repose, employing the time we two in
perfectioning our loves after the manner of the shepherds described in Diana
de Montemayor, whilst that Orambel our adopted father governed household
affairs.

During our abode there, there arrived many strange encounters to us, which I
will not enterprise to recount unto you, fearing to trouble you; yet it is
almost impossible for me to hinder my self from reciting one adventure that
happened to us one day. Then Don Charles made the discourse of his encounter
with Fenise, as it has been said in the beginning of the first book; adding in
continuing thus we di^^^^ed the troubles of a country life, where the days
(...) very long, and great repose displeasing. Vio^^^ often received letters
from her Father, which ^^^mbel went to fetch at her Aunts house; amongst
others, she received one, wherein her father let her know, that he was kept in
his bed by a sickness, which the Physicians presaged would endure a long time,
and therefore he could not return into Spain; that it was necessary for her
presently to come into Italy, to take possession of his goods, to the end that
if she remained an Orphan, she should not be a poor one. Violante durst not
undertake so long a voyage, finding her self then indisposed, she entreated me
to take it for her, saying, that it would not be unbeseeming, taking the
quality of her husband. I was enflamed every day more and more with her beauty,
considering that mine honor could not be interessed in marrying of her, since
that if Don Baltazar had deceived her, she was sufficiently satisfied
therefore; and besides, that she had never given him that liberty, if she had
not believed him to be her husband. J served my self of her proposition, and
told her, that since that she avowed me to take the quality of husband, I did
not desire to be a liar, and that if she pleased she might make it good. She
that desired it as much as J, gave me her hand in the face of the Church, and
J married her as the widow of a Cavalier, disabusing those of the village from
the opinion which we had given them, that we were brother and sister; and a
month after J went to Naples, with witnesses of my marriage, which were
Letters from Violante and her Aunt, which made me receive a gracious welcome
from my Father in law. The fear which he had to die without regulating his
affairs, obliged him to install me in the inheritance of a great estate; and
six weeks after he gave me leave to depart, counselling me to return to my
wife, whom he recommended carefully to me: I disposed my self to obey his
will, and the solicitations of my love; but in my return by sea, the effects
of my intentions were hindered, by being taken captive and carried into a
country, where God had done me the favor to let me know Fenise, that I might
remain obliged unto him all my life, for as he has delivered me from a
constrained captivity, so he has engaged me for ever to be his voluntary
slave. But if with this good fortune, and that to see my brother Don Antonio in
health, I could join the contentment of seeing again my dear Violante, I
should esteem my self at the height of a most perfect felicity.

This pleasant narration left those that heard it in good humor, and
particularly Fenise, knowing him who had saved his life in the mountains; he
recounted the success thereof, saying that he was the Cavalier which was hurt,
and that that which hindered Don Charles from then knowing him, was because the
first time he had seen him, he had his face all covered with blood. Don Charles
was extremely glad of this knowledge. Don Antonio his brother told him upon
the instant that the death of Don Baltazar had been attributed to a certain
Gallant of that Ladies to whom his friends would have married him; and that
neither he nor Violante had ever been suspected.

After that they had admired the mavelous accidents of these two histories,
every one kept silence, seeing that Fenise prayed Marcell to entertain the rest
of their way, in telling them the cause of his voyage, when Marcell courteously
agreeing to what they desired of him, addressed the beginning of his discourse
to Don Charles, and said thus.

The Prodigious History of a Son and his Mother.
MY voyage and encounters have been partly grounded upon your adventures; and
if the history I am going to recount unto you is less pleasant than yours, J
dare believe that it will be found more worthy of admiration.

I had a paternall Uncle in Cartagene, a man reverenced for his virtues, and
respected for his prudence and venerable aspect; he married with a gentlewoman
of noble extraction, but whose chastity was not too certain, she was called
Constance; the effects of things do not always agree with their names. He had
a son by her totally opposed to her modesty. The debauches of Don Garcia, so
was this cosen of mine called, much tormented him; he endeavored in his
infancy to repress them by chastisements, and in his youth by sweet
remonstrances; but seeing he could not prevail, he resolved to send him into
Flanders, that he might there employ his valor (whereof he showed some signs)
against the enemies of the faith, and for the service of his King; for there
are no occasions so glorious as those wherein one may render proof of zeal
and courage. He gave him Money, and Letters of favor to put his person in
consideration; but these Letters had no virtue, nor his Money was not spent in
Flanders, but at Madrid the Court of Spain, making by this means experiment
of the great difference which there is betwixt an ill inclination and a
generous one. Vicious persons have no great trouble to meet with their like:
Don Garcia found incontinently many friends of his humor, and amongst others
he was very great with one Don Baltazar the very same that Seigneur Charles
has spoken of, and whom Violante made to feel the effects of her name and
vengeance, and yet very justly. In time mine Uncle knew the little satisfaction
which my cosen gave to his desire, and his proper birth and without speaking
any thing thereof to his wi^e, for fear of troubling her, suffered his breast
to be gnawed with extreme displeasure. In fine, hearing too often of his
pernicious life, he fell sick, and in a little time died. Constance was left
Widow with great i^^^s, and also surcharged with much affliction, as well for
the loss of her husband, as for the fear which she had, seeing him dye for
sorrow, that he had heard of the death of his son in some encounter of
war; for she believed him to be in Flanders, and that he had hidden this
accident from her to exempt her from sorrow. I was at Toledo when they writ to
me of the decease of mine Uncle, and because I knew that Don Garcia was at
Madrid, J presently went to let him know thereof; I found him hidden in the
house of one of his friends, because he was sought after diligently, being
accused for the death of Don Baltazar, he being the same night he was slain at
his house, and there it was where he had treated Violante so unworthily, as Don
Charles has said. In the doubt wherein I was, that he was culpable of this
murder, although he swore to me that he was innocent, I counseled him to go
into his country, to do which he easily resolved. He took the way to
Cartagene, entertaining his spirit with the actions that Don Baltazar had done
the last time he saw him at his house; and in remembering the words which he
spoke that night, and in many other occasions (that there was no chaste women
but those who had never been solicited) he would make proof of this unjust
opinion in the person of his Mother. Do but see this execrable project.

For this effect he passed by the town of Murcia, with intention to serve
himself of a young advocate of that town, whom he had often seen at Madrid, in
the company of Gallants, and men of pastime, amongst whom he passed for a good
wit and a well spoken man. My Cosen found him out, and let him know, that he
was returning to Cartagene the place of his birth, and before that he would
make his arrival known, he had a desire to prove the chastity of a Widow, a
Kinswoman of his, and of whom he had an ill suspicion; but because this was an
experience which he could not make alone, he stood in need of the intermission
of a friend, that he had addressed himself to him, having known him most
able, and judging him very discreet, to entreat him to assist him in this
design. The Advocate who was of [a wanton humor, having heard this
proposition, imagined that if this widow was fair, he would sound her to the
last proof, and in this thought he promised to Don Florisell to serve him in
whatsoever he would, and should judge expedient. Before that I pass any further
in this narration, you must know that my cosen had taken the name of Florisell
in arriving at Madrid, for fear of being known, and that his father might not
know that he was there, and not in Flanders whither he had sent him. Thi^
disguising of his name, and whereby I shall call him in this discourse, did
much favor my cosens abominable design, in that the Advocate could not know,
that this was his proper mother whom he would affront; so that in this
ignorance and gallant determination, they departed together from Murcia, and
went to Cartagene.

They lodged in an Inn near enough the lodging of Constance, where they
changed their clothes. Florisell took the Advocates, saying he was his man,
and the Advocate his, passing for a Cavalier of Arragon, of the town of
Pamplone, called Don Felix Ozoria, who was come to Cartagene to hearken after
news of one of his brothers, who was a slave at Maroc in Barbaria. The next day
after their arrival Florisell carried Felix into a Church, where he showed him
the face of the Widow of whom he had spoken, who came every day to Mass into
that place; she had forty years of age, but her beauty and features covered
almost a third part of them, that if she had said she had had but twenty five,
one would not have thought her to have had more, regarding her complexion.
Going from the Church, Florisell showed him the house where she dwelt; ^^ter
which the Advocate being clothed like a Cavalier, grew accquainted with a
chambermaide of Constances, and by force of money, wherewith Don Florisel
furnished him, obliged her speak well of him to her mistrisse. This maid
succeeded so well in her persuasions, that she obliged Constance to cast her
eyes upon him in the same church where he had already seen her. Finding him of
handsome fashion, she permitted her servant to serve for enterpreter of the
passions of this new Cavalier, and to present her with the letters which he
gave her. Having shown his wit by his writings which was capable to have moved
feelings of love in the heart of those who were never so little disposed
thereunto, and who would give themselves liberty to read them: he got
acquainted with Constance, let her know his passion, and afterward their
familiarity became so great, that she promised to give him the last favor in
one night which she appointed.

Florisel exactly instructed of all the circumstances of these assaults, seeing
that the place was going to be rendered, prayed Felix to stay there and to let
him alone with the rest. Then at the time appointed for this generous exploit,
Florisel changed again with Felix, he became again advocate, and the other
Cavalier he took again his habits, and name of Garcia, and went to his
mothers house, putting himself in the place of Felix, who stayed behind in the
Inn. The maid was ready at the door, who doubted not but this was he whom he
expected; because he wore the same clothes and was of the same height of
Felix. She led him without light, or speaking word, right to the bed of
Constance: for although she was mistress of her house, yet she was not so
disordered that she she durst take a greater liberty for fear, the other
domestiques should perceive her sensuallity. This chambermaide helped him to
uncloath himself, then without speaking word, he lay down by his mother who
received him with like silence. If he entered into the bed as mute, he remained
there as suddenly grown lame: he passed the rest of the night in seeming to
sleep, and at the rising of Aurora which approached to see this fearful
couple of lovers. Don Garcia, arose and dressed himself to be gone without
being known. Constance his mother seeing his actions, and that he had lien
insensible by her all the night, imagined that he was enchanted, or else that
he had taken some distaste with her; but rather believing the later, although
she was extremely neat and proper, she called him as he opened the door of
her chamber. Sir said she, very low, I cannot believe that you are he which
has used so many writings and amorous devises, to obtain this cherishable
permission which I have given you, other ways your effects are much different
from your words: farewell, Sir farewell, I commend your continence as a virtue
which renders you incomparable. Yet said she in coming out of bed, and hindering
him from opening the door, before I gave you your leave, I would desire to
know the cause of your excessive retention, for provided that it does not
proceed from distaste or contempt of my person, I am well satisfied. Garcia
seeing himself constrained to speak: Madame said he, your suspicions are most
true, and my effects different from those which your sensuality promised it
self, for I am much different from him you expected. Then horror which I have
had to pollute my fathers bed, and her blood who conceived me, has obliged me
to this respective retention. What Madame needs there so many words to make
you know your son Garcia; when unhappy Constance had heard this discourse,
and name; shame ceazed her so violently, that she made but one cry. Ah, God!
said she, in falling half dead upon her bed without being able to speak or
breath of long time. In the interim Garcia having made her chambermaide to come
in, left the house, and that very hour gave money and a horse to this Advocate
that had served him as instrument of this scandal, thanking him for the good
office which he had rendered him, and made him return to Murcia, without
telling him the effect of his stratagem. Constance being returned from her
trance, found her self in a burning fever, which being mingled with the
grief of her repentance pressed her to appear before the sovereign Judge, so
that from the time her son had left her, until the instant of her death, she
had but leisure to receive the the sacrament (where she seemed to be very
sensible and to repent, her fault) and to make her testament; dying without any
one knowing the cause of her end. Don Garcia considering that his impious
curisitie, had killed her, durst not appear neither before her nor else where
during her sickness: but incontinent after her decease, he made himself seen
as arriving from Flanders, they opened the testament, where Garcia was found
disinherited; he without regarding the ordinance of his mother would possess
himself of the succession, but he was hindered by two of the cosens of the
defunct. He had with them both words and blows, and in this difference, he
outraged Gentlewomen his Kinswomen with so many insolences, injuries, and
intemperances, that it was decreed against him, that he should be put into
prison, where he stayed a long while, because no body regarded him, all that
he undertook issued very ill, and in the end seeing himself abandoned by all
the world, and pressed with extreme necessity, besides the incommodities of
prison, he had recourse to me, and writ to me, conjuring me to assist him in
the misery which he endured, being abandoned of all his kindred and friends.
This letter was given me, and many others, wherein he reiterated the same
prayers, but I was not much moved to assist him, I was insensibly grown into a
certain negligence, which many times hindered me from undertaking this voyage.
I imagine that heaven permitted it to be so, to chastise him for the evil he
had done, in being the cause of the death of her, which was the cause of his
life, after the sovereign author of all things. Seeing himself reduced to so
great misery, so far that he was not visited in his chamber by any but the
other prisoners, he had his heart touched with a very sensible repentance;
judging that all these miseries were come unto him by divine punition: those
who brought him his meat, found him always sighing and weeping. Desiring then
to appease the anger of God, and do penance for his fault, he made a Vow with
a good heart to employ a whole year in visiting on foot all the holy
Sanctuaries of Spain, if it pleased God to deliver him from the miseries
wherein he was. From that hour that he had thus acknowledged himself, all
things came to him according to his wish, every one began to pity him. I
arrived at Cartagene with intent to endeavor to serve him, and before J saw
any of my kindred, J went to visit him in prison, where after having embraced
him with tears in his eyes, he recounted to me from point to point the
prodigious extravagancie which he had done, which he believed was the original
of his misfortunes. I blamed, and chid him rudely for suffering himself to be
carried away with such a folly, and seeing the extreme sorrow which he had for
it, J became the vigilant solicitour of his affairs. By my intermission, they
(whom he had offended pardoned him) seeing that they had a sufficient
reparation) having kept him two years a prisoner for not penetrating into the
judgments of God, they believed that it was only by their means that Garcia
had suffered this pain. Not being content with having gotten him out of
prison, J would see the clause of the Testament of his mother, and the cause of
his dis-inheriting; having examined it with counsel, we learned that the Law
deprived from succession those children who laid violent hands upon their
Fathers or mothers, or who attempted upon their lives, and as the adversaries
of Garcia could not prove that he was guilty of any of these cases (for
although he was the cause of the death of his mother, there was none but she
and he that knew it) the Judges before the Process was begun, ordained that
the Testament should be broken, and that Garcia should be put into possession
of the inheritance, not only of his mother, but also of his father; a few
days after he was installed in his goods, he enterprised to render his vows,
beginning with our Lady of Piler of Saragoce, one of the most holy places of
Spain, where the blessed Virgin appeared to the Apostle St. James.

We left Cartagene at the same time, he to acquit himself of his vows toward
God, and I of my duty toward my wife. See Seignieur Fenise the cause of my
voyage which you desired to know, and the weak curiosity of my foolish Cosen,
who will be wise hereafter. An example which shows us the misfortunes which
arrive to those that will make such foolish experiences.

The entertain of these pleasing divertisements endured until their last
days journey. In approaching to Toledo Don Antonio and his brother renewed
their thankfulness to Fenise, taking leave of him and Marcell, with a thousand
civil complements. Don Charles carried Don Antonio to the town where Violante
lived with Orambel; who had like to have dyed many times with sorrow, not
knowing what was become of her husband, since that he went for Naples, his
unexpected presence carried her from one extremity to another, the excessive
joy which she received at his arrival, had like to have made her tender her
soul in embracing him. Don Antonio stayed six days with them, and then he
carried them to Madrid. Fenise and Marcel arriving at Toledo were received with
unspeakable joy, the one of his mother, the other of his wife, the one to stay
always with his family, and the other only to regulate his affairs, and take
possession of an estate which his father had left him, with the right of the
eldest of his house. The respect which every one bore to his merit, made him
happily proceed in his business, which being done, the Idea, features,
virtues and perfections of Magdelene, which kept the most eminent place in his
memory, obliged him incontinently to take again the way to Cartagene. In few
days he was with her to the great contentment of her father, mother and
brother, who all expected him with great impatience to put him in possession of
a treasure which he more passionately aspired unto then the highest fortune in
the world. It was his marriage with Magdelene which was celebrated before the
ministers, of the only law, where he publicly gave her his hand, as secretly
he had done his heart, and under reciprocal promises of a perfect union, they
reaped, the fruits of their loves which had taken increase and maturitie,
amongst so many different dangers, surmounted by their hardy resolutions, and
according to the ingenious conduct of our Heroes.

Having passed some months amongst his wives friends, he would let her know
his: for this effect by the consentment of their father and mother, and her
particular approbation, he carried her to Madrid there to establish his house,
and habitation; where now he passes his life, with this marvel of beauty and
wisdom, and with all delights which are to be tasted in this world. A
success which may serve for a certain proof, that in case of marriage the
union of souls is made in heaven, and the alliance of bodies upon earth Jn the
variety of rare adventures described in this volume, the mavelous effects of
love, and fortune, are seen, whereby one may know that the one surmounts all
the greatest hazards that can oppose him; and the other, although she be
inconstant, and many times maglignant, she nevertheless favors generous
courages, and aydeth them to accomplish their designs, when they are guided by
honor, and virtue.

FINIS.
Courteous Reader, These Books following are Printed for Humphrey Moseley, and
are to be sold at his shop at the Princes Arms in St PAUL'S Churchyard.
Various Histories, with curious Discourses in Humane Learning, etc.
1. THe History of the Banished Virgin, a Romance translated by I. H. Esquire Fol.
2. The History of Polexander, Englished by William Brown Gent. Printed for T.
W. and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, in Folio. 3. Mr James Howels History
of Lewis the thirteenth, King of France, with the life of his Cardinal de
Richelieu, in Folio. 4. Mr Howels Epistolae Ho-Elianae, Familiar Letters,
Domestic and Foreign, in six Sections, Partly Historical, Political,
Philosophical, first Volume with Additions, in 8o 1650. 5. Mr Howels New
Volume of Familiar Letters; Partly Historical, Political, Philosophical, the
second Volume with many Additions. 1650. 6. Mr Howels third Volume of
Additionall Letters of a fresher date, never before published, in 8o 1650. 7.
Mr Howels Dodona's Grove, or the Vocal Forest, in 12o with Additions. 1650.
8. Mr Howels Englands Tears for the present Wars, in 12o 1650. 9. Mr Howell
of the Pre-eminence and Pedigree of Parliament, in 12o 1650. 10. Mr Howels
Instructions for Foreign Travels, in 12o with diverse Additions. 1650. 11. Mr
Howels Vote, or a Poem Royal presented to His Majesty, in 4o 12. Mr Howels
Angliae Suspiria and Lachrimae, in 12o 13. Policy Vnveiled, or Maxims of
State, done into English by the Translator of Gusman the Spanish Rogue, in 4o
14. The History of the Inquisition, composed by the R. F. Paul Servita the
compiler of the History of the Council of Trent, in 4o 15. Biathanatos, a
Paradox of Self-Homicide, by D. Io: Done Deane of St Paul's London, in 4o 16.
Marquis Virgillio Malvezzi's, Romulus and Tarquin, Englished by Hen. Earl of
Monmonth, in 12o 17. Marquis Virgillio Malvezzis, David persecuted, Englished
by Rob. Ashley Gent. in 12o 18. Marquis Virgillio Malvezzi, Of the success and
chief events of the Monarchy of Spain, in the year 1639. of the Revolt of the
Catalonians, Englished by Rob. Gentilis, in 12o 19. Marquis Virgillio
Malvezzi's, considerations on the lives of Alcibiades and Coriolanus, Englished
by Robert Gentilis, in 12o 1650. 20. Gracious Privileges granted by the King
of Spain unto our English Merchants, in 4o 21. The History of Life and Death,
or the Promulgation of Life, written by Francis Lord Verulam Viscount St Alban.
in 12o 22. The Antipathy between the French and the Spaniard, Translated out of
Spanish, in 12o 23. Mr Birds Grounds of Grammar, in 8o 24. Mr Bulwers
Philocophus, or the Deaf and Dumb man's friend, in 12o 25. Mr Bulwers
Pathomyotomia, or a Dissection of the significative Muscles of the Affections
of the Mind, in 12o 26. An Itinerary containing a Voyage made through Italy in
the years 1646, 1647. Illustrated with diverse Figures of Antiquities, never
before published, by John Reymond. Genesis in 12o 27. The use of passions, written
by I. F. Senault, and put into English by Henry Earl of Monmouth, in 8o 28.
Choice Music for three Voices, with a Thorough Base, composed by Mr Henry and
Mr William Laws, Brothers and Servants to His Majesty, with diverse Elegies set
in Music by several friends upon the Death of Mr William Laws, in 4o 29.
Judicious and select Essays and Observations written by the Renowned and
learned Knight, Sir Walter Raleigh, with his Apology for his Voyage to Guiana,
in 8o 1650.
Choice Poems, with excellent Translations, and Incomparable Comedies and
Tragedies, written by several Ingenious Authors.
30 COmedies and Tragedies written by Francis Beaumont, and John Fletcher Gent.
never printed before, and now published by the Authors Original Copies,
containing 34 Plays, and a Masque, in Folio. 31. Epigrammata Thomae Mori
Angli, in 16o 32. Fragmenta Aurea, A collection of the Incomparable Pieces
written by Sir John Suckling Knight, in 8o 33. All Invenals 16. Satyrs,
Translated by Sir Robert Stapylton Knight, wherein is contained a Survey of the
manners and Actions of Mankind, with Annotations, in 8o 34. Maseus on the loves
of Hero and Leander, with Leanders Letters to Hero, and her answer, taken out
of Ovid, with Annotations, by Sir Robert Stapylton Knight, in 12o 35. Poems
etc. written by M. Edward Waller of Beckons field Esquire in 8o 36. Pastor fido, the
faithful Shepherd, a Pastoral, newly Translated out of the Original by
Richard Fanshaw Esquire in 4o 37. Poems, with a Discovery of the Civil Wars of
Rome, by Richard Fanshaw Esquire in 4o 38. Aurora Ismenia and the Prince, with
Oronta the Cyprian Virgin, translated by Tho: Stanley Esquire the second Edition
corrected and amended, in 8o 1650. 39. Europa, Cupid crucified Venus Vigills,
with Annotations, by Thomas Stanley Esquire in 8o 1650. 40. Medea, a Tragedy
written in Latin by Lucius Annaeus Seneca, Englished by Mr Edward Sherburne
Esquire with Annotations, in 8o 41. Senecas Answer to Lucilius his Quaere why Good
men suffer misfortunes seeing there is a Divine Providence, translated into
English Verse by Mr Edward Sherburne Esquire in 8o 42. Poems of Mr John Milton,
with a Masque presented at Ludlow Castle before the Earl of Bridgewater then
President of Wales, in 8o 43. Poems etc. with a Masque called the Triumph of
Beauty, by James Shirley, in 8o 44 Steps to the Temple, Sacred Poems, with the
Delight of the Muses, upon several occasions, by Richard Crashaw of Cambridge,
in 12o 45. The Mistress, or several Copies of Love verses written by Mr Abraham
Cowley, 8o 46. Divine Poems, written by Francis Quarles Senior, in 8o 47. The
Odes of Casimire, translated by George Hills, in 12o 48. Arnalte and Lucenda,
or the Melancholy Knight, a Poem translated by L. Lawrence in 4o 49. The
Sophister, a Comedy, in 4o by Dr S. 50. The woman Hater, or the Hungry
Courtier, a Comedy written by Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher Genesis in 4o 51.
The Tragedy of Thierry King of France, and his Brother Theodoret, written by
Francis Beaumont and John Fletcher, Genesis in 4o 52. The Unfortunate Lovers, a
Tragedy, written by William Davenant Knight, in 4o 53. Love and Honor, a
Comedy, written by William Davenant Knight, in 4o 54. Madagascar, with other
Poems, written by William Davenant Knight, in 12o 55. The Country Captain and
the Variety, Two Comedies written by a person of Honor, in 12o 56. The Cid, a
Trage-comedy. in 12o 1650. 57. The Sophy, a Tragedy, written by John Denham Esquire
58. Coopers Hill, a Poem by John Denham Esquire the 2 Edition in 4o with Additions.
1650. 59. Clarastella with other occasional Poems, Elegies, Epigrams, and
Satyrs, written by Robert Heath, Esquire 1650. 60. The Accademy of Complements,
wherein Ladies, Gentlewomen, Scholars, and Strangers, may accommodate their
Courtly Practice with Gentile Ceremonies, Complemental, Amorous, high
expressions and Forms of speaking, or writing of Letters, most in fashion,
with Additions of many witty Poems, and pleasant new Songs, Newly Printed.
1650.
^everall Sermons with other Excellent Tracts in Divinity, written by some most
eminent and learned Bishops, and Orthodox Divines.
61 A Manual of Private Devotions and Meditations for every day in the week, by
the ^ight reverend Father in God, Lancelot Andrews, ^ate Lord Bishop of
Winchester, in 24o 62 A Manual of Directions for the Sick, with many sweet
Meditations and Devotions, by the Right Reverend Father in God Lancelot
Andrews, ^ate Lord Bishop of Winchester, in 24o 63 Ten Sermons upon Several
Occasions, preached at St Paul's Cross, and elsewhere, by the Right Reverend
Father in God, Arthur Lake late Bishop of Bath and Walls, in 4o 64 Six Sermons
upon Several Occasions preached at the Court before the Kings Majesty, and
elsewhere, by that late Learned and reverend Divine, John Done Dr in Divinity,
and Deane of St Paul's London, in 4o 65 Precious Promises and Privileges of the
faithful, written by Richard Sibbes Doctor in Divinity, late Master of
Katherin Hall in Cambridge, and Preacher of Grayes Inn London, in 12o 66 Sarah
and Hagar, or the sixteenth Chapter of Genesis, opened in nineteen Sermons,
being the first legitimate Essay of the Pious labors of that Learned,
Orthodox, and Indefatigable Preacher of the Gospel, Mr Josias Shute B.D. and
above 33 years Rector of St Mary Woolnoth, in Lombardstreet, in Folio. 67
Christ's tears, with his love and affection toward Jerusalem, delivered in
sundry Sermon upon Luke 19. v. 41, 42. by Richard Maiden B D Preacher of the
Word of God, and late Fellow o^ Magdalen College in Cambridge, 4o 68 Ten
Sermons preached upon several Sundays, and Saints days, by Peter Hausted Mr.
in Arts, and Curate at Vppingham in Rutland, in 4o 69 18 Sermons preached upon
the Incarnation and Nativity of our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
wherein the greatest mysteries of Godliness are unfolded, to the capacity of
the weakest Christian, by John Dawson, in 4o 70 Christian Divinity, written by
Edmund Reeve, Bachelour in Divinity, in 4o 71 A description of the Newborn
Christian, or a lively Pattern of the Saint militant, child of God, written by
Nicholas Hunt, in 4o 72 The Tyranny of Satan, in a Recantation Sermon at St
Paul's Cross, by T. Gage, in 4o 73 The True and absolute Bishop, wherein is
showed how Christ is our only Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, by Nicholas
Darton, in 4o 74 Divine Meditations upon the 91 Psalm, and on the Hist. of Agag
K. of Amaleck, with an Essay of friendship, written by an Honble person, in 12o
75 Lazarus his rest, a Sermon preached at the Funeral of that pious, learned,
and Orthodox Divine, Mr. Ephraim Vdall, by Thomas Reeve Bachelor in Divinity,
in 4o 76. An Historical Anatomy of Christian Melancholy, by Edmund Gregory, in
8o

