ROMES DESTRUCTION: OR, Express Texts and necessary Consequences drawn out of
the Word of God, for the condemning of the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and
Justifying of that of the Reformed Churches.

First Written in French, by C. D. R. A French Nobleman.

And now Published in English at the Solicitation of diverse Religious Men of
this Nation.

By JAM: MOUNTAIN.

Psalm. 137. 8. O Daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed: happy shall he be
that rewards thee as thou have served Us.

LONDON, Printed by Stephen Bulkley, and are to be sold by Henry Twyford at
the three Daggers in Fleetstreet* near the Inner-Temple-Gate. 1641.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND most Illustrious Lord, PHILIP Earl of Pembroke
and Mongomery, Baron Herbert of Cardiffe and Shurland, etc. Lord Chamberlain
of his Majesty's Household, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Garter; and
one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Counsel.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
IF Books were to be esteemed for their Bulk, and not for their Worth: I would
not presume to Dedicate so little a Book as this is, to so great a Lord as You
are. But since it is their Goodness, and not their Bigness, that makes them
recommendable: the Book it self, I hope, shall answer for me. For in It, your
Honor shall find a great deal of good matter, contained in a little room.
In It, You shall see the Doctrine of the Church of Rome flatly condemned; and
the Doctrine of the Reformed Church, fully Justified: And that, not by any
passages taken out of the broken Cisternes of the Traditions of men; but by
many express Texts, and necessary Consequences drawn out of the Pure Fountain
of the very word of God. In a word, though it be of a contemptible Stature: yet
you shall find It to be a pretty tall Man of his hands; skillful in his
weapons; and so full of mettle and spirit, that like a little DAVID (comeing in
the name of the Lord, and being armed with his Word) he foyles and utterly
overthrowes that Great GOLIATH of Gath, I mean the Church of Rome.

And now, most Illustrious Lord, the thing that has encouraged me to make
choice of Your Honor, and seek after Your Patronage, is, that my Author (of
Noble extraction himself) Dedicated this Book of his to a Great and Religious
Princess of my Nation, Daughter to that Renowned Prince, the late Duke of
ROHAN: by which example, I thought my self obliged not to disparage it in
England.

But the most prevalent Motive, and, as I may say, the very Loadstone that has
attracted me thereunto, is, chiefly, those transcendent virtues which I see
shine so brightly in Your Honor, and wherewith God has adorned Your Soul as
with a garment: I mean that Fervent love You have to the Truth: That Ardent
Affection You show to the Sincerity of Religion: and that Inbred and Holy
Hatred You bear, not only to all Popery and Superstition: but also to the
least thing that might conduce thereunto.

And for the Confirmation of this testimony of mine: Give me leave, Most Noble
Lord, to boast that I am very strong; and may, with as much right as any man,
use in this the common English Proverb, that says, I come with a Witness:
since I bring no less with me than the Voice of the whole Kingdom.

For indeed, Right Honorable, though I have been in most places of England, and
have carefully and diligently observed the bent and affections of the People: I
never yet met with any man that dissented from that opinion.

What hopes then should not I have that Your Honor will accept of this poor
Labor of mine, and afford It Your Protection, since It suits so well with Your
disposition; and that You shall see in It the Truth of that Religion which You
Profess; and the Falsehood of that Religion which You Detest.

Vouchsafe therefore Most Illustrious Lord, to receive It with a gracious eye,
and to afford It Your Countenance. I know that for Your Honors sake, it will be
welcome to this Nation, when they see Your Honorable Name in the front of It.
And I make no question but after they have read It, they will love it also for
its own sake. If in these times (wherein many look back toward Babylon
again, and Popery has been here so bold as to think her self at home) the
Public receive any fruit thereby, they shall be obliged unto Your Honor for
it: but I more especially, who will acknowledge my self bound so long as I
live, to be and remain,

Your Honors most humble and most devoted Servant, J. MOVNTAINE.

To the Reader.
THe Jesuits and other Doctors of the Roman Church, having lurked a long time
under the Cloak of a pretended Antiquity, personal Succession, false
Miracles, Councels, and ancient Fathers: And now, perceiving that this old
ragged covering is not able to hide any longer those Errors and Idolatries
which the Pope has brought into the Church, because that the people whom they
have deceived, and by this means kept in their Errors, begin now to know
That the Religion which has the truth of the Word of God has the Antiquity:
and that on the contrary, That Religion which has not this Truth, has the
Falsehood and Novelty. Moreover, That there is no succession of true Pastors,
where there is no succession of true Doctrine: That Miracles belongs now to
Antichrist, and are a mark of Apostasy, and not of the Truth: as the Word of
God plainly teaches, Mat. 24. 24. 2. These. 2. 9: That they are forced to
confess, That diverse Councels and ancient Fathers have Erred, and that they
are not rules of the Word of God, but that they ought to be ruled by the same
Word. They have been forced (running from their colors) to forsake their
weatherbeaten shelter, to seek for a new retreat, and cast themselves into a
new intrenchment, there to hold and lurk yet a while, which is to ask of us
some express texts out of the Word of God, and necessary Consequences drawn
out of the same, for the proof of our Doctrine, and condemnation of theirs;
thinking by such means to persuade the simple people, that we have bragd in
vain that our Doctrine was conformable unto the word of God, and that we had
express texts and necessary Consequences drawn out of the same for the
confirmation thereof, and are not able to produce any. But these Doctors
imagining to hide themselves thereby, have on the contrary, stripped themselves
so stark naked, that it is impossible for them to subsist any longer. For I
will show in this Treatise, with the help of the Lord, that according to their
own Maxim and proper Confession, the Doctrine of the Roman Church is most
false: and That of the Reformed Church, most true.

To come therefore to the Point, without using any long digression: We must
understand, that our Adversaries do confess ingenuously, That the Doctrine
which may be proved both by express texts out of the Word of God, and
necessary Consequences drawn out of the same, is the true Doctrine. And
contrariwise, That that Doctrine which cannot be proved out of express texts
of the Word of God, and necessary Consequences drawn out of the same, is the
false. And that withal the Jesuits do brag impudently in some of their
Books, to have put to silence all Our Ministers: And make their boast, That
neither Minister, nor any other, can produce any express Text out of the
Bible, that either condemns any of their Articles, or justifies any of ours,
though we should produce them out of the Geneva Bible. Moreover, That by
Express Texts, they do not mean we should show them in the Bible, the very
same words of the debated Article: but that they are contented with such like
and equivalent words. And that we cannot justify any of our Articles of Faith,
nor condemn any of theirs by any good Consequence drawn out of the pure Word
of God. And in Jesuit Verons answer to my Book called The Caballe of the
Jesuits, etc. after he has brought some lines wherein I say that the only
way to make them come out of this last entrenchment, is to produce Express
Texts out of the Word of God, for the proof of that which is in Controversy:
he answers, That it is all he desires of us, and offers to be a
P^^testant, if we be able to do it, even in one only Article. Again, in de
Raconis Book, containing the Acts of the Conference held between him and Mr. du
Moulin, Printed with the approbation of the Doctors, p. 15, the said de Raconis
confesses, That the Church is subject unto the written Word, not to go
against it. And in the 31. Page he admits the said du Moulin to necessary
Consequences drawn out of the Word of God. So that all we have now to do, is
to produce Express Texts out of the Word of God, and necessary Consequences
drawn out of the same, for the condemning of the Doctrine of (...) Roman
Church, and Justify^^g of that of the Reformed. Which thing I do in this
Treatise upon the chief points of Controversy: Whereby every one may easily
perceive, that according to our Adversaries own Confession, the Reformed Church
has the true Doctrine, and the Roman Church the false. And therefore all they
that desire to have Salvation, ought to come out of it, and join themselves to
the Reformed Church.

THE MATTERS Contained in this TREATISE.
CHAP. I. THat the Word of God is not dark to them that have received the
Spirit of God, that they may know the things which are freely given them of
God. Item, That it contains all things necessary to Salvation, and by
Consequent, that Men's Traditions are vain and unprofitable. Page 1. CHAP. II.
That it is necessary that all the Faithful should read the holy Scriptures,
and that they are even bound thereunto, by the Commandment of our Lord Jesus
Christ. p. 23. CHAP. III. That a Man can do no good work without the Grace of
God, and that our works therefore are not dispositive for the obtaining of
that Grace as our Adversaries say. Page 27. CHAP. IV. That our Lord Jesus
Christ, has fully and perfectly satisfied the Justice of God for our sins,
as well for the guilt as for the punishment; and Consequently, that it is a vain
and an unprofitable thing to desire to satisfy again unto the same by works.
p. 31. CHAP. V. That a Man not being able to satisfy the Justice of God for
his own sins; cannot by Consequent satisfy for the sins of others. p. 44.
CHAP. VI. That the pretended treasure of the Roman Church, was only
established to make void the merits of Christ, and to make a little Saint of
him that no body may know among the rest of the Saints. Page 50. CHAP. VII.
That our good works have no merit at all, and that all the merits of the
Faithful are in one Christ alone. Page 57. CHAP. VIII. That the Invocation of
Saints departed, is contrary unto the Word of God, and tends to no other end
but to give unto the creature the honor and glory that belongs unto the
Creator. p. 64. CHAP. IX. That the Images of the Roman Church, are made
against the Commandment of God; and that the Adoration they give unto them, is
mere Idolatry. p. 74. CHAP. X. That four Rules show unto us that there is a
Figure in these words, This is my Body: and that the Transubstantiation of the
bread into the body of Christ, is contrary unto the truth of God, and destroys
the humane nature of Christ. Item, That in all Sacraments, the Word is, is put
for signifies or represents. Page 84. CHAP. XI. That it is not enough (for
to have eternal life) to eat Christ's flesh: but we must also drink his blood.
And therefore all Christians indifferently, ought to communicate under both
kinds, according to the Commandment of Christ and the Apostle Saint Paul. p.
112. CHAP. XII. That the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass, was only
established for to annihilate the power and efficacy of the Sacrifice of the
Cross. And that there is but one only Sacrificator Sacrificing expiatorily in
the Evangelicall Law, to wit, Christ Jesus our Lord. Page 125. CHAP. XIII. That
S. Peter was not established by Christ, Head of the Universal Church, and
Prince of the Apostles. And Consequently, that the Pope, who challenges this
title but as S. Peter's Successor, has intruded himself into that Office,
without any lawful calling: And shows himself to be Antichrist, in doing
quite contrary to that which Christ and S. Peter did. p. 148.
Express Texts, and necessary Consequences drawn out of the Word of God, for
the condemning of the Doctrine of the Roman Church, and justifying of that of
the Reformed Churches.
CHAP. I.
That the Word of God is not dark to them that have received the Spirit of God,
that they may know the things which are freely given them of God. Item, That it
contains all things necessary to Salvation; and by consequent, that Men's
Traditions are vain and unprofitable.
THE Word of God contained in the Old and New Testament, is the chief and
principal means we have to know him. It is it alone that declares us his
will, and teaches u^ what the honor and service is we owe unto him. In sum,
it is the only light that scatters and disperseth the darkness of our
understanding, and by whose pure brightness we are led into the way of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Therefore it is no wonder if the Pope and his disciples
(enemies of Man's Salvation) have endeavored, and do endeavor sti^^ to take
away that holy light from before men, to the end that they walking in
darkness, may fall into eternal ruin and perdition. Now, the chief means
they have used to attain to their ends, is first, to persuade and make the
simple people believe, That the Scriptures are full of darkness* and therefore
that it belongs not to every one to read the same, but only to Doctors and
learned men. Secondly, That it does not contain all things necessary to
Salvation. That ^t is but a piece of a rule, a nose of wax, a two-handed sword.
But for to supply the Scriptures want, there is a Tradition and unwritten Word,
which they cause to be received with like credit and certainty as the very Word
of God. And with this artifice and cunning, the Pope has set up himself in
the Temple of God, and has changed the Christian Religion, into Idolatry,
superstition and false Doctrine; causing the people to receive whatsoever he
says and decrees, as the very Word and ordinance of God, though they be things
directly contrary to the same: which things, by the grace of God, I shall make
plainly appear by many places of the Word of God, and necessary consequences
drawn out of the same.

First, as touching the darkness of the Scripture which they suppose, for to
hinder the simple people from reading the same: I say that in this very thing,
they truly show themselves to be those blind and incredulous ones of whom S.
Paul speaks when he says, If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost: In whom the God of this World has blinded the minds of them that
believe not, Lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image
of God, should shine unto them, 2. Cor. 4. ver. 3. 4.

If the Word of God be dark, it is not in regard of it self, but of men that
are blind by nature in things that are of God. The natural man,says S. Paul,
receives not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto
him: neither can he know them* because they are spiritually discerned, 1. Cor.
2. 14. And, our Lord teaches us, that they which are not of God, cannot hear
the Word of God, Joh. 8. 47.

The Word of God is not dark to them that have received the Spirit of God, that
they may know the things which are freely given to them of God, 1. Cor. 2. 12.
I prove it by these arguments.

Whatsoever is a lamp unto the feet of the Faithful, and a light unto their
paths, the same is not dark unto them. But the Word of God is a lamp unto the
feet of the Faithful, and a light unto their paths, Psalm. 119. 105. Therefore
the Word of God is not dark unto them. Item, Whatsoever illuminateth, and makes
the simple to have understanding, the same is plain unto them. But the Word of
God enlightneth and makes the simple to have understanding. Psalm. 119. 130.
Therefore the Word of God is plain unto the simple.
Secondly, The Pope and his Adherents, teaching that the Word of God contains
not all things necessary to Salvation, show themselves wholly and absolutely
adverse to Saint Paul: these words are plain to Timothy: The holy Scriptures,
says he, are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in
Christ Jesus. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in
righteousness, That the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works, 2. Tim. 3. 15. 16. 17.

The written Word of God, has the virtue and power to save souls; S. James
teaches the same when he says, Receive with meekness the engrafted Word,
which is able to save your souls, Jam. 1. 21. If you continue in my Word,
says Christ, You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free, Joh.
8. 31. 32. These things are written, says S. John, that you may believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and in believing you may have life
through his name, Joh. 20. 31. The written Word of God therefore contains all
things necessary to Salvation, and it is a needless thing to have recourse to
men's Traditions.

Again, Christ says, That they worship him in vain, teaching for doctrines
the commandments of men, Mark. 7. 7. He would not therefore have men to take
upon them to make laws and commandments in his Church: But rather that al
should submit themselves to his doctrine and Commandments contained in his
Word, without either adding unto it, or diminishing from it, Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Apoc.
22. 18. 19. The fear of this people, says he, is toward me through the
commandments of men, Esaias 29. 13.

In a word, Christ and his Apostles, in many places do send us to the written
Word of God, but never to an unwritten word, or humane Traditions: But rather
on the contrary, S. Paul exhorts the faithful to take heed least they be
surprised by the Traditions and vain deceits of men. If any man, says he, yea,
even an Angel from Heaven, preach unto you any other Gospel than that which you
have received, let him be accursed, Galat. 1. 8. The written Word of God
therefore contains all that which is necessary to salvation: and
consequently, we need not seek after any other unwritten Word for that purpose.

Moreover, We do not reject all kind of Traditions, but only such as are
contrary unto the Word of God, or invented by men for to impose a yoke upon
the consciences of men, which God has not imposed.

The true Church, groundeth no Articles of faith upon the Traditions of men,
but upon the Word of God. But our Adversaries build their Articles of faith
upon the Tradition and the unwritten Word only, which they prefer before the
holy Scriptures, and set it up far above the same. Gabriel de S. Maria, in his
treatise of the Authority of Scripture, chap. 7. page 162. says, that If we
do compare the Tradition with the written Word of God, we shall find that the
Tradition excels it infinitely, for that it has more necessity, more light,
more firmness, and more authority than the written Word of God.

The Church of God uses some Traditions, but such as are not contrary unto the
Word of God, and which do not impose a yoke upon the consciences of men: But
the Traditions of the Roman Church, which (as our Adversaries say) excel the
Word of God infinitely, are directly contrary unto the same and impose a yoke
upon the consciences of men, which God has not imposed; which is clearly
verified in these examples following.

1 In the first place, The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church,
teaches, That all the Faithful ought not to read and meditate upon the Word
of God.

This doctrine is contrary to these places of the written word of God.

Blessed is he that reads the Words of this Prophecy, etc. Apoc. 1. 3.

Seek unto the Book of the Law, and read, etc. Esaias 34. 39.

2 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, That Saints
departed are our advocates and mediators toward God.

This Doctrine is contrary to these express places of the written Word of God.

God is one, and the Mediator one between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1.
Tim. 2. 5.

If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, John 1. Epist. 2. 1.

3 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, That we must
make Images of God, to worship him by them.

This Doctrine is contrary unto the written Word of God, as appears by these
express places.

Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any likeness of any thing
that is in Heaven above, or that is in the Earth beneath, etc. Thou shall not
bow down thy self to them, nor serve them, etc. Exodus 20. 4. 5.

To whom will ye liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him, Esaias
40. 18.

Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools: And changed the glory of
the uncorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to
birds, and to foure-footed beasts, Romans 1. 22. 23.

4 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, That all
Christians ought to abstain from certain meats, both in Lent, and other days
throughout the year.

This Doctrine is contrary unto the written Word of God, as you may see by
these express places.

Whatsoever is sold in the shambles, that eat, as king no question for
conscience sake.

If any of them that believe not, bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to
go, whatsoever is set before you, eat, as king no question for conscience
sake, 1. Cor. 10. 25. 27.

Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times, some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe, etc. 1. Tim. 4.
1. etc.

5 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, That all
Pastors, and other Ecclesiastical persons in the Christian Church, ought not
to marry, but rather that they should make a vow never to marry.

This Doctrine is contrary to the written Word of God, as is proved by these
express texts following:

To avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman
have her own husband, etc. 1. Cor. 7. 2.

But if they cannot contain, let them marry: for it is better to marry than to
burn, 1. Cor. 7. 9.

Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled: but whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4.

A Bishop then must be blameless, the husband of one wife: ruling well his own
house, having his children in subjection with all gravity. Item, Let the
Deacons be husbands of one wife, ruling their children, and their own houses
well, 1. Tim. 3. 2. etc.

Saint Paul also calls the forbidding of marriage, a doctrine of Devils, 1.
Tim. 4. 1.

6 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, that in all
places Divine Service and Prayers ought not to be said but in Latin.

This Doctrine is contrary to these express texts of the written Word of God.

Except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air. I will pray with the
Spirit, and will pray with understanding also: I will sing with the Spirit, and
I will sing with the understanding also. Else when thou shall bless with the
Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned, say Amen at thy
giving of thanks, seeing he knows not what thou say? Yet in the Church I
had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice I might
teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue, 1. Cor. 14.
9. 15. 16. 19.

7 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, That the
Faithful deserve Eternal life by their good works, and the glory of the
kingdom of Heaven.

This Doctrine is contrary to the written word of God, as it is proved by these
express places.

If it be by Grace, it is no more of Works: otherwise Grace is no more Grace,
Romans 11. 6.

By Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves: it is the
gift of God. Not of works, least any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. Tit. 3.
5.

The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, That by the
death and passion of Christ, we are delivered from the guilt and punishment of
sins committed before Baptism: but not from the punishment of sins
committed after Baptism, for which we must pay and satisfy the justice of
God, both in this life by penance, and after this life in a fire of Purgatory.

This Doctrine is contrary to these express places of the written Word of God.

All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Being justified freely by
his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3. 23. 24.

The blood of Jesus Christ, cleanses us from all sin, John 1. Epist. 1. 7.

By Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast, etc. Ephesians. 2. 8. 9.

There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, etc. Romans 8. 1.

9 The fifth Gospel of Cardinal Bellarmine, teaches, That Saints departed are
in some kind our Redeemers, lib. 1. de. Indulg. cap. 4.

This Doctrine is contrary to the written Word of God, as it is proved by these
express texts.

There is no Salvation in any other but in Christ Jesus: neither is there any
other name under Heaven given unto men, whereby we must be saved;Act. 4. 12.

The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin, John 1. Epist. 1. 7.

10 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, That after
consecration, the bread of the Mass is no more bread, but is transubstantiated
into the Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood. That Christ is between
the hands of the Priests, in as many places as there are Masses said, as big
and as large as he was upon the Cross.

This Doctrine is altogether contrary unto these express places of the
written. Word of God.

Jesus took Bread, brake it, and gave it, etc. Math. 26.

As often as ye eat this Bread, etc. 1. Cor. 11. 26. Let a man examine
himself, and so let him eat of that Bread, etc. 1. Cor. 11. 28.

The poor ye have always with you: but me ye have not always,John 12. 8.

I leave the World, and go to the Father, John 16. 28.

Heaven must contain him, until the time of restitution of all things, which
God has foretold, etc. Acts. ^. 21.

11 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches. That the Lay
people, men and women, ought not to partake of the holy Sacrament of the Lords
supper, under both kinds.

This Doctrine is directly contrary unto the written Word of God, as appears
by these express texts.

Drink ye all of it, Mat. 26. 27.

Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that Bread and drink of
that cup, 1. Cor. 11. 28.

12 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches also: That
Christ Jesus sacrifices himself every day really, by the hands of the
Priests, both for the quick and for the dead.

This Doctrine is directly contrary to the written Word of God, that says:

Christ is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God
for us. Yet not that he should offer himself often, as the high Priest entered
into the holy place every year with blood of others, etc. Heb. 9. 24. 25.

By the which Will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all. For by one offering he has perfected for ever them that
are sanctified.

Now, where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin,Heb.
chap. 10. 10. 14. 18.

13 The Tradition and unwritten Word of the Roman Church, teaches, That Saint
Peter was appointed by Christ, to be head of the Universal Church, and Prince
of the Apostles.

This doctrine is directly contrary unto the written word of God, as appears
by these express texts.

God has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church, which is his Body, Ephesians. 1. ver. 22. 23.

Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they
that are great, exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you,
etc. Mat. 20. 25. 26.

And he gave some Apostles: and some Prophets: and some Evangelists: and some
Pastors and Teachers,Ephess. 4. 11.

It appears therefore plainly, that this Tradition and unwritten word of the
Roman Church, is altogether contrary unto the written Word of God; and that it
imposes a yoke upon the consciences of men that God has not imposed.

Seeing it forbids marriage to certain persons, which God for avoiding of
fornication, commands to every one.

Seeing it forbids the use of certain meats which God does not forbid, but
rather commands to be used with thanksgiving.

Seeing it forbids all men to work upon a great number of Holy Days, thereby
depriving them of the means to earne their bread, which oftentimes is wanting
on such days, to poor men charged with wives and small children: the which
thing is directly contrary to the Commandment of God. Six days shall thou
labor, and do all thy work, Exodus 20. 9.

Again, by bringing in such an infinite number of ceremonies, in part taken
from the Pagans, and in part from the Jews, with a numberless number of
Pilgrimages and other such like things, as is almost impossible to declare and
represent by particulars.

It is not then without cause and reason, that we reject these Traditions and
inventions of men, seeing they were broached only to bring in into Christian
Religion Error and Idolatry: as I shall prove hereafter more at large, as well
by express texts and necessary consequences drawn out of the Word of God, as
by invincible reasons.

CHAP. II.
That it is necessary that all the Faithful should read the holy Scripture,
and that they are even bound thereunto, by the Commandment of our Lord Jesus
Christ.
FRom the very same Spring, flows the prohibition which the Pope and his
Associates make to the Lay people, to read the Word of God without special
leave: wherein their manifest hypocrisy appears plainly, and the fear they
have that by reading of the same, men should come to know that the Doctrine
which they have invented, is false, and wholly contrary unto the Word of God.
Our Lord Jesus Christ teaches us far otherwise: Search, says he, the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they
which testify of me, John 5. 39. And under the Parable of the rich Glutton, he
sends them still to the Scripture, saying, They have Moses and the Prophets,
Let them hear them, Luk, 16. 29. The Jesuits and other the Popes Disciples
answer, that there is Let them hear them: but not, Let them read them. But
what will they answer to these express places? Seek ye out of the Book of the
Lord, and read, Esaias 34. verse. 16. Blessed is he that reads, and they that
hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which are written
therein, Revel. 1. 3. If sobriety must be kept in any Book of the holy
Scripture, it is in that of the Revelation. Nevertheless, Saint John exhorts
all the Faithful to practice the reading thereof, saying; Blessed is he that
reads the words of this Prophecy. Let the word of Christ, says Saint Paul,
dwell in you richly, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another,
etc. Col. 3. 16. Saint Peter tells us, That we shall do well to hearken unto
the words of the Prophets, 2. Pet. 1. 19. The Jews of Berea, did daily search
the Scriptures, to know whether those things were so, as Saint Paul taught,
Act. 17. 11. And are commended for it in the Scriptures, being called more
Noble than them of Thessalonica. It is therefore lawful for every Faithful
Christian to read the Word of God, that by it they may know the Doctrine, and
judge whether it be of God or no.

In a word, as I have said already, the principal means we have to know God
and his Will, is his word, by which he declares unto us his mercy in Christ
Jesus, and assures us of his love. Now, the Pope and his Disciples take away
and hide (as much as in them lies) this Word from the people: and so deprive
them of the chief means to know God: which is to cast them headlong into
darkness and ignorance of their salvation, and finally into damnation. For,
what can that man do that is deprived of the knowledge of God and of his will,
but run into damnation.

CHAP. III.
That a man can do no good Work without the Grace of God: And that our Works
therefore are not dispositive for the obtaining of that grace, as our
Adversaries say.
THe Pope and his Associates teach also, That our works ought to be considered
three manner of ways. First, as dispositive. Secondly, as satisfactory; and
Thirdly, as meritorious. Before we be in the state of Grace, they will have our
Works to be dispositive to purchase Grace; and after grace received; to be
satisfactory for the temporal punishment that remains for sin: And after
satisfaction finished, then they will have their works to deserve the Kingdom
of Heaven. A doctrine which is directly contrary unto the word of God, as I
shall prove it hereafter out of express texts, which I shall produce out of
the Word of God, and necessary consequences drawn out of the same.

In the first place, they teach that our Works do dispose and prepare us to
obtain the grace of God. But now, I ask of them, whether we do good Works
before we be in grace, or whether we do them after? yea or no. If they say
that we do them before; they know that men naturally are dead in sin; I
prove it by this express text out of Saint Paul: And you says he, being dead
in your sins, and through the uncircumcision of your flesh, has he quickened
together with him; having forgiven you all trespasses, Colos. 2. 13. Now even
as a dead man cannot do so much as to stir his fingers end, unless he be
raised again: So a man dead in sin, cannot do any good work, unless God
raise him first, and regenerate him inwardly by his spirit. The same Apostle
teaches it plainly in another place, saying, That it is God which works in
us both to will and to do, according to his good pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.

The holiest men, though endued with the spirit of God, and ordinarily
accompanied with his grace, have always acknowledged themselves to be sinners,
and very unable to do good works. Saint Paul speaks thus of himself, and
also of all others in his person, For I was alive without the Law once: but
when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died. I am carnal, sold
under sin, I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing:
For to will is present with me, but how to perform that which is good, I find
not. For the good that I would do, I do not: but the evil which I would not,
that I do, Romans 7. 9. 14. 15. 18. 19.

Is it not then a mere ridiculous foolery, to teach, that a man destitute of
the Grace of God, may do any good work to obtain Grace, seeing that these
which have this Grace already, do not do the good they would, but do the
evil which they would not, having always some corruptions of the flesh
opposing the desires of the spirit? And therefore they must confess, that we
do good works after we have received Grace: whence it follows that their
Doctrine is false, as I prove it by this argument.

If we do good works after we are received into Grace: Then it follows, that
our works do not dispose us to obtain that Grace which we have already, and
without which we cannot apply our selves to good works. But the Antecedent is
true: therefore the Consequent also.

CHAP. IV.
That our Lord Jesus Christ has fully and perfectly satisfied the justice of
God for our sins, both for the guilt and punishment thereof: and consequently,
that it is a vain and unprofitable thing to desire to satisfy again unto the
same by works.
THat which our Adversaries teach concerning satisfaction, is, That God
releaseth unto the sinner all the guilt, and forgiveth him the eternal
punishment due unto it: But that he will have it turned into a Temporal
punishment: alleging, that if in our Justification, nothing were found but the
forgiveness of sins, it would be perfect mercy; but that there is some other
thing whereby the justice of God appears. To be short, The Doctrine of these
Doctors, is, that God (for the manifestation of his justice) will have the
justified sinner to satisfy Gods justice for the Temporal punishment of his
sins: otherwise, his justice is not satisfied.

Answer. It is an old wile of Satan, which he has always practiced by his
false Prophets, to smother and bury as much as in him lies, the means whereby
God is pacified with us, and his justice fully satisfied. Therefore I ask of
them, whether Christ has satisfied to the justice of God, or no? If he has
not satisfied it, he is not our Savior, and we are still in our sins, liable
to the curse of the Law, Galat. 3. 13. But if Christ has satisfied the justice
of God for sin; it follows, that it is satisfied; and declared in this
alone satisfaction of his; and by consequent, that it is a vain and an
unprofitable thing, to desire to satisfy the same again.

Now that Christ has satisfied fully the justice of God for sin: these
express texts show it clearly and plainly.

He has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows. He was wounded for our
transgressions, and bruised for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace
was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. The Lord has laid on him the
iniquity of us all, Esaias 53. 4. 5. 6. And the Apostle Saint Paul teaches us,
That he has reconciled all things unto himself (having made peace through the
blood of his Cross) whether they be things in Earth, or things in
Heaven,Colos. 1. 20. Again, The Mediator is one between God and Man, the Man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, 1. Tim. 2. 5. 6.

Now the Jesuits and other Doctors of the Roman Church (to avoid this) use to
make a distinction of guilt and punishment, saying that Christ has satisfied
for the guilt and eternal punishment, but not for that Temporal punishment
reserved for the sinner justified, for which he is bound to satisfy the
justice of God. But this is brought in to no purpose: For I will stop up this
passage upon them in producing express texts and necessary consequences drawn
out of the Word of God, that show plainly the contrary.

First of all, the Prophet Esaias has told us in the forenamed place, that
Christ has not only borne our griefs, but our sorrows also, which are not
the guilt, but the punishment of our sins. And to say that this is true as
touching the eternal and not the Temporal punishment, is to no purpose. For
S. Paul says, That there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8. 1. But what punishment soever is imposed for the satisfying of Gods
justice, is a condemnation. Therefore there is no punishment imposed to
satisfy the justice of God.

Secondly, The same Apostle teaches us, That by Grace we are saved through
Faith, and that not of our selves: it is the gift of God: not of works, least
any man should boast, Saint Paul teaches us, That he has reconciled all
things unto himself (having made peace through the blood of his Cross)
whether they be things in Earth, or things in Heaven,Colos. 1. 20. Again, The
Mediator is one between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
ransom for all, 1. Tim. 2. 5. 6.

Now the Jesuits and other Doctors of the Roman Church (to avoid this) use to
make a distinction of guilt and punishment, saying that Christ has satisfied
for the guilt and eternal punishment, but not for that Temporal punishment
reserved for the sinner justified, for which he is bound to satisfy the
justice of God. But this is brought in to no purpose: For I will stop up this
passage upon them in producing express texts and necessary consequences drawn
out of the Word of God, that show plainly the contrary.

First of all, the Prophet Esaias has told us in the forenamed place, that
Christ has not only borne our griefs, but our sorrows also, which are not
the guilt, but the punishment of our sins. And to say that this is true as
touching the eternal and not the Temporal punishment, is to no purpose. For
S. Paul says, That there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8. 1. But what punishment soever is imposed for the satisfying of Gods
justice, is a condemnation. Therefore there is no punishment imposed to
satisfy the justice of God.

Secondly, The same Apostle teaches us, That by Grace we are saved through
Faith, and that not of our selves: it is the gift of God: not of works, least
any man should boast, Ephesians. 2. 8. 9. And in the Epistle to the Romans, he
says, All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being justified
freely by his Grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.
23. 24. It is not therefore by paying on our part for the punishment of our
sins; it being altogether incompatible, freely to acquit and discharge a debt,
and yet desire to be satisfied for it to the uttermost farthing.

3 Again, if God do forgive the sins of his children in such sort as he will
remember them no more: it follows, that he will not be satisfied with
temporal punishments. But the first proposition is true. I will forgive their
iniquity, says the Lord, and I will remember their sin no more, Jerem. 31.
34. Esaias 43. 25. Heb. 10. 27. Ergo, the last also, and therefore there remains
no punishment for the justified sinner.

4 Moreover, Jesus Christ our Lord has satisfied the justice of God for us,
either fully and perfectly, or imperfectly and in part only, yea or no. If
fully and perfectly, then it follows that he has satisfied it as well for the
guilt, as for the punishment of sin: and by consequent, that we ought neither
to satisfy it for the one, nor for the other. If inperfectly and in part
only: it follows, that he is our Savior but in part; for he is not our
Savior, unless he has fully satisfied the Justice of God for us.

5 Again, Whatsoever is done by ones self, is not done by an other: But Jesus
Christ our Lord has purged our sins by himself: Christ, says Saint Paul,
having by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the
Majesty on high, Heb. 1. 3. It is not done therefore but by Christ. And if the
purgation of sins be not but by Christ; it follows, that it is not done by
Temporal punishment and Humane satisfactions. But the Antecedent is true,
Ergo, the Consequent also. And therefore to desire to satisfy again the
Justice of God, is to debase too much the worth and merits of the blood of
Christ, and to esteem his satisfaction as a thing of naught. For it is he only
that was able to satisfy the same, for them that have obtained free mercy. And
to allege as they do, that the Physic is prepared, but that we must drink
it: That it is true, that we receive all good things from the blood of Christ,
but we must apply it, is to no purpose. For our penal works are not the means
whereby we may apply unto our selves the virtue and efficacy of the blood of
Christ. It is by faith that he is apprehended and applied unto us. For as the
body is fed and nourished by means of the corporal mouth, that receives and
apprehends the food. So the soul is nourished and sustained by Faith that
receives and apprehends our Lord Jesus Christ and his merits, by which only
means Christ is applied unto it for it is spiritual food.

In a word, I maintain that it is altogether impossible for a man to satisfy
the Justice of God. Yea, even for all men put together, to satisfy it for the
least sin, whether for the guilt, or for the punishment. For God is infinite,
he therefore that offends him, deserves an infinite and an Eternal punishment.
Punishments ought to be according to the offenses: And the offenses, according
to the quality of the persons offended. And to allege, that Eternal
punishments are turned into Temporal, is as vain and ridiculous. For Gods
Justice being infinite, cannot be satisfied but by an infinite punishment. And
if God through his mercy remits any thing unto the sinner, he will not do it
by halfes.

Therefore they consider the Justice of God, and the desert of sin very ill,
when as they think to be able to satisfy the same, and that by such means, as
should open the gates of Heaven to the rich, rather than to the poor. For the
principal means they appoint unto man to satisfy Gods Justice withal, for
the punishment of sins, is to buy pardons and indulgences of the Pope, and give
to the Churh; the which indeed the rich may do, but not the poor. Whereupon it
will follow, that we must say quite contrary to that which Christ says,
Blessed are the poor, for to such is the kingdom of Heaven, Math. 5. 3.

Our Adversaries do bring in some places of Scripture to prove their pretended
satisfactions; but against their true sense: as that of the Apostle to the
Hebrews, Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives, Heb. 12. 6.

Again, they say that David having confessed his sin to Nathan, did
nevertheless, bear the punishment of his sin, it being said unto him, The
child that is borne unto thee, shall surely die, 2. Sam. 12. 14. and diverse
other places, where it is said that God chastises his children.

I answer, That in all these places there is not a word spoken of satisfying
Gods Justice, who indeed tries his children, and fatherly chastises them, not
to satisfy his Justice, but to correct them and make them wiser for the time
to come, showing them and making them feel how much sin is displeasing unto
him.

There is two sorts of Judgments of God; the one of revenge, the other of
correction: by the one, God punishes his enemies, confounding them in his
wrath. David prays he might not be punished in this kind. Lord, says he,
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chastise me in thy hot displeasure, Psalm.
6. 2. By the other of correction, God does not chasten to cast away and to
destroy, but to admonish his children, and make the^ to profit unto repentance.
He chastened David fatherly, when he took away his child, and Saul in Justice,
in taking away his kingdom from him.

The Faithful are also called to suffer in this life, for to follow the steps
of our Lord Jesus Christ. For even hereunto were ye called says S. Peter,
because Christ also suffered for you, leaving us an example that ye should
follow his steps, 1. Epist. 2. 21. All, says S. Paul, that will live godly in
Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2. Tim. 3. 12. In the World ye shall
have tribulation, says our Lord to his Disciples, John 16. 33. And in another
place, Whosoever takes not his cross, and follows after me, he is not worthy
of me, Math. 10. 38. Therefore the pains and afflictions that befall the
Faithful, are not to satisfy the Justice of God, neither for the guilt, nor
for the punishment of sins, but to follow the steps of Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. V.
That a man not being able to satisfy the Justice of God for his own sins,
cannot by consequent satisfy for the sins of others.
OUr Adversaries have not been contented to teach, that a man is able to
satisfy the Justice of God for the punishment due to his own sins: but have
gone a great deal farther, and are come to such a height of absurdity, as to
teach, That one man may satisfy for another: and that God accepts for the
satisfaction of the one, whatsoever is done by the other. Now, to give some
color to this Doctrine, they allege that a justified man, in this life, may
do more satisfactory works than is needful for the paying of the Temporal
punishment remaining for his sins. And that having finished the satisfaction
ordained for the said punishment: All the penal and satisfactory works that
he does afterward, are superaboundant: which works being applied unto
another with an intention to satisfy for him, are allowed as satisfactory for
the punishment of his sins.

Answ. I have showed already and proved out of express texts of the Word of
God, and invincible reasons, That a man is not able to satisfy the justice of
God for himself, and by consequent, much less for another. Nevertheless, it
is necessary to show again, the impiety of this doctrine.

First if a man ought and may satisfy the justice of God for another, it
follows necessarily that Christ is not an alone Savior: but that he that
satisfies for another, is also a Savior of that man. O horrible impiety! For
there is no salvation in any other, neither is there any other name under
heaven given unto men, says Saint Peter, whereby we must be saved, but the
name of Jesus. Act. 4. 12.

Moreover, I demand of these Doctors, whether a man can satisfy for another,
before he have fully and wholly satisfied for his own sins, and have none
left behind? for otherwise, how can a man satisfy for another, if himself be
still indebted? If so be then, a man cannot be without sin: it follows he
cannot satisfy for himself, and consequently much less for another. But the
first is true, therefore the last also. I prove the Antecedent of my Argument
by the proper confession of these Doctors, yielding us that concupisence
remains still in a man: but yet they say (for an evasion) that it is not
sin as touching the guilt, but an inclination and an alluring unto sin,
being only an original punishment of the sin of Adam; wherein they deceive
themselves grossly: for whatsoever is a transgression of the Commandment of
God, is sin as touching the guilt. But concupiscence is a transgression of
the commandment of God, Thou shall not covet, Exodus 20. 17. Romans 7. 7.
Therefore concupiscence is sin as touching the guilt.

Item, If sin begets concupiscence in a man, it follows that concupiscence
is sin as touching the guilt: for what other thing can sin beget in a man,
but sin it self? But the Antecedent is true: for Sin, says Saint Paul,
taking occasion by the commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence, Romans 7. 8. Ergo the Consequent also: and therefore a man is
never without sin: sin I say in the very guilt, concupiscence remaining
still in him. Solomon teaches us so much, when he says, That a Just man
falls into sin seven times a day, Pro. 24. 16. If we say,says Saint John,
that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. 1.
Epist. 1. 8. I am carnal, says Saint Paul, sold under sin. I know that in
me, (that is, in my flesh) dwells no good thing. For the good that I would, I
do not: but the evil I would not, that I do,Romans 7. 14. 18. 19. It is enough
now O Lord, said Elias, take away my life, for I am not better than my Fathers,
1. King. 19. 4.

And Christ teaches us to say every day, Forgive us our sins, Matthew. 6. 11.
and Luke 11. 4. Whence it appears plainly, that a man is not able to keep
himself one day without offending his God: That he has sin always dwelling
in him, and consequently that he cannot wholly satisfy the justice of God.

In a word, I ask of these Doctors, how shall that man take upon him to
satisfy for another, that is not able to know whether he has sufficiently
satisfied for himself or no? and how shall one sinner trust to the
satisfaction of another sinner, that knows not in what case the other stands
before his God?

CHAP. VI.
That the pretended treasure of the Roman Church, was established only for to
weaken the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ: and to make a little Saint of him
that no body may know from the rest of the Saints.
BUt it was not yet enough for our Adversaries to teach men to satisfy the
Justice of God; and that they may do it superabundantly, one for another: But
they maintain moreover, That the treasure of their holy mother Church, is
framed and replenished with these superabundant satisfactions: of which
treasure His Holiness is the Guardian, and may distribute them to those that
have not satisfied sufficiently. And it is here that they make Christ a little
Saint, that no body can know among the rest of the Saints: Behold we here how
they argue, to cloak this Doctrine.

Saint Peter and Saint Paul, (say they) about the latter end of their life, had
done so many painful works, that they had fully accomplished their
satisfaction: After that, they suffered martyrdom; this martyrdom was a good
work done in Grace. Therefore it was satisfactory and meritorious. But so is
it, that it was not satisfactory for them: for they had already wholly and
fully satisfied. It was therefore a work of supererogation. And so may one say
of so many other Saints, besides the infinite satisfaction of the blood of
Christ and of the Virgin Marie, who at the very point of her death, was found
to have gathered and heaped up together a very great heap of satisfactions. In
sum, with the passion of Christ, says Panigarolle, Lesson. 11. Page. 333.
inasmuch as it is satisfactory, are joined also (O horrible impiety!) the
passion and superabundancies of all the Saints, wherewith is framed the treasury
of the holy mother Church, to supply the want of them in whom their own
satisfactory works are wanting.

All this being builded upon this naughty foundation of their pretended
satisfaction, which I have already refuted by express texts out of the Word of
God, and invincible reasons: deserves not a new refutation. But what Christian
man is there that hearing but such impieties read, will not wonder at the
patience of God? And shall not shiver for fear, to see the merits of the
passion of the son of God, thus trampled under feet; and that they should
make of him a little Saint, that no man can know among so many Saints, nor
sever his merit and satisfaction, from so many merits and superaboundant
satisfactions! O Doctors! how long will ye trample under feet the merits of the
death and passion of the son of God?

Saint Peter teaches us that there is no salvation in any other but in Christ
Jesus: And that there is no other name under heaven given unto men, whereby we
must be saved.Act. 4. 12. Item, To him give all the Prophets witness, that
through his Name whosoever believes in him, shall receive remission of sins,
Act. 10. 43. and contrariwise, these Doctors teach men to seek for salvation
and remission of sins in the name of Saints.

Saint Paul teaches us that we have redemption through the blood of Christ,
even the forgiveness of sins, Col. 1. 14. But these Doctors teach men to seek
after Redemption and remission of sins through the blood of Martyrs.

Saint John affirms, that the blood of Christ cleanses us from all sin. 1.
Epist. 1. 7. and that the faithful have washed their robes, and made them
white in the blood of the Lamb. Revel. 7. 14. But these Doctors, on the
contrary, teach men to wash and to cleanse their sins in the blood of Saints
departed: which is to reject the death and passion of Christ, as Panigarolle
teaches it plainly in his ninth Lesson, Page 278, saying, It is a great sin
and foolery to say I trust to be saved by the blood of Jesus Christ.
Panigarolle* Lesson 9. p. By so many express places of the word of God, and
necessary consequences drawn out of the same, the pretended satisfaction of
our adversaries is cast to the ground and cut even to the very deepest root:
as likewise their Purgatory, which they have built upon the same foundation.
For, Purgatory was invented but for these two ends. The first, to satisfy the
justice of God for the punishment of sins. Now if we must not satisfy Gods
justice for the punishment of sins, as I have proved it clearly: It
follows there needs no Purgatory.

The second is for to entrap and to catch money from the simple people. For,
how comes it to pass, that the Prelates of the Roman Church, have so many
thousand pounds of yearly revenews? That one part of the Nobility is
incommodated and behind hand; and that the greatest part of the people starve
with hunger; but because these men have by diverse means cunnycatcht a great
part of their estates, and especially by great Donations that many have given
at their death, to redeem their souls from the pain which they thought to
suffer in a fire of Purgatory? For, is there any thing in the world, which a
man will not give at the very point of death to free himself from going into a
fire for the space of many hundred years? Will a man in that perplexity care
to leave his posterity after him miserable and wretched, in giving away all his
estate, So he may be exempted from the torments of that fire, which, as they
say, is seven times hotter than our fire is in this world? Those therefore that
laid the first foundation thereof, showed themselves most ungodly and full of
covetousness, which is the root of all evils, as Saint Paul says, Timoth. 6.
10. as likewise enemies of the glory, and merits of the death and passion of
our Lord Jesus Christ.

CHAP. VII.
That our good works have no merit at all: and that all the merit of the
Faithful is in one Christ alone.
AS for the merits of works, we need no long discourse for to show that they
have none at all; seeing that the very best of our works are full of defects,
being always mingled with some corruptions of the flesh; and man is so subject
to sin as that he does not the good he would, but the evil which he would not;
Wherefore the Prophet Esaias says, That we are al as an unclean thing, and that
al our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Esaias 64. 6. Whence it follows,
that they have no merit at all. For what can such polluted works that are so
far from that perfection they ought to have, deserve at the hands of God? And
though they were done as they ought, yet could they deserve nothing. For a man
deserves nothing in doing that which he is bound to do. When ye shall have
done all those things which are commanded you (says our Lord Jesus Christ)
say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do,
Luke 17. 10.

Moreover, whatsoever is given us by Grace and Mercy of God, is not given us by
the merits of our works. If it be of Grace, says Saint Paul, it is no more of
works: otherwise, Grace is no more Grace, Romans 11. 6. But the salvation of the
Faithful, and the glory that they shall have in the kingdom of God, is given
them through the Grace and mercy of God. Therefore it is not given them by the
merits of their works.

The second proposition of this Argument is also proved by many express texts
out of the Word of God. All have sinned, says S. Paul, being justified freely
by his Grace, Romans 3. 23. 24. By Grace are ye saved, and that not of your
selves; it is the gift of God: not of works, least any man should boast, Ephesians.
2. 8. 9. and in another place, But after that the kindness and love of God our
Savior toward man appeared, not by works of righteousness which we have
done, but according to his mercy he saved us by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 4. 5.

In a word, whatsoever absolves and justifies us before God, from the same I
say, comes all our merit: But it is the only obedience, merit and satisfaction
of our Lord Jesus Christ that absolves and justifies us before God. Therefore,
from him alone proceeds all our merit: and if all our merit proceeds from
Christ alone, then it follows, that it does not proceed from our works. But
the first is true: Therefore the last also.

Let our Adversaries now deny as much as they will, That all our merit is in
one Christ alone, and let them establish other merits in their works: as for
our selves, we will remain constant to that, being assured that by Christ his
only merits, obedience and satisfaction, we are absolved and justified before
God: which thing the Prophet Esaias teaches us when he says, That he was
wounded for our transgressions, and that the Lord has laid on him the iniquity
of us all, Esaias 53. and so does the Apostle S. Paul, saying, That the Mediator
is one between God and man, the man Christ Jesus: who gave himself a ransom
for all, 1. Tim. 2. 5. 6. and Saint John teaches it also plainly, when he
says, That Jesus Christ the Righteous is the propitiation for our sins, 1.
Epist. 2. 2.

Now our Adversaries allege certain places of Scripture, which say, that God
rewards good works: Whereupon they build this syllogism:

Wheresoever there is a reward, there is merit.

But there is a reward to good works, Mat. 5. 12. Apoc. 22. 12. Therefore there
is merit.

I deny the Major. For there are some undeserved rewards. A Father may promise
his Son a fine suit of clothes, if he write a good coppie: Now that son
deserves not that suite of clothes for doing well that coppie. For what profit
comes to the father thereby? nevertheless, the father will give the promised
suit only because of his promise. Even so does God to his children, giving his
Kingdom unto them without any desert, but only because he has promised it.

Moreover, a father may be induced to give the promised suire to his son,
because of his duty in doing his coppie well, giveing his father content by
that means. But none of the faithful, can do their duty toward God. All
have sinned, says Saint Paul, Romans 3. 23. and Whosoever, says Saint James,
offends in one point of the Law, he is guilty of all. Jam. 2. 10. All
therefore are guilty of the breach of the whole Law. For who is he that has
not failed in some one point or other of the Law? And therefore our Adversaries
are very far wide of that pretended merit they do attribute to their good
works.

CHAP. VIII.
That the Invocation of Saints departed, is contrary unto the Word of God, and
tends to no other end but to give unto the creatures the honor and glory
that belongs unto the Creator.
THese Doctors keep a great noise, and cry out very loud that they are the
true Church: and that the doctrine which they teach, is conformable unto the
Word of God: but when it comes to the proof, they are mightily puzzled,
having nothing to show but some few allegories which they bring in upon
certain points of controversy: Like unto Foxes which run into thickets and
bushie places to save themselves: True it is, they make a great bucklet of
these words, This is my body: which they think are very clear to prove, that
the bread is transubstantiated into the body of Christ. But I will show in its
due place, in few words, That they pervert the meaning of this place of
Scripture, taking this word is, properly and without a figure, which in all
Sacraments ought to be taken for Signifies of Represents.

Now I will show what slender cause they have to maintain the Invocation of
Saints departed, and to teach that Christ is not our only Mediator with God:
but that all the Saints in heaven are also our Mediators: and that we must draw
near unto God by them, as we come near unto the King by his familiar
servants, entreating them to pray for us. A Doctrine which is absolutely false,
as I shall prove hereafter out of diverse express places, and necessary
consequences drawn out of the Word of God.

First of all then, we ask of them one express text out of the Word of God,
or one necessary consequence drawn out of the same for the proof of this
doctrine. There they stand as mute as fishes: Behold then a doctrine that has
neither prop nor foundation in the Word of God, but is merely invented by men
against the Word of God, as I will show hereafter. And albeit it were not
contrary unto the same; I yet maintain that it ought to be rejected of every
Christian, because it is a vain worshipping of God, to worship him after the
Doctrine and commandments of men. As our Lord Jesus Christ terms it. Mark
7. 7.

Moreover, I prove that this doctrine cannot be without great sin. For
whatsoever is done without the Word of God, is done without faith. Faith, says
Saint Paul, comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God. Romans 10. 17.
But the Invocation of Saints departed is done without the Word of God:
Therefore it is done without Faith. Whatsoever is done without Faith, is sin,
says the same Apostle, Romans 14. 23. But the Invocation of Saints departed is
done without Faith: Therefore the Invocation of Saints departed is sin.

In brief, That Doctrine which teaches men to pray unto Saints departed, is
contrary unto the Word of God, that teaches, That we ought to call upon none,
but on him in whom we have believed, Romans 10. 14. But we do not believe in the
Saints departed; but in one only God, Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Therefore
we ought not to call upon Saints departed, but upon God alone, in whom we
believe.

That Doctrine which teaches men to go unto God by his Saints, as a man goes
to the King by his familiar servants, is contrary unto the Word of God, which
teaches us to go directly to Christ, and that he is the only Way, to go to
the Father. Come unto me, says he, al ye that labor and are heavy laden, and
I will give you rest, etc. Math. 11. 28. He would not have us then go unto him
by the Saints departed. I am, says he, the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no
man comes unto the Father but by me, John 14. 6.

That Doctrine which teaches that there is diverse Mediators with God, is
contrary unto the Word of God, which teaches us, That God is one, and the
Mediator one, between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1. Tim. 2. 5.

Item, That God alone knows the hearts of all the sons of men, 1. Kin. 8.
38.

Whereupon it follows, That the Saints departed do not know our prayers,
which are made in the heart; and that by Consequent, it is a vain and an idle
thing to pray unto them.

The Argument which we draw out of this place of Saint Paul against the
Invocation of Saints departed, is thus.

If there be one only Mediator between God and man, to wit, Christ Jesus: It
follows, That the Saints departed are not our Mediators with God, and by
Consequent, that it is unprofitable to pray unto them to pray for us. But the
Antecedent is true; Therefore the Consequent also.

Our Adversaries, to put off this blow, make a distinction, saying, That Saint
Paul in this place, speaks not of a Mediator of Intercession, but of a
Mediator of Redemption: and therefore that this place is not brought to the
purpose for the Intercession of Saints: a thing which is in controversy
between them and us.

To which I answer, First, That they are not able to prove that distinction of
a Mediator of Redemption, and a Mediator of Intercession, either by any
express texts out of the Word of God, or any necessary consequence drawn out
of the same: and therefore that it is false. Secondly, That on the contrary,
the Word of God teaching us, that we have an Advocate with God, which is Christ
Jesus: teaches us Consequently, that he is our alone Mediator of Intercession,
as well as ^f Redemption. If any man sin, says S. John, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, John. 1. Epist. 2. 1.

Veron the Jesuit, in his answer to my Book, Of the Cabale of the Jesuits,
page 18. answers, That to say there is one Mediator, Therefore there is but
one Mediator, is no good Consequence; and he brings in for example one that
should say, I have a Crown: It were no good Consequence to say, Therefore he
has but one Crown.

But this answer comes from a gross ignorance. For that is not to be able to
judge of what is Consequent to a thing, and what is not. Let him learn
therefore by the same example he produces, that if we ask one, How much money
have you in your purse? and he answers Categorically, I have one Crown; the
Consequent is good, Therefore you have but one Crown in your purse.

Even so, I ask how many Advocates we have with God? and reading the whole
Word of God, I find that it shows me but one Advocate with God, which is
Christ Jesus. The Consequence is good then, Therefore we have but one Advocate
with God, which is Christ Jesus our Lord.

It is then our Jesuits part to study Master du Moulins Logic, whereunto he
sends me, seeing he shows himself so ignorant therein, that he may learn
better how to judge of Consequences.

Moreover, God will not give his glory unto another; I am, says he, the Lord,
such is my name. I will not give my Glory unto another, nor my praise unto the
Idol, Esaias 42. 8. He would not have us then to give unto the creatures that
Invocation which belongs unto him. Whereby it does appear, That this
Invocation of Saints departed, is wholly and absolutely contrary unto the Word
of God, having no other end but to give un- the creature the honor and glory
that belongs only unto the Creator.

CHAP. IX.
That the Images of the Roman Church, are made against the Commandment of God*
and that the adoration which they give unto them, is mere Idolatry.
AS for the Images of the RomanChurch, It is certain that they are made
directly against the Commandment of God, (as I have showed before) which in
the second Commandment of the Law, says, Thou shall not make unto thee any
graven Image of any thing that is in Heaven above, etc. Exodus 20. 4. And in
another place, Ye shall make you no Idols nor graven Image, neither rear you
up a standing Image, neither shall you set up any Image of stone in your Land,
to how down unto it: for I am the Lord your God, Levit. 26. 1.

Our Adversaries do answer, That God has forbidden Images, for to worship
them, but not as touching the representation. But I will even in that, show
that they transgress the Commandment of God, and commit Idolatry. For if they
cause Images to be erected for to worship them: It follows, that they swerve
from the Commandment of God, and that they are Idolaters. But the first is
true; I prove it by the second Council of Nice, That commands straightly to
have Images, and to worship them. Besides, let any man see the books of their
Schoolmen upon this point of Images, and they shall find them all reach, That
the Image ought to be worshipped with the Imagined, making but one adoration of
the Image, and of the thing represented by the Image.

When they see themselves convinced by their own Decrees, Books, and Canons,
they say, That the Error is not in the worshipping by means of the Images, but
by them to worship false gods, as the Pagans did; but as for them, they, by
means of the Images, worship the true God.

I answer; By this reason, the Israelits did well to make the Golden calfe, and
Moses very ill in breaking of it. For these Calves thought to worship the true
God by means of that calfe, Exodus 32. 5. 6. Ezekias had likewise done ill in
taking away the Brazen Serpent; for this people thought to worship the true
God, by burning Incense to it, 2. King. 18. 4. and yet God had commanded it
should be set up. But it would puzzle our Adversaries vilely to show us one
express place in the Word of God, wherein it is commanded to make Images of
God for to worship him by them. These men are like unto those Idolaters which
the King of Assyria sent to inhabit the Cities of Samaria in stead of the
Children of Israel, whom he had brought into Babylon, Who feared the Lord, and
served their graven Images, 2. King. 17. 32. 33. 41.

Again, these Doctors allege, That they worship their Images distinctly; that
is, the Images of God with the adoration of Latria, and the Images of Saints
with Dulia. Item, That they make their adoration pass unto the final object,
and therefore they are no Idolaters.

But that will not serve their turn: For whosoever gives unto the creature
that worship which belongs unto the Creator, is an Idolater. But the Doctors
of the Roman Church confess they give unto the Image (which blasphemously they
say to be of God) the Adoration that belongs to God: Therefore they are
Idolaters.

Neither can they escape, in alleging that their Adoration passes to the
final object: For to worship the creature with the Creator, is manifest
Idolatry. And indeed, were it not Idolatry to worship Images of Gold, of
Silver, of Wood and Stone, with God, with the same Adoration that belongs to
God? And to say that the Adoration passes unto the final object, is as vain.
For, the Image being then first worshipped, at least partaketh with the
Adoration; which is mere Idolatry.

Now, these Doctors telling us (for a shift) That the Adoration passes to the
final object, in that confess underhand tacitly, that they are Idolaters,
worshipping Wood and Stone, which is the first object of their adoration: which
is an abomination unto the Lord, who calls himself a jealous God, and that
cannot endure we should any manner of way give unto the creature the honor
which is due unto Him.

Many in the Roman Church, (that are not well instructed in the Doctrine of
their Doctors) think assuredly, that the adoration of Images is Dulia, and the
adoration of the things imagined or represented, to be Latria. But that is not
their Doctrine. For they make but one adoration both of the Image and of the
thing represented by the Image. If we worship God, (says Panigarole in his
lessons, page 439.) by means of the Image, God and the Image are both
worshipped with one adoration of Latria. And if by means of the Image we
worship the Saint, both the Saint and the Image are worshipped with one
Adoration of Dulia. But it will never be proved, That the worship of the Image,
is Dulia, and that of the Imagined or represented by the Image is Latria;
because both are but one Adoration: These are the very words of this Doctor.

In fine, We ask of our Adversaries one express text out of the Word of God,
or any one necessary Consequence drawn out of the same, where it is commanded
to make Images of God to worship him by them. That puts them into a grievous
rage, and makes them presently to fall to railing instead of answering.

We ask them again, who has told them, that God may be represented by Images
of Gold, Silver, Wood and Stone. God is a Spirit,says Christ, and those that
worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth, John 4. 24. God is infinite
and incomprehensible, therefore he cannot be represented by such material and
corporal things, it being an horrible blasphemy to go about to represent the
Godhead with such things. Wherefore the Prophet Esaias cries aloud against such
Idolaters; To whom then will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare
him unto? or to whom shall I be equal, says the holy One? Lift up your eyes
on high, and behold who has Created these things, Esaias 40. 18. 25. 26. And the
Apostle Saint Paul says, That professing themselves to be wise, they became
fools, and changed the Glory of the uncorruptible God, into an Image made like
to corruptible Man, and to Birds and foure-footed Beasts, Romans 1. 22. 23.

This adoration of Dulia, which they give unto Saints, cannot choose but be a
great sin, and Idolatry: For this adoration is made without any warrant out
of the Word of God, and by Consequent, done without Faith, which cannot be but
sin and Idolatry.

In sum, Our Adversaries are greater Idolaters in worshipping of their
Images, than the Pagans and ancient Idolaters were. For those had not the
knowledge of the true God, and were not taught and instructed by his Word.
Besides, They worshipped the Images of things which they believed to be gods;
as of Jupiter, Hercules, Apollo, Juno, Venus, Diana, and others. But these
Idolaters here, see by the Word of God, how much Idolatry is in abomination
unto the Lord: and nevertheless, they worship the Images of things, which as
themselves confess are no gods, as of the true Cross, of the Virgin Mary, of
Saint Francis, of Saint Dominick, and others: and are come so far even as to
worship Tabernacles, Boxes, and such other like things. But if any man think
that I accuse them wrongfully, and lay to their charge that which they do not
teach: Let him take the pains to read their Canons and Books, and namely, the
Lessons of Francis Panigarolle, a renowned Doctor amongst them, and he shall
find, that the Pagans, never came to such a height of Idolatry.

CHAP. X.
That four rules show unto us, that there is a Figure in these Words, This is
my body. And that the Transubstantiation of the bread into the body of Christ,
is contrary unto the truth of God, and destroys the humane nature of Christ.
Item, That in all Sacraments, the Word, is, is put for signifies, or
represents.
BY that which has been said already, It appears plainly, That the Doctrine
of our Adversaries is altogether contrary unto the Word of God, and therefore
it is no wonder, that they have forsaken the light, for to hide themselves
under the darkness of a Tradition and unwritten Word. It is true, they boast
much of these Words, This is my body: and make a show to stick close to those
Four small Words of the Gospel, upon which words they will not admit of any
Figure or interpretation, but will take them at the bark of the Letter, to draw
out of the same a Doctrine contrary unto the Analogy of Faith, and that wholly
destroys the humane nature of our Lord Jesus Christ. The which I will prove
by these four rules following, which will put us out of all doubt; For they
certainly show unto us when there is a Figure in any place of the holy
Scripture.

The first is, when the matter, and the circumstances of the preceding and
subsequent words, show that there is a Figure.

The second, whether the time in which it is spoken, is to make a Figure.

The third, whether understanding the place literally and without a Figure,
there should from thence arise an impossible thing.

The fourth, if taking it literally and without a Figure, there should follow
any absurdity.

According to these four rules, we must examine this place, This is my body,
and see whether there be a Figure in it or no.

As for the first, the matter and the circumstances do show, That there is a
Figure in these words, This is my body: For Christ was instituting of a
Sacrament. Now, whatsoever is said in matters of Sacraments, ought to be
understood sacramentally, and not literally. Again, The circumstances of the
preceding and subsequent words do show also, that there is a Figure. For in
the foregoing words, the Scripture says, that Christ took bread, brake it, and
gave it. But it is not given till after the consecration: therefore he gave
bread. And to the subsequent words he adds these words, This is my body,
which is broken for you. But the body of Christ was not broken in the Lords
Supper; no not on the very Cross it self; therefore they must be understood
figuratively.

Moreover, he said, giving the Cup to his Apostles, This Cup is the New
Testament in my blood, Luke 21. 20. the which cannot be understood without a
Figure: For a Cup, or that which is in it, is not a Testament substantially.

Item, he says, He will drink no more of the fruit of this Vine, Mat. 26. 29.
He commands, to do that in remembrance of him, 1. Cor. 11. 24. Therefore
there is a figure in these words, This is my body.

By the second rule it appears also, That there is a figure in these words,
This is my body. For the time in which Christ instituted the holy Sacrament of
his Supper, was the same time in which he would leave the World, and go to his
Father, as he testifies of himself, saying, I leave the World, and go to the
Father, John 16. 28. I am no more in the World, John 17. 11. Ye have the poor
with you always, but me ye have not always, Mar. 14. 7. But he willing to
have his Church to make a commenmoration of his death, he Instituteth a
Sacrament, wherein he ordains bread to be broken, and the Cup to be
distributed in remembrance of him; Do this, says he, in remembrance of me.
For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lords
death till he come, 1. Cor. 11. 26. And that, to represent unto us, That even
as the bread and wine nourishes our bodies in this Temporal life: So his
flesh and his blood are the food of our souls in the Eternal life. Therefore
there is a figure in these words, This is my body.

By the third rule, it appears also clearly, that these words, This is my
body, are to be understood figuratively. For as it is impossible that twice two
be not four, but there must be the first odd number umpire: So it is
likewise impossible, That a true body be in diverse places at once. But the body
of our Lord Jesus Christ is a true body, Like unto his brethren in all things,
sin excepted, says the Apostle, Heb. 2. 17. Therefore it cannot be in diverse
places at once.

Our Adversaries would feign cover themselves with the omnipotency of God; but
it is in vain: for the question is of his will, and not of his power. But it
was his will that his Son should take a true humane body, and by Consequent,
that he should be in one, and not in diverse places.

It is most true, That God is omnipotent; but he does not all that he is able
to do. For he could transform the Pope into a monster having seven heads, and
ten horns, and al his Disciples into Grasshoppers: but he does not do it.

In a word, He will not have the body of his Son to be in diverse places at
once, because there would be in him Yea and Nay. Yea in that he will have every
physical and composed body to be in one only place: Nay, If he would have the
body of his Son which is such, to be in several places at once.

Moreover, every true humane body is a material substance, that has his
natural and inseparable properties, one of which is to be limited,
circumscribed and contained in one certain place. Take away from bodies the
distance of places,says Saint Austin, and they shall be nowhere, and because
they shall be nowhere, they shall not be at all.And speaking of the body of
Christ, he says, That if some space be not given unto it that may contain it
after the same manner as other bodies are, its humane nature is
destroyed,Epist. 37. ad Dardanum.Therefore there is a figure in these words,
This is my body.

The fourth rule also shows us very plainly, That there is a figure in these
words, This is my body. For if we take them literally, and without a figure,
there follows diverse absurdities.

1 First, That a body like unto ours in all things, sin excepted, should be
in an infinite number of places at one and the same time. For they teach it is
in as many places as there are Masses said: and that it is whole in every
crumme of the Host, and in every drop in the Chalice, and yet budges not from
Heaven: neither is it in the space which is between both, and by Consequent,
that one and the self same body, may be higher and lower than it self, and
that there is some distance between Christ's body and the body of Christ.

2 Secondly, That a true body has all its parts under one point, having the
head where the feet are, the eyes, mouth, and ears altogether: and by
Consequent, it has a length without extent, that is, a length and no length.

3 Thirdly, That Christ did eat himself, and drank his own body and blood,
seeing (after their own Doctrine) his body is also in the Chalice. And that by
Consequent, he had his head in his mouth, and his whole body in his stomach,
having the inside out, and the outside in, which is a thing more absurd than if
the scabberd were in the sword; For being in the sword, it were in another
thing than it self. But these Doctors put the body of Christ into the body of
Christ.

4 Fourthly, That there is a Christ suffering, and a Christ not suffering: A
Christ crucified, and a Christ not crucified. For as soon as Christ had
supped, he went to the Garden of Olives, where he swate great drops of blood,
was apprehended, and finally, Crucified. But the same that was in his and the
Apostles stomachs, did not sweat great drops of blood, was not apprehended, nor
crucified: And by Consequent, he was not our Savior, seeing he has not
suffered for us.

It appears therefore plainly by that which has bin above said, That these
words, This is my body, must not be taken literally, but figuratively.

Nevertheless, our Adversaries are so wilful and obstinate in this, as to
affirm still, That these words must be taken literally and without a figure:
and that the bread of the Mass, is transubstantiated into the body of Christ:
alleging, that God is able to do it: but as I have said already, the Question
is of his will, and not of his power. They should have proved first, That it is
his Truth and his Will, before they go about to tell us of his power. There is
no opinion so extravagant or fantastical, but may be maintained in saying that
God is powerful enough to make it to be so. To prove a doctrine, only
because God is omnipotent; is an open confession of their weakness. There be
some things that God cannot do, because he is omnipotent. He cannot lie: He
cannot contradict himself. Gods omnipotency ought not to be a cloak unto
Error, nor serve as a refuge to falsehood and Idolatry. Therefore we must see
first whether it be his truth or no.

1. In the first place, the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, that Christ is
like unto his brethren in all things, sin excepted, Heb. 2. 16. 17. Therefore
it is a thing contrary unto the truth of God, to teach that he may be in a
million of places at one and the same time. For to have a true body, and to be
like unto his brethren in all things, he must be in one, and not in many places.

2. Himself tells us that he leaves the World, and goes to the Father, John
16. 28. That he is no more in the World. John 17. 11. That we shall have the
poor always, but we shall not have him always. Mark 14. 7. It is therefore
a thing contrary unto the truth of God, to teach that he is here on earth in a
million of places at once. They answer to this, that we have Christ no more
visibly: but that we have him invisibly under the Species of the bread and
wine.

But that will not serve their turn. For, to have Christ invisibly, is still
to have Christ. That man were a liar that should say he had no clothes, because
they are hid in a trunk. Even so he were a liar that should say he had not
Christ, because he is hidden under the Species of bread and wine. But he says
expressly, We shall not have him always; That he leaves the World, and goes to
the Father. Sentences which should be false if he were yet in the world
between the hands of a Priest saying Mass, or locked up in a pix or box. And
as touching that which he says, Matthew. 28. 20. That he shall be with us unto
the end of the World: That is very true: not according to his Humane nature,
but according to his Divinity, power and efficacy of the holy Ghost, whereby
he guides, governs, and rules his Church. We have Christ always, according
to the presence of his Majesty, says Saint Austin; but according to the
presence of his flesh, it was truly said unto the Apostles, Ye shall not have
me always, August. 50 Treatise upon Saint John.

3. Saint Peter says, That Heaven must contain him until the times of
restitution of al things, which God has spoken by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets since the World began, Act 3. 21. It is therefore a thing contrary
unto the Truth of God, to teach that he is here on earth below in the hands of
a Priest, in as many places as there are Masses said.

4. In the Apostles Creed we believe and confess, That he ascended into
heaven, and sits at the right hand of God the Father. Item, That from thence
he shall come to judge the quick and the dead, Therefore it is a thing
contrary unto the truth of God, to teach that he is here below on earth in the
hands of a Priest, in as many places as there are Masses said.

But for as much as they allege, without any respect to Gods truth, that it is
his will, manifested in these words This is my body: I will show that it is no
more his will, which cannot be contrary to his truth. For the will of our Lord
Jesus Christ was to institute a Sacrament. But in all Sacraments there should
be two distinct things; to wit, the sign, and the thing signified; the one
thing terrestrial, and the other celestial. It was his will therefore that
these two things should be in the Sacrament of the supper, which he instituted:
that is, the bread and the wine, which are the sign and the terrestrial
thing: And his body and blood, which are the celestial and signified thing.
The signs received by the corporal mouth, and the thing signified by faith,
according to that which the Apostle says, Christ dwells in your hearts by
faith. Ephesians. 3. 17. Whereupon it follows that it was not his will, that the
bread and wine should be transubstantiated into his body, which they should
signify. And indeed, he did not say, this is transubstantiated into my body:
but only, This is my body. And that conformably unto the style of the holy
Scripture, which gives always to the sign the name of the thing signified,
using in all Sacraments the word is for signifies.

But forasmuch as all the difficulty lies upon this word is, to know whether
it ought to be taken properly, or by signifies in this euunciation, this is my
body: I prove that it ought not to be taken properly, but by signifies. Here
is my argument. If in all Sacraments, the signs do bear the name of the
things signified: Item, if the word is, is put for signifies or represents:
It follows that the bread and the wine, which are signs in the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, ought to bear the name of the body and blood of Christ.
Item, that the word is, is put for signifies or represents. But the first
proposition is true. Here are my proofs.

1. The Circumcision was a Sacrament among the Jews, that signified the
Covenant of God, as it is said in the 17 of Genesis, verse. 10. 2. 4. 7. Every
man-child among you shall be circumcised, and ye shall circumcise the flesh of
your foreskin, and it shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. But
in the same chapter this Circumcision is called the Covenant it self, I will
make my Covenant between me and thee. As for me, behold my Covenant is with
thee. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee. All that is said of
the Circumcision; it was then called the Covenant, of the name of the thing
whereof it was a sign. So Christ following the style of the holy Scripture,
did call the bread his body.

2. The Paschall Lamb was also a Sacrament among the Jews, which represented
the passover of the Angel that passed by in Egypt. Nevertheless it is called
even the passover it self. And thus shall ye eat it: with your loins
girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand: and ye shall
eat it in haste: for it is the Lords passover. Exodus 12. 11.

3. The Arc of the Covenant was also a Sacrament among the Jews, which
represented the Lord: but it is called the Lord himself in the Word of God, as
we see in these words, And David arose and went with all the people that were
with him, from Baal of Juda to bring up from thence the Ark of God whose name
is called by the name of the Lord of hosts that dwells upon it between the
Cherubins, 2 Samuel 6. 2.

4. The Rock from which came out waters in the Wilderness, was also a sign
and a sacrament among the Jews, that signified the refection and spiritual
food which the faithful have in our Lord Jesus Christ: but it is called
Christ, even by Saint Paul. Our Fathers did all eat the same spiritual meat:
and did all drink the same spiritual drink: for they all drank of that
spiritual rock that followed them: and that Rock was Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4.

P^anigarolle in his Lessons, page 477. deceives himself grossy, being of
opinion that in this place Christ is called a rock, and therefore that this
word Was, is to be taken for being, and not for signifying. 1. For if it were
the sense and meaning of the Apostle, he would not have said that the rock was
Christ, but that Christ was the rock. 2. Also he would not have said in the
passive tense was, but in the present tense is: For he is always both the
fundamental and chief corner stone of the Church.

3. To discern the truth, we must but consider the words of the Apostle: for
he says That our Fathers did all eat of the same spiritual meat, and did
all drink of the same spiritual drink, 1. Cor. 10. 2. But this spiritual
meat was the Manna. Exodus 16. 15. which he calls spiritual because it was a
figure of Christ: Likewise, this spiritual drink, was the water issuing forth
of the rock. Exodus 17. 6. Numb. 20. 10. 11. which also he calls spiritual
drink, because its signification was spiritual. But as by this spiritual
meat, Saint Paul did not mean Christ himself: So by this spiritual drink he
did not understand Christ himself, but the water that flowed out of the Rock.
It is therefore clear enough, that this Rock whereof he speaks, is the same
whence the waters flowed in the Wilderness, which he calls Christ, because
it was a figure of Christ.

The which is plainly showed in the foregoing words of Sea, and Cloud. For
the Sea, the Cloud, and the Rock are used in one and the self same kind, and
to one and the self same end. Even so then as it was a true Sea, and a true
cloud: so this Rock was a true Rock. And it is said it followed the people:
because the streams of waters that issued forth of this Rock, followed this
people a long time in the Wilderness.

Again, Christ says, That he is the true Vine, John 15. 1. That he is the
door of the Sheep, John 10. 7. And Saint Paul says, That the bread which we
break, is the Communion of the body of Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 16. Howbeit the
bread is not the Communion it self, but a Sacrament thereof.

As for Baptism, S. Paul says, That by it we are buried with Christ, Romans 6.
4. Col. 2. 12. because it represents the death of the old man, and of our
natural corruption.

But without going from the Sacrament, whereof we now treat* there is
sufficient matter to show plainly, That in these words, This is my body, the
word is, is put for signifies, or represents: For Christ says, This is my
body which is broken for you. But if we should here take this word is, properly
and without a figure, it would follow, That the body of Christ was broken at
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: which is a thing contrary unto the Word of
God, that says, He was not broken, that the Scripture should be fulfilled
which says, that a bone of him shall not be broken, John 19. 33. 36.

Now we must note, That this word is, is found here twice in the same place,
and within three words one of another, viz. This is my body, which is broken
for you, etc. These subtle Doctors, enemies of figures, will take the first
properly, and without a figure, in these words, This is my body: but in the
words following, which is broken for you, etc. they take it figuratively,
saying, that breaking is attributed to the body of Christ, because the species
which cover it, are broken by the Priest, that is to say, the color, the
quantity, the measures. A brave subtilty; for according to this Doctrine, an
arm shall be broken, because the sleeve that contains it, is broken.

But here is yet more. S. Luke, and S. Paul say, That the Cup is the New
Testament, etc. Luke 22. 20. 1. Cor. 11. 25. Out of which we draw this
infallible conclusion. If the Cup, or that which is in the Cup, cannot be the
new Testament substantially, but only Sacramentally: It follows, that this
word is, ought to be expounded in this place for signifies or represents.
But the first is true; Therefore the last also.

Our Adversaries deny the Antecedent: affirming, That the Cup or that which is
in the Cup, is the New Testament properly, and without a figure: and perceiving
very well, that the bread is the Lords body in the same kind as the Cup is the
New Testament: and that if the word, is, must be expounded for signifies or
represents, in this enunciation, This Cup is the New Testament, etc. that it
must be expounded so in this enunciation, This is my body.

But this hole is too little to creep out at. For behold, Saint Matthew says,
That this blood is the blood of the New Testament, Mat. 26. 28. Therefore it is
not the New Testament. For even as the four corner Cap of a Jesuit is not a
Jesuit: so the blood of the New Testament, is not the New Testament.

Add moreover, that our Adversaries tell us, That the New Testament is founded
upon the blood which they say is in the Chalice. Therefore by their own
Doctrine, it is not the New Testament: for one thing founded upon another, is
not the same thing with it.

In sum, Christ says, This Cup is the New Testament in my blood. Therefore
it is not his blood; For a thing which is in another, is not the same thing in
which it is.

By so many express texts, and invincible reasons, is this proposition
evidently proved: That in all Sacraments, the signs do bear the name of the
thing signified; and that this word is, is put for signifies or represents;
and Consequently, that the bread and wine, remaining still bread and wine, at
the Sacrament of the Lords supper, do bear the name of the body and blood of
Christ whom they signify. And therefore the meaning of these words, this is my
body, is, This signifies or represents my body: as diverse Fathers have
expounded it, and namely, Saint Austin in these words: The Lord made no
difficulty to say, This is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. Austin
against Adimentus chap. 12. And Tertullian also in these words: Christ having
taken bread and distributed it to his Disciples, made it to be his body, saying
this is my body, that is, the figure of my body, Tertullian contra Marcion,
chap. 40. Whereby it appears that this popish doctrine is no less contrary
unto the will of God than unto his truth manifested in his Word.

CHAP. XI.
That it is not enough (for to have Eternal life) to eat Christ's flesh; but
that we must also drink his blood; And therefore all Christians indifferently
ought to communicate under both kinds, according to the Commandment of
Christ, and the Apostle Saint Paul.
THe Pope and his Associats do keep men easily in their Idolatry and false
doctrines, by these two means. The first, in holding them in a more than
brutish ignorance, using them like beasts. The second, by sweet alluring
speeches wherewith they cover the poison which they give unto the simple to
drink. It is a thing worthy of compassion to see sometimes these Doctors in the
Pulpit torment themselves, gnash their teeth for anger, and spew out a thousand
injuries, slanders, and forged imputations against the good servants of God,
and especially against Calvin. For the very remembrance of the name of that
good Doctor, is able to make them stark mad: mingling in their sermons among
their injuries, some words of Piety, recommendation, and praise of good works,
to amuse their hearers, and entertain them in that opinion, that they preach a
true, and wholesome doctrine. This is the cause the Papists sometimes do
entreat us to go hear their sermons. O silly people, ye have not yet learned
what the depths of Satan are, that can transform himself into an Angel of
light for to seduce men. Apoc. 2. 24. Ye hearken not to Christ's warning, when
he says, Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheep clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening ^olfe^. Math. 7. 15. Ye know not that Antichrist
has two horns like a Lamb, but speaks as a Dragon. Apoc. 13. 11. Poor
seduced people that ^eed your selves with shows of good, wherewith they hide
the falsehood which they give you, without inquiring of the truth, so easy to
be found in the Word of God to confound your Doctors. Ask them but where it is
commanded in the Word of God to deprive Lay men and women from the Communion of
the Cup, as they do; and ye shall make them as dumb as fishes.

Those red Hats, and fur'd Hoods, assembled at the Councels of Constance and
Trente, acknowledge in the thirteenth and fifth Sessions of the said Councels,
That Christ did institute the Sacrament of the Supper under both kinds of bread
and wine, and delivered it so to his Diciples: Confessing moreover that the use
of both kinds was very frequent and ordin^ry in the beginning of Christian
Religion; and yet nevertheless, they are so bold and impudent as to put an
Anathema upon him that shall say that all every one of the Faithful ought to
receive under both kinds the Sacrament of the Eucharist, by the commandment
of God. Declaring that this custom of receiving under one kind, ought to be
held as a Law: forbidding every Christian to believe or teach otherwise. Behold
how these Doctors have banded themselves openly against Christ, whom they have
Anathematised with the Apostle Saint Paul. Our Lord, for saying unto his
Disciples when he gave them the Cup, Drink ye all of it: Math. 26. 27. And
the Apostle, for commanding to every one of the Corinthians, to examine
himself, and so eat of this bread and drink of this cup. 1. Corinthians. 11. 28.

Now, because this is sufficient to make it appear that the Pope is contrary
unto Christ, they labor to put off this blow, alleging that Christ spoke to
none but to his Apostles, which were pastors; and so, that this privilege of
receiving under both kinds, belongs to Priests only, and not to Lay men; but
they cannot shun it so; for if Christ command all his Disciples to do that
which he had done in the supper: It follows that all his Disciples
indifferently ought to communicate under both kinds; but the first is true, do
(says he) this is remembrance of me. 1. Cor. 11. 24. Therefore the last also.

And seeing that the Jesuits at this day, besides the Consequences drawn out
of the Word of God, do ask of us still some express Texts and Arguments
whereof the two first propositions be in the Scriptures: Here be some.

Whosoever bids every man to examine himself, and so eat of this Bread and
drink of this Cup: commands all the Faithful indifferently to communicate
under both kinds.

But Saint Paul commands every one to examine himself, and so eat of this
Bread, and drink of this Cup, 1. Cor. 11. 28. Therefore he commands all the
Faithful, indifferently to communicate under both kinds.

Again, Whosoever says in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, Drink ye all of
it: bids every one to drink of this Cup, 1. Cor. 11. 28.

But Christ in the Sacrament of the Eucharist says, Drink ye all of it.Math.
26. 27.

Therefore he commands every one to drink of this Cup, 1. Cor. 11.

Behold some express texts and co^sequences drawn out of the pure Word of God,
for the proof of our Doctrine, and condemnation of that of our Adversaries.

Our Adversaries on their part, produce some places, by which they pretend to
prove, that Christ and the Apostles have given the Communion under the species
of Bread only.

First they produce a place out of Saint Luke, who says, That in Emaus, as
Christ sat at meat with the two Disciples, He took Bread, and blessed it, and
brake, and gave to them; and that there is no mention made that he gave them
the Cup. Luke 24.

Moreover they bring in two other places in the Acts of the Apostles, whereof
the first says, That The Disciples did continue in the Apostles doctrine, and
in the communion and breaking of bread; and the other, That the Disciples were
gathered together to break bread. Acts 2. 42. and chap. 20. 7. From which
places they do infer, That it is in the power of the Church to take away the
Cup from the Lay people: since in these places there is no mention made of the
Cup, but of the bread only.

To which I answer, 1. That I have already brought express texts out of the
Word of God, whereby it is expressly commanded to all Christians to drink of
the cup in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: and therefore that it is not in
the Churches power to take away the cup from the Lay people.

2. It is a manifest impiety to make use of the Word of God for to oppose and
contradict the same word, pulling for that purpose some texts as it were by the
hair and against their true meaning, to establish a doctrine contrary unto
express textes: which is an ordinary thing with these Romish Doctors, as
appears here in this place, where they oppose the texts here above mentioned,
to these two express and plain texts. Drink ye all of it. Math. 26. Let
Every man examine himself, and so let him drink of this cup. 1. Cor. 11. 3.

That even from these places produced by them, no man can infer that it is in
the power of the Church to take away the Cup from the people. 1. For in that of
Saint Lukes, it is not spoken of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, but of a
common repast, at which it was Christ's accustomed manner to break the bread
with giving of thanks, as you may see in Saint Math. 14. 19. and in S. Luke 9.
16.

2. That though the Sacrament of the Eucharist were meant in these places, it
were no good consequence to say: In these places there is no mention made, but
of breaking of bread: Therefore there was no wine: For under the word Bread,
the Scripture signifies all things necessary for life, as you may see in these
places of the Word of God. Genesis 37. 35. and chap. 43. 31. 32. 34. And though I
say I did eat with such a one, It does not follow that I drank not with him.

3. That if in these places the Sacrament of the Lords supper be meant, and
there was no wine at it: It follows that neither Christ nor the Apostles
drank at it, and consequently that Priests are no more bound than the Lay
people to communicate under both kinds. But de Raconis denies it in a
Treatise he made upon the conversion of Monsieur de Colincourt, page 87.
saying, That the Apostles were bound to celebrate under both kinds of bread
and wine severally, to represent the separation that was made on the Cross of
the blood of Christ from his body.

Now for to prove their Transubstantiation, these Doctors produce some places
out of the sixth of Saint John, where there is never a word spoken of the
Eucharist, but of Christ's flesh given upon the Cross for the life of the
World; not perceiving that by this means they even overthrow themselves. For
here are Christ's words, Except you eat the flesh of the Son of man, and
drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whosoever eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, has eternal life. John 6. 53. 54. If these words be meant
of the Eucharist: It follows they deprive the people of life, taking from
them the Cup.

Moreover, it is not enough to eat the flesh of Christ by faith under the
sign of bread, but we must also drink his blood spiritually by faith under
the sign of the wine, seeing Christ has instituted this holy Sacrament under
both signs of bread and wine; the one to be broken, and the other to be shed
or powered forth in remembrance of him: the which he chiefly recommended of the
Cup, saying, Drink ye all of it. Math. 26: and even as if he would have
remedied the error that afterward crept into the Church; viz. in taking away
against his precept, the half of that holy sacrament. And therefore it is to
no purpose to allege the concomitancie. For, to eat a morsel of bread in
form of a Wafer, is not to drink Christ's blood as he bids it expressly,
saying, That Except we drink his blood, we have no life in us. John 6.

CHAP. XII.
That the pretended Sacrifice of the Mass was only established for to
annihilate the power and efficacy of the Sacrifice of the Cross. And that
there is but one only Sacrificator sacrificing expiatorily in the Evangelicall
Law, to wit, Jesus Christ our Lord.
BRiefly, whosoever shall consider the Popes Doctrine, and of his Disciples, he
shall see plainly, That it tends only to debase the merit and virtue of the
death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ: as you may observe by the Doctrine
of their pretended sacrifice of the Mass. For these Doctors teach, that it is
a second sacrifice of Christ, propitiatory both for the quick and for the
dead; which is plainly to deny that the Sacrifice of the Cross has the power
and efficacy to take away sins, unless it be reiterated. But the Apostle
Saint Paul teaches us plainly, that the sacrifice of the Cross, has at once
taken sin wholly away, when he says, That by the will of God we are sanctified
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. By one offering
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. And he adds yet another
sentence, that cutteth up this Error by the very roots. Now, Where remission of
these is, there is no more offering for sin, Heb. 10. 10. 14. 18. He means by
these things, the transgression of the Law of God. But in the Sacrifice of the
Cross there is forgiveness of these things: Therefore there is no more
oblation for sin.

Against such clear places, these Doctors arm themselves with a false
distinction of Sacrifice, which they could never yet prove, neither out of any
express text taken out of the Word of God, or necessary Consequence drawn out
of the same. They say, that there is no more bloody sacrifice for sin; but that
there is an unbloody sacrifice, according to the order of Melchisedeck, for the
continual application of the merit of the sacrifice of the Cross.

But this distinction is not able to take them off the hooks. For, the Apostle
saying expressly, That there is no more oblation for sin, shows us plainly,
That there is no other propitiatory sacrifice for sin, of what kind soever,
but that of the Cross. It is therefore their part, that go about to give the
Apostle the lie, to prove that distinction, showing by express texts, or at
least by necessary consequences drawn out of the pure Word of God, that we
ought to sacrifice again the body of Christ unbloodily, to apply the merit of
his bloody sacrifice: which thing they are never able to do.

For to attain to this proof, some of them argue thus: Christ is a
sacrificator after the order of Melchisedeck; but Melchisedeck offered an
unbloody sacrifice: for he offered bread and wine. Therefore Christ after the
same order, has offered an unbloody sacrifice, when he has offered himself
under the Species of bread and wine. And therefore the distinction of bloody
and unbloody sacrifice is true.

We grant the Major, but we deny the Minor, which is grounded upon a falsehood.
We do not find in any place of holy Scripture, that Melchisedeck offered to
God bread and wine. We read in the 14 of Genesis, verse. 18. that he brought
unto Abraham bread and wine for to feed and refresh him and his men that were
wearied and travayl'd as they came from the defeat of the Kings: But there is
not a word there that Melchisedeck offered bread and wine unto God. And
therefore the conclusion of this argument is false, and by consequent also this
pretended distinction of bloody and unbloody sacrifice.

Now I will show hereafter wherein consists this order of Melchisedeck,
according to which order Christ is an everlasting Sacrificator. At this
present, I will press our Adversaries upon this pretended application, which
is the last refuge of falsehood brought to the baye upon her back.

We say then that in this pretended application, our Adversaries grant under
hand tacitly, that the Mass is not the sacrifice of Jesus Christ. For, if it
be but the application of Christ's sacrifice: It follows it is not Christ's
sacrifice. For even as the application of a plaster is not a plaster; so the
application of Christ's sacrifice, is not Christ's sacrifice.

And here these Doctors confess freely again that the Mass is not Christ's
sacrifice. For they say that every true sacrifice requires that the thing
offered be destroyed and consumed: Whereupon we build this argument.

Every true sacrifice requires that the thing offered be destroyed and
consumed. But the Mass, say they, is a true sacrifice: Therefore the thing
offered in the Mass, is destroyed and consumed.

They yield us that too, but to their confusion; for say we,

If the thing offered in the Mass, be destroyed and consumed, and this thing
offered is the body of Christ: It follows that the body of Christ is
destroyed and consumed in the Mass. It is not true, say they, but it is the
Species of bread and wine that are destroyed and consumed: that is, the color,
the taste, the roundnesse and quantity of the bread and wine. They confess
therefore freely that the Mass is not Christ's sacrifice, seeing that he is not
destroyed, but only a sacrifice of roundnesses, of measures, of lines, of
castles in the air, well befitting such a Religion, wherein all is nothing but
Mask and hypocrisy.

Moreover, the application of a thing, is not the thing applied. As for
example, The water of the Bath is applied by means of the channel or
conduit-pipe: Yet it is not the pipe. Physic is administered with a cup or
vessel, but it is not the vessel: and so of all other things. But contrariwise,
these subtle Doctors will have the application and the thing applied to be one
and the self same thing. For they say that Christ's sacrifice is applied by the
sacrifice of the same Christ. But they have not cunning enough yet to persuade
us that although the Mass were good, it could be both the Physic and the
vessel together.

But, say our Adversaries, do we an injury to the physic by applying it with
the vessel? do we wrong to the water of the Bath, when we receive it by the
channel? do we wrong to the bloody sacrifice, in applying it by the unbloody
sacrifice?

Yea Doctors, ye do wrong to the Physic, when ye attribute unto the vessel
the virtue of healing, which is only proper to the physic. Ye do wrong to
the water of the Bath, when ye attribute unto the conduit-pipe the cure which
the water only works. Likewise ye do wrong to the sacrifice of the Cross,
when ye attribute to your pretended sacrifice of the Mass the virtue to
expiate sins, as if the other alone were insufficient.

We hold therefore, that Christ cannot be offered again in sacrifice for the
forgiveness of sins, without making void the virtue and efficacy of the
sacrifice of the Cross. For of two plasters, either the one is sufficient to
heal the wound, or both are requisite and necessary. If the one be sufficient,
the other is superflous. If both are requisite and necessary: it follows that
one is not sufficient. Let us say then, if there be two propitiatory sacrifices
for the remission of sins, the one bloody, and the other unbloody: The one of
the two is sufficient, or both are requisite and necessary. If the one be
sufficient, the other is superflous. If both are requisite and necessary: It
follows that one alone is insufficient. So that admitting two propitiatory
sacrifices, the one bloody, the other unbloody, is to deny that the sacrifice
of the Cross has the virtue alone to expiate sins.

The Word of God does not teach us that there is two different sacrifices of
Christ, the one bloody the other unbloody. The Apostle to the Hebrews
imployeth many leafes to declare this point, and treating fully of the
Priesthood in the Christian Church, he there makes no mention at all of the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Finally, our Adversaries affirm that the Mass is an unbloody propitiatory
sacrifice instituted by Christ, both for the quick and for the dead. Enquired
where he instituted it: they bring these words, Do this. Admirable proof! Do
this, that is to say, sacrifice me really under the kinds of bread and wine in
propitiatory sacrifice both for the quick and for the dead. That is a good
gloss. But by these words Do this, Christ commands to do that which he did
at the Supper. Therefore they should have prooved first that Christ did at the
Lords Supper sacrifice himself to God his Father, which he did not do.
Nevertheless, some of them do go about to prove it, alleging the words
which our Lord says in Saint Luke, This is my body which is given for you.
Luke 22. 19. Where given, say they? not on the Cross: for he was not yet
there; but under the Species of bread and wine at the same instant, and even
while he pronounced these words: Whereupon they conclude that Christ offered
himself to God his Father at the supper.

I answer, that these words which is given for you, etc. prove no manner of way
that Christ offered himself to God his Father in the sacrament. For he offered
only to his Disciples, saying unto them Take. But he offers nothing to God,
he makes no Elevation of an Host. Moreover, Adoration is a necessary action
in all Sacrifices: but the Apostles worshipped not the bread which Christ gave
unto them, but remained at table with him: which shows, they did not think
that bread to be transubstantiated into the body of Christ. For otherwise, it
had been an extreme irreverence in them not to worship that which Christ did
present unto them.

And for that he says in the Present tense, which is given for you, etc. we
see he speaks often of his approaching death, as if it were present; I lay
down, says he, my life for my sheep, John 10. 15. 17. 18. I leave my life that
I may take it again. Father, I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do, John 17. 4. Nevertheless, there remained the principal thing, to wit,
his death upon the Cross. The Lamb was slain from the foundation of the
World, Apoc. 13. 8. I send you (says God by the Prophet Malachy) the Prophet
Eliah, Mal. 4. 3. that is, I will send you John the Baptist; which was not done
of long time after. If therefore a thing so far off, was said as if it were
present: how much more shall that be thought present, which is to be done at
hand? There is nothing so frequent in the word of God as the changing of
tenses: So as very often, the Past, or the Present, is taken for the future.
Thus Christ speaks of the Sacrifice of the Cross, on which he gave himself
for the life of the World.

Some others argue thus; All effusion of blood for the Remission of sins, is
a propitiatory Sacrifice: But Christ says that his blood is shed in the
Eucharist for the Remission of sins: Therefore the Eucharist is a
propitiatory Sacrifice.

I answer, That the two first propositions of this Argument are false, as also
the conclusion, in the sense that our Adversaries take it in. First, it is
false that an effusion of blood is a propitiatory Sacrifice for the Remission
of sins: Unless that blood be offered unto God with the death of the
Sacrifice. But Christ offered nothing unto God in the Eucharist, nor yet
suffered death thereat.

Again, It is false that Christ did shed his blood in the Eucharist. For it was
not shed, but on the Cross: and it is of that shedding he speaks, saying,
This Cup is the New Testament in my blood which is shed for you. And to reply
that there is in the present tense is shed, and not in the future shall be shed:
is to no purpose. For I have above stopped this passage, in showing out of diverse
places of the holy Scriptures, that this word, is, is oftentimes taken in the
Future. And indeed, the Latin Bible of the Roman Church, and the Canon of the
Mass, turns it in the Future, qui pro vobis effundetur, which shall be shed
for you.

But it is worthy of Note, to see how our Adversaries grant without difficulty,
that which they so painfully deny. For when we ask of them, whether Christ's
blood came out of the veins in the Sacrament of the Eucharist, or no? They
answer, It did not come out of the veins. Then it was not shed there, say we.
For a thing is not shed while it remains enclosed in the vessel that
contains it. And besides, they call the Mass an unbloody Sacrifice.
Nevertheless, contradicting themselves grossly, they will not give over
writing and affirming that Christ shed his blood there. We ask them then, how,
and after what manner it is shed in the Mass. They answer, It is shed under
the species of the wine. Then, say we, It is shed. It is not, say they; It is
but the accidents of the wine only that are shed. Now I leave it to the
judgment of all men, whether this be not with one breath to deny, and affirm
both together. Why then do they tell us that it is shed, for to tell us
presently after that it is not shed, but that the only accidents of wine are
shed? They have bin brought to lay the like absurdity upon these words, which
is broken for you, being forced to maintain that the body of Christ is broken,
because the species that co^tain him, are broken. The conclusion which they
draw from this argument, is also false. For they conclude, that the Eucharist
is a propitiatory Sacrifice for sin, both for the quick and for the dead: which
is not so, but only a Sacrifice of thanksgiving: for there is but one
propitiatory Sacrifice for sin, which is that of the Cross.

Now, even as there is but one only expiatory Sacrifice, so there is but one
only Priest sacrificing expiatorily, to wit, Christ Jesus our Lord. There were
many under the Law, because they were hindered by death from remaining: but our
Lord Jesus Christ remaining a Priest for ever, and which cannot be hindered by
death, needs no other Priest to be appointed in his room.

And it is here that these new sacrificers labor in vain to prove their
pretended calling: For it is an imaginary charge, which was never established
by Christ, nor practiced by the Apostles. Behold how they argue.

Christ said to his Disciples, As my Father has sent me, so I send you. But
Christ was sent of the Father to sacrifice under the kinds of bread and wine,
after the order of Melchisedeck. Therefore he sent his Apostles to sacrifice
under the species of bread and wine according to this order; and Consequently,
has made them Priests.

I answer, That if it be false that Melchisedeck did sacrifice bread and wine:
It follows, it is as false that Christ sent his Apostles to sacrifice him
under the kinds of bread and wine: but the first is true. I have proved it
already plainly here above: therefore the last also.

But to make the Error of this allegation appear the more plainly, we must but
add this to the second proposition of their Argument. As Christ was sent of
his Father, so he sent his Apostles. But Christ was sent of his Father to be a
King, a Prophet, and for to sacrifice himself for the Redemption of many.
Therefore he sent his Apostles to be Kings, prophets, and to sacrifice
themselves for the Redemption of many. Who sees not the error and falsehood of
such a proposition? This word, As, therefore, must not be understood of the
Kingly, or Prophetical Office, and Priesthood of Christ. It is a presumption
and temerity for men to assume unto themselves such titles: but only for the
preaching of the Gospel, administering of Sacraments, and things which only
regard the Ministry. Christ gave them not any other Office.

And as touching the Order of Melchisedeck, after which Christ is a Priest for
ever: It is not in regard of the sacrifices, but in regard of the persons
sacrificing. The Apostle teaches it plainly, handling the comparison between
Christ and Melchisedeck. In the first place, he says, Heb. 7. 2. That
Melchisedeck is by Interpretation, King of Righteousness, and also, King of
Peace: which are titles belonging to Christ, and which the Prophets also give
him. For he is King of Righteousness, because he absolves and Justifies us by
his obedience before God his Father. He is also King of Peace, because that
making our peace and reconciliation, he directs us into the way of
everlasting peace. The Apostle goes on, and says, That this Melchisedeck was
without Father, without Mother, and without descent, having neither beginning
of days, nor end of life: but being made like unto the Son of God, abides a
Priest for ever. Behold then wherein consists the agreement and similitude
between our Lord Jesus Christ and Melchisedeck, which is not in the matter of
the thing sacrificed, but in the Order and Calling of the persons sacrificing:
which is proved again plainly in this, that Christ is a Priest for ever after
that Order of Melchisedeck. For if this Order were and did consist in the
pretended sacrfice of the Mass: Then it would follow, that Christ should not
be a Priest for ever, seeing the Mass shall not endure for ever.

Therefore, Even as the same Melchisedeck was not head of any Order of
Priesthood, but only a Priest after his own Order under the Law: So Christ the
only Priest under the Evangelical Law, needs not to have a company of
Priests sacrificing expiatorily; and therefore that infinite number of
Sacrificers established in the Church of Rome for to sacrifice again our Lord
Jesus Christ to God his Father, stands convinced of having no calling. Seeing
they have intruded themselves into that Office without any commandment from
God, taking unto themselves in so doing, the honor which belongs to none but
to our Lord and Savior: it not belonging at all unto the crature to sacrifice
the Creator; or for men sinners, to sacrifice the Lamb without sin.

CHAP. XIII.
That S. Peter was not established by Christ head of the Universal Church, and
Prince of the Apostles, and Consequently, that the Pope (who challenges this
Title but as S. Peter's successor) has intruded himself into that office,
without any lawful calling: and shows himself to be Antichrist, in doing
quite contrary to that which Christ and S. Peter did.
TO be short, It seems that our Adversaries will be Christians no longer:
having not only forsaken the Doctrine, but the very name also, for to take the
name of Catholics. God in his Justice would not suffer that they should retain
the name which belongs only to true Christians, that follow his word, and
trust in his promises. For to be a true Christian, it is not enough to believe
only that there is a Christ: but we must rely on his promises, and receive him
such as he was given unto us of the Father, that is, for our salvation,
righteousness and satisfaction for our sins. But our Adversaries do not
receive him so, seeing they have established their righteousness in their own
works, by which they think to deserve the kingdom of God. They will say
indeed, that his blood shed upon the Cross is our Purgatory: but they do
establish another in an Imaginary fire. They say that the sacrifice he made
upon the Cross has taken away our sins: but they have established another
sacrifice to blot them away again; and all against the Word of God. Therefore
they cannot boast that they are Christians, but rather Antichristians, that
have rejected the true Doctrine, for to embrace and follow the Doctrine of the
Pope of Rome, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God,
or that is worshipped: So that he as God, sits in the Temple of God showing
himself that he is God, 2. These. 2. 4.

But for as much as the Popes Disciples do cloak this mystery of iniquity with
some places of Scripture, whereby they pretend to prove that S. Peter was
established Head of the Universal Church, and Prince of the Apostles; because
they would maintain the Pope, who by cunning has intruded himself into that
office: I will show in few words that Saint Peter was not Prince of the
Apostles, nor head of the Universal Church, as they say.

In the first place, the Word of God tells us, That our Lord Jesus Christ is the
Head of his Church. God has put all things (says S. Paul) under his feet: and
gave him to be the head over all things to the Church, which is his body.
Again, He is the head of the body, the Church: who is the beginning, the first
born from the dead: that in all things he might have the preeminence, Ephesians. 1.
22. 23. Colos. 1. 18. By these places it appears, that S. Peter was not Head
of the Church; For She which is but one body, cannot have two heads. And it is
to no purpose to say that Christ is the essential head, but that S. Peter was
the Ministerial head: For it is still to make a monster of the Church, in
giving her two heads.

Moreover, if S. Peter was ministerial head of the Church, and Prince of the
Apostles, It must be by the institution of Christ: and if it be by Christ's
institution, this institution is to be found in the word of God. Moreover, S.
Peter must needs have exercised that office, or else it would have brought a
confusion in the Church. But on the contrary, the word of God, shows us, That
Christ did not appoint Peter to be head of the Church, nor Prince of the
Apostles. Item, That S. Peter did never exercise that office, as I shall prove
by these texts and reasons following.

As for the first point, S. Paul teaches us, That our Lord for the gathering
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, and for the edification of his
body, has given some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Pastors and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. And in another place: God has set some in the Church:
First Apostles, secondly Prophets, thirdly Teachers, 1. Cor. 12. 28. He makes
no mention at all of any head of the Church, nor or Prince of the Apostles: and
yet these are the places where this principality should have appeared, being
very likely that if Christ had established Peter for head of the Universal
Church, and Prince of the Apostles; he would not have omitted to set down this
principality in the first rank. But having left it out, it appears, That
Christ did not ordain any one for head of the Church, and Prince of the
Apostles.

But let us learn of S. Peter himself whether there should be in the Church a
Prince among the Apostles or no. I exhort (says he, he does not say, I
command) the Elders that are among you; I that am an Elder with you (he does
not say above them) and a witness of the sufferings of Christ. Feed the flock
of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by constraint, but
willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither as being Lords
(mark, as being Lords) over Gods heritage: but being ensamples to the Flock,
1. Pet. 5. 1. 2. 3. S. Petertherefore did not believe that any Bishop should be
Prince among the Apostles, and have special lordship in the Church, as the
Pope and his disciples do suppose.

Upon the strife which arose twice among the Apostles about primacy, Christ
decided their controversy, saying unto them, Ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great, exercise
authority upon them; Bus it shall not be so among you,Mat. 20. 25. 26.

The word of God also in diverse places recommendeth humility unto us: to become
as little children, to be poor. Christ proposes himself for an example
thereof unto his Apostles: and will have his Apostles to be for an example unto
all the World. That the son of man (says he) is not come to be ministered unto,
but to minister, Mat. 18. 1. 2. 3. and chap. 20. 28.

When the Apostles were sent to preach, they were sent as fellows: the which
excludes superiority, Math. 10.

Moreover, Christ promises unto them, That they shall sit upon twelve Thrones,
Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, Luke 22. 30. But he gives not unto Peter
a more eminent place for to preside, than to the rest.

When the holy Ghost descended upon them, It was when they were all in one
place, and without any prerogative, Acts 2. 1. 4.

S. Paul says, That there is no difference between him and them who seemed to
be most eminent, Galat. 2. 6. He did not then acknowledge any of the Apostles
to be above him, as head of the Universal Church and Prince of the Apostles.

Again, he says, That the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed unto him,
as the Gospel of the Circumcision was unto Peter, Galat. 2. 7. Behold then,
they are equal in the labor and ministry of the Gospel.

The Apostles that were at Jerusalem, hearing that Samaria had received the
word of God: they sent them Peter and John, Acts 8. 14. Now, to be sent, shows
no superiority; but, at most, equality of them that sends and of him that is
sent. For the inferior never sends the superior. I do verily believe that
the Pope would not approve of them that should send him to preach in England.

S. Peter was rebuked by S. Paul, who withstood him to the face. The which he
does after such a manner, as he shows well enough that he did not esteem him
as head of the Church, nor Prince of the Apostles, Gal. 2. 11. 14.

It appears therefore by these places that S. Peter was not head of the
Universal Church, nor Prince of the Apostles. It remains now to see whether he
did exercise that place: and whether the rest of the Apostles have yielded him
the pre-eminence.

At the Council of Jerusalem, S. Peter propounded his opinion; but James,
Bishop of the same place made the conclusion as President thereof, Acts 15. 7.
13. 19. and the Letters were not dispatched in Peter's name, but in the name of
the whole Assembly: Nevertheless, this was the place where S. Peter should
have exercised this office of Head and Prince among the Apostles.

Item, He is accused by the Disciples for conversing with the Gentiles. He
makes his defense and excuse, Act. 11. He was then accountable to his brethren
for what he did.

In sum, He calls himself a fellow Elder with the Elders of the Church,
and exhorts them lovingly as his equals, 1. Pet. 5. 1. Therefore he did not
think himself Head and Prince amongst them.

But let us hear a pleasant objection which the Popes disciples do make for to
prove that S. Peter was Head and Prince of the Apostles. S. Peter, say they, is
the first named in the Scripture. He was the first whose feet Christ did wash;
The first that spoke at the Council of Jerusalem; The first after Christ to
whom the Angels did speak: all which prerogatives do show, that he was Head
and Prince of the Apostles.

This Argument deserves not an answer. For if the first-named in the holy
Scriptures, is for that cause the superior: the last named shall be the least
and the abjectest. Now, if that be true: Christ and Peter shall sit in the
lowest rank in the Church. For Christ himself is postposed to S. Peter by S.
Paul. Now, this I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ, 1. Cor. 1. 12. S. John also names
Peter the last; Philip, says he, was of Bethsaida the City of Andrew and
Peter, John 1. 44. S. Paul also places S. James before; James, Cephas, and
John who seemed to be pillars, Galat. 2. 9. Therefore this is but a mere
foppery, brought in a desperate cause for lack of better reasons. S. Peter
might be among the Apostles, the first in age or in zeal, or in eloquence, or
in virtue and miracles; but not at all in principality and superiority of
jurisdiction.

Moreover, they allege again, That Christ said to Peter, Thou art Peter, and
upon this rock will I build my Church. Therefore, say they Peter was
established the head and foundation of the Church.

I answer, That Christ did not build upon the person of Peter, but upon
himself, and upon the confession of Faith which Peter had made: and therefore
this conclusion, That S. Peter is head and foundation of the Church is false.
For other foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, says S. Paul, 1. Cor.
3. 11. But this foundation which is laid is Christ Jesus: Therefore no man can
lay any other foundation than Christ Jesus.

Again, Christ has plainly distinguished Peter from the Rock, that is, Simon
Peter from the living Rock upon which is builded the Church. For he says not
super te Petrum, but Super hanc petram, that is to say, upon this Rock, and
not upon thee Peter.

Moreover, let every one judge whether it is more convenient the Church should
be grounded upon Peter than upon Christ: upon the Son of the living God whom
Peter had confessed: or upon Peter, who presently after denied the Son of the
living God: upon him who has vanquished Satan, or upon him whom Christ calls
Satan. Mat. 16. 23. Upon him who is called the chief corner stone; or upon him
who was a scandal, that is to say, a stumbling stone.

Again, the Popes Disciples allege that Christ said thrice to (...) my sheep.
But there is gr^^^ difference betwixt feeding Christ's sheep, and to be
Universal Head of the Church, and Prince of the Apostles. Christ says not to
him, feed my sheep universally or soveraignly: the same commission of feeding
the sheep is given to all the Apostles. The holy Ghost, says Saint Paul, has
established you Bishops, to feed the Church of God, whom he has purchased with
his own blood. Act. 20. 28. Feed the flock of Christ which is committed unto
you, says S. Peter. 1. Pet. 5. 21.

Christ speaks unto Peter only, and bids him three times feed his sheep,
because he had denied him thrice. Christ draws three confessions from him, to
remedy his threefold denying: at the end of which he is reestablished in the
office of a Pastor.

Therefore this being prooved, that Saint Peter was not head of the Church, nor
Prince of the Apostles: It follows that the Pope (who challenges it but as
his Successor) has intruded himself into that office, without any lawful
calling: and maintains himself therein by tyranny, doing and practicing that
which neither Christ nor Peter ever did or practiced.

1. For neither Christ nor Peter ever showed themselves in Pontificalibus,
crowned with three crowns: nor caused the Kings of the earth to kiss their
feet, as the Pope does at this day, having changed the Christian Religion into
Idolatry, superstition and false doctrines, contrary unto the Word of God.

2. Saint Peter never exalted himself above men and Angels, as the Pope does
in that he wills and commands all men to worship him; and the Angel refused
it, saying to John that would have worshipped him, See thou do it not, I am a
servant with thee, worship God. Apoc. 22. 9. Saint Peter likewise made
Cornelius the Centurion to arise, saying unto him, That he himself was a man.
Acts 10. 16.

3. Saint Peter never bragged that he had all power both in heaven and in
earth, as the Pope does. Item, he never gave away the kingdoms of the World,
nor (for that end) dispensed with any Subjects for their oath of allegiance.

4. Saint Peter never caused himself to be called God as the Pope does: Can.
satisf. distinct. 96. nor said that he was neither God nor man, but somewhat
betwixt the Divinity and the Humanity, as says the Gloss upon the
Clementines, and never made himself to be called most holy Father.

5. Saint Peter never styled himself the Spouse of the Church, The Prince of
the Apostles, the Universal Monarch, the Sovereign Pastor, the Lion of Juda,
the Savior of the Church, as the Pope does, Council of Lateran Session. 6.
Who in so doing, takes upon him those titles which belong only unto Christ.

6. The Council of Florence says, That the Pope may add to the Symbol of the
Apostles; which is as much in effect as to account and acknowledge him to be
God. For none but God alone can add to the Symbol, And make Articles of Faith
in his Church to bind the consciences of men.

Upon this objection, De Raconismaketh a pleasant answer to Peter du Moulin;
That which you produce (says he in his triumph of truth, page 127.) of the
Council of Florence, that the Pope may add to the Apostles Creed: avayleth
nothing. The meaning of it, is only that he may (whether in a Council or out
of a Council) establish Articles of Faith: But not that he will place them as
thirteenth, fourteenth, or fifteenth Articles of the Apostles Creed.

This Doctor being smitten on his visible head, was so amazed with the blow,
that he knew not what he wrote. Master du Moulin tells him that the Council of
Florence says, that the Pope may add to the Apostles Creed. Thereupon he
answers that the only meaning is, that the Pope may make Articles of Faith.
Is not that well answered? Doubtless, if the Pope may add to the Symbol, he
may make Articles of Faith. Therefore he should have proved first that the Pope
may add to the Creed, and then it had been time for him to tell that he may
make Articles of Faith. But who has told him that the only meaning is, that
the Pope may make Articles of Faith? What audaciousnesse is it in this Doctor
so to restrain and wrest the words of this Council, which says in express
terms that the Pope may add to the Creed?

Mark therefore that De Raconis does not say that the Pope may not add to the
Creed: but, that the Articles of faith which he may make, he will not place
them as thirteenth, fourteenth, or fifteenth Articles of the Creed. I answer,
it matters not: since the Pope will have whatsoever he says and decrees in
matters of Religion, to be received with like credit, authority and certainty,
as the Articles of the Creed.

Moreover, I deny that the Pope may add to the Creed, and make Articles of
Faith. And it is De Raconis part and the rest of the Doctors of the Roman
Church, to prove it by express texts of the Word of God, or by necessary
consequences drawn out of the same. For lack of which, I maintain that this
alone is sufficient to prove that the Pope is Antichrist, since he takes upon
him that power which belongs only to God, which is to be able to add to the
Creed, and make Articles of Faith to bind the consciences of men.

In a word, if the Pope be wholly contrary to our Lord Jesus Christ, both in
doctrine and in manners: It follows he is that Antichrist spoken of in the
Word of God; since to be Antichrist, is nothing else but to be contrary to
Christ, But the antecedent is true; I have proved it already here above as
touching the doctrine. It is as easy also to prove it touching manners.

1. First, our Lord Jesus Christ showed himself so humble, that although he
was King both of heaven and earth, yet would he not show himself to be such in
this World. He fled unto a Mountain when the Jews would have made him King.
John 6. 15. He says That his kingdom is not of this World. John 18. 30. But
the Pope exalts himself above the Emperor, and above al Kings and Princes of
the earth: Therefore he is contrary unto Christ in his manners.

2. Christ's mind did not run upon heaping up treasures on earth; but his
only care was to do the Will of God his Father. He testifies That the Foxes
have holes, and the birds of the air have nests: but he had not whereon to
rest his head. Mat. 8. 20. S. Peter also says, That he had neither Gold nor
Silver, Act. 3. 6. But all the Popes care is to gather up treasures and riches.
Therefore he is contrary unto Christ in his Manners.

3. Christ, willing to show himself a pattern of humility, washed the feet of
his Apostles, John 13. But the Pope will not be so officious; but on the
contrary, he makes others to kiss his feet devoutly, out of his pride.
Therefore, he is contrary unto Christ in his Manners.

4. Christ was Crowned with a Crown of Thorns: but it pleases his Holiness
to wear three Crowns that are not of the like matter.

5. Christ went into Cities and Towns, preaching, and showing the Doctrine of
Salvation, Luke 8. But the Pope dispenses with himself handsomely from that
labor.

6. Christ commands his Apostles to give for nothing that which they have
received for nothing, Mat. 10. 8. But the Pope is wiser than so, to give any of
his wares gratis.

7. Christ teaches us, That if any man will be his Disciple and follow him,
that he must take up his Cross, Mat. 10. that is, all manner of afflictions
and poverty; denying himself and his affections. But the Pope follows not
this precept: and by Consequent, cannot be put or placed into the number of
Christ's Disciples.

8. Christ forbids Fornication: and the Pope ordains it, in suffering public
Stews in Rome and other places, that bring him in great profit.

9. The Pope likewise shows himself contrary unto Christ in greatness and
Worldly pomp. It is an admirable thing to see him in his Pontificalibus,
crowned with three Crowns, or carried upon men's shoulders through the City of
Rome, attended with Suitzers and other guards, both a Horseback and a Foot;
and to see the people upon their knees worshipping him in the streets.

10. In a word, The Pope is absolutely contrary unto Christ, in magnificence of
apparel, garments, movables, Horses, and Officers; all which he has in great
number. Item, in meats, drinks, baths, unctions, corporal delights, pleasures,
Music, Plays, sports, and all Earthly contentments. Wherefore the Consequence
of my Argument is most true, and therefore none ought to doubt but thar he is
that Antichrist spoken of in the Word of God. Item, That that Congregation
which acknowledges him for its Head, is not the Church of Christ, but the
Synagogue of Antichrist, from which we ought to separate our selves, according
to Gods command, Apoc. 18. 4. and cleave to the Reformed Church, which is the
true Church, the only Pillar of Truth, out of which there is no Salvation.

Apoc. 14. 9. 10. If any man worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his
mark in his Forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the
wrath of God, which is powered out without mixture into the Cup of his
indignation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence
of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Tho. Wykes R. P. Episc. Land. Capell. Domest.




