J2R

DIEV ET MON DROIT

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

royal blazon or coat of arms
A PROCLAMATION Requiring all the Members of Parliament to wait on, and attend
His Majesty's High Commissioner at the Palace of Holy-rood-house, the 23. of
April, 1685.
Present in COUNCIL His Orace the Duke of Queensberry, etc. His MAJESTY'S High
COMMISSIONER.
The Lord High Chancellor. The Lord Archbishop of St. Andrews. The Lord
Archbishop of Glasgow. The Marquess of Athol, L. Privy Seal. The Lord Marquess
of Dowglass. The Earl of Errol. The Earl of Linlithgow, Lord Justice. General.
The Earl of Southesk. The Earl of Panmure. The Earl of Balcarras. The Earl of
Kintore. The Lord Livingston. The Lord Kinniaird. The L. President of the
Session. The L. Register. The L. Advocat. The L. Justice Clerk. The L. Castle
Hill. Drumelzier. Abbots-hall. Gos^foord.

James by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,Defender
of the Faith,
to Our Lion King at Arms, and his Brethren Heralds, Macers of Our Privy
Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms, Our Sheriffs in that part
conjunctly and severally, specially Constitute, Greeting:
Forasmuch, as We having by Our Royal Proclamation, dated at Our Court at
White Hall, the Sixteenth day of February last, upon diverse weighty
Considerations of great Importance to Our Service, and to the Peace and
Tranquillity of this our Ancient Kingdom: Thougt sit to call a Parliament, to
meet at Our City of Edinburgh upon (...) day of April, then next ensuing: And
which Diet of Meeting was thereafter by Our Royal Proclamation of the twentieth
and second of March last, Continued and Adjourned from the said Ninth, to the
twentieth and third day of the said Month of April Instant; and We being
resolved that all the Members of the said Parliament should according to their
Allegiance and Duty, attend and keep the said Meeting of Parliament, upon the
said twentieth third Instant, and upon that day by eight a Clock in the Morning
wait upon our High Commissioner, from Our Palace of Holy-rood house to Our
Parliament House, in his Riding up and down from, and to, Our said Palace, and
keep and attend the whole Diers and Meetings of Our said Parliament, during the
Sitting thereof. We therefore with the Advice of our Privy Council, Do hereby
Require and Command all the Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and all
Commissioners of Shires and Burrows, to wait upon, and attend Our High
Commissioner, tho said day of the Meeting of our Parliament, by eight a Clock
in the Morning Precisely, and to Ride according to their Ranks and Orders, from
our said Palace to Our Parliament House, and from thence down again to Our said
Palace; and to keep and attend all the Diets and Meetings of our said
Parliament, during the Sitting thereof; Certifying such as (without a Lawful
Excuse, timely represented and admitted by our High Commissioner) shall be
absent, they shall be liable unto, and incur the Pains and Penalties following,
contained in an Act of the first Session, of the first Parliament of Our
Dearest Brother, of ever Blessed Memory; Dated the thirteenth day of May, 1662.
viz: Each Archbishop, Bishop and Noble Man, the sum of twelve hundred Pounds
Scots: Each Commssioner of Shires the sum of six hundred Pounds Scots: And
each Commissioner of Burrows, the Sum of two hundred Pounds Scots, to be paid
to Our Cash-keeper, for Our Use: At whose Instance, all Execution necessary is
hereby ordered to pass for Payment thereof: Which Penalties conform to the said
Act of Parliament, are declared to be by and attour, and without Prejudice of
what other Censure Our Parliament shall think sit to inflict for fo high
Contempt and Neglect of Our Authority. And We further Declare, that such
Members of Our, Parliament as shall not accompany our High Commissioner on
Horseback decently with Foot-Mantles, from Our said Palace, to Our said
Parliament House, and from thence down again to Our said Palace, shall bo
reputed for Absents, and incur the same Pains and Penalties, as if they were
Absent, which are to be Inflicted and Exacted with all Rigor, conform to the
thirty fourth Act of the eleventh Parliament of Our Royal Grandfather King
James the Sixth of ever Blessed Memory. And further, Woe hereby Require and
Command all Persons who have recieved Commissions from our several Shires and
Burrows for being Members of our said Parliament, to enter and give in the same
to Our Clerk of Register, the day immediately preceding the said Sitting of
Our Parliament, betwixt ten and twelve a Clock in tho Forenoon, (or sooner) to
be by him considered and Marked, as they will answer the contrary oh their
Peril. And to the effect our pleasure in the Premises may be timeously known to
all Persons concerned, Our will is, and We Charge you strictly and command,
that in continent these our Letters seen, yo pass to tho Market Cross of
Edinburgh, and other Places needful, and there by open Proclamation, make
Publication of Our Pleasure in the Premises, that all Persons concerned may
have notice thereof, and give exact and peremtor Obedience thereto.

Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the fourteenth day of April, 1685. And of
Our Reign the first Year. Per actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON,
Cls. Sti., Concilii.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings most
Sacred Majesty, Ann DOM, 1685. And Reprinted at London, by George Croom, at the
Sign of the Blue Ball in Thames Street, over against Baynard's-Castle.


