PAPERS Given in to the HONORABLE COMMITTEE OF LORDS and COMMONS And Assembly
of Divines with the Commissioners of Scotland, FOR ACCOMMODATION. 1644.

By a SUB-COMMITTEE of Divines of the Assembly and Dissenting Brethren.

London, Printed Anno Dom. 1648.

An Order of the House of Commons for A Committee of Accommodation.
September. 13. 1644.
THat the Committee of Lords and Commons appointed to treat with the
Commissioners of Scotland, and the Committee of the Assembly, Do take into
consideration the differences of the opinions of the members of the Assembly in
point of Church Government, and to endeavor an union if it be possible: And in
case that cannot be done, to endeavor the finding out some way how far tender
consciences, who cannot in all things submit to the same Rule, which shall be
established, may be borne with according to the Word, and as may stand with the
public peace; That so the proceedings of the Assembly may not be so much
retarded.

This honorable Committee met according to the Order, September. 20. following
THe appointment of the Order Being, That the differences of opinions, of the
members of the Assembly, in point of Church Government be taken into
consideration. The honorable Committee appointed a SUB-COMMITTEE of six of the
Members of the Assembly. Mr, Marshall, Mr. Hearle, Master Vines, Dr. Temple,
Mr. Goodwin, and Mr. Nigh, (two of the dissenting brethren) To consider of the
differences of opinions in the Assembly, in point of Church Government: And to
bring in what might be matter for that grand Committee to consider of.

In pursuance of this, the said sub-Committee met, who styled themselves the
sub-Committee of AGREEMENTS. And after the Preface declaring their mutual
confidence to agree in one Confession of Faith, and in One Directory of
public worship, etc. They prepared several Propositions, concerning the
Government of particular Congregations, and Ordination, etc. Declaring how
far in practical principles they did agree therein, together with the
different practices, which each according to their principles, desired.

October 11. 1644. The honorable Committee met again, At which the
sub-Committee presented the Propositions they had prepared, declaring they had
further to bring in concerning Classes and Synods. And what might be the way of
accommodation for the dissenting brethren to enjoy Congregations amongst us,
according to their principles. All which (though they had met many days) was
not as then perfected.

Therefore the honorable Committee did remit back to the said sub-Committee
the Propositions then brought in, to be further explained, and as much, as
might to be perfected against the next meeting, adjourning that Committee
until Tuesday October 15.

When these Propositions that follow, were brought in by the sub-Committee, as
containing both a fuller explication, and the best way to accommodate their own
and their brethrens principles in a practique way (which was the end of that
honorable Committee) both for Congregations, and Synods, and the government
thereof.

October 15. 1644. The honorable Committee of Lords, Commons, Divines of the
Assembly, with the Scotch-Commissioners met. And these Propositions were read
by Master Vines who was the Chaire-man of that sub-Committee.

A Vote was past in the Committee to take them into consideration. But that
debate was not entered upon, because it was the earnest desire of some that the
Rule should first be made complete by the Assembly and the Houses.

And there was a Cessation put upon the honorable Committee herein, by the
honorable House of Commons until their further pleasure.

Let the Reader take notice, that in what particulars the dissenting brethren
do differ from the Propositions of the rest of the SUB-COMMITTEE, or do
express their desires a part from them, there is a differing Character put in
the Printing of them for the discerning thereof, and that in other things
wherein they express not any difference or further explanation, they agreed to
them.

The PROPOSITIONS were as follows.

At the Sub-Committee of Agreements.
IN confidence that we shall jointly agree in one Confession of Faith, and in
one Directory of the Public worship of God, with the help of a Preface, we
come according to our order to points of Government, and therein do agree as
follows.

1. That a particular congregation having such officers as the word of God
holds out, both for preaching and governing, is a Church that has power in all
Ecclesiastical affairs, which do only concern it self.

2. That these forementioned officers are to be so many in numb,er in every
such congregation, as that three or two at the least may agree together in
every act of government. By two at the least we mean preaching or governing
officers. But some of the Committee do hold that a preaching Presbyter should
concur in the sentence of excommunication and suspension.

3. That these officers have power in those things which are voted by the
Assembly to be due unto them, and in suspension and excommunication: Some of
the Committee meaning that the major part of the officers have power to do it,
the congregation not opposing it, in which case of opposition they hold fit
that the officers do suspend the act. Others of the Committee saying that the
Major part of the Officers have power to do it, if the Major part of the
Brethren do consent unto it by their Votes: so as the negative lies in the
major part, either of the Officers or Brethren.

And as for Ordination, we all ho^ld, that where there are two preaching
Presbyters at least, such a Presbytery may ordain their own Elders. But some
of the Committee do further say that where there are two ruling Elders at
least, they have power of ordaining Elders for that congregation, and in case
there be no Elders ( as at the first in Ecclesia constituenda) then the choice
of Elders, by the people, with approbation of the neighboring Ministers with
fasting and prayer, may suffice.

4. That the Elders of the congregation shall advise with the Classis in all
cases of Excommunication before they proceed to it, and the Classis has power
to hear and determine: yet so, as the power of the Congregation be not
concluded thereby in matter of Excommunication. But some of the Committee do
say that in whatsoever case they find difficult either in excommunication or in
any other administration of their power, they shall first advise with some
company or Classis of neighbor Ministers, as at the end of the four following
Propositions afterward.

5. For the associating of Churches, let there be in every County of this
Kingdom, a certain number of select, godly and able Ministers of the word,
within that County, to he are and determine the causes and differences in every
congregation within the same, and let there be a certain number of select
Church Governors assistant unto them: the first choice of these to be made by
the Parliament in such a way as they shall determine, and such number to have
power of election from time to time of any Minister or Church-governour into
any place among them, that is void by death or otherwise.

6. The Ministers and Ruling-governors, of every congregation within that
County so associated, shall have power to debate and vote in that meeting from
time to time in such cases as pertain to that particular congregation, except
such of them as are complained of, or are parties in question.

7. A certain number of the aforesaid Ministers, and Ruling-governours as do
dwell near together, in the same Deanery or division of that County, and who
may with convenience more frequently meet together, shall have power to hear
and determine the causes and differences within the several congregations of
that precinct.

8. Let National Assemblies of Ministers and others, be chosen from time to
time, according as shall be appointed by the Parliament, as the necessity of the
Churches affairs shall require.

To the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth, the whole Committee does ascent;
only some of them do desire that the effect of that which hereafter follows
may for explanation sake be inserted. viz. That the Elders and Brethren of each
Congregation in case they find any thing too hard for themselves or have any
controversy among themselves, may have liberty to advise with any of those
select Elders, and others in the Province jointly or apart, or with the Elders
of any other Churches, for the determining and composing the controversy or
resolving of that difficulty, and in case they cannot be satisfied, then to
have recourse also to the advice and help of that Classis unto which they
appertain, to solve and determine it.

9 That the members of particular congregations do cohabit and live together
within certain bounds and precincts of a parish under preaching and governing
Officers: unto which so far as it concerns the mere bounding of congregations
some of the Committee do desire that these provisions may be added.

1. That they may have liberty to dwell in another Parish if the consent of the
Minister of that other parish be procured. 2. For Country villages that the
limits be extended to take in from some one parish immediately adjoining.
We having weighed our Brethrens Principles, do find no probability of
accommodation for them, ordinarily to enjoy congregations, unless when it
shall happen in a parish that the Minister cannot administer the Sacraments to
all in the Parish, whom possibly the neighbor Ministers or the Classis may
judge fit to be admitted; such persons shall have power to procure to
themselves the Sacraments, either by the help of a neighbor Minister, or some
other provision be made by a proportionable allowance out of the Tithes of the
parish according to the wisdom of the State.

Whereunto our Brethren add as follows.
Or otherwise if in a parish it happen that there be a considerable number of
such as cannot partake in the ordinances with the Minister and people there,
they shall have liberty to dispose of themselves as a distinct Church, and to
choose a Minister or Ministers at their own charge to be maintained, to be
their Pastor.

If such a liberty shall seem in the wisdom of this honorable Committee to
be prejudicial to the peace of the Church, as not to be permitted, we humbly
desire the doctrinall principles wherein we differ about Church Government may
be taken into serious confideration, and some other way of accommodation in
practice thought upon, as shall seem fit to this honorable Committee.

Concerning Classes and Synods.
1. At these meetings, let them pray, expound scripture, resolve difficult
cases of conscience and preach the word.

2. They may dogmatically declare what the will of Christ is in such cases as
are before them; And this judgment of theirs ought to be received with
reverence, and obligation, as from an ordinance of Christ. Some of the Brethren
(though assenting) yet are bold to add hereunto, that the judgment of any
other, of those Elders in the province, or elsewhere, advised with, they do in
like manner look at as the ordinance of Christ, and to have the like
obligation in them.

3. If the doctrine or practice of any particular congregation be erroneous,
hurtful or destructive to holiness or the peace of that or other
congregations, they are bound to give account thereof to the Classis or Synod.
Some of the Brethren add to this, That the ground of this obligation to give
account to the Classis or Synod is their being offended, or their Churches
scandalized thereat.

4. The Classis or Synod may examine, admonish, and in case of obstinacy
declare against that congregation or any particular member in it, as the nature
and degree of that offense shall require. Some of the Brethren assent to such
proceedings as toward a Church offending and scandalizing of them: but add,
That no such examination, admonition in any Classis or Assembly be extended to
any particular person in that Church, but unto the Church it self, for not
putting forth the power that Christ has given them for reforming him.

5. The Classis or Synod may judge touching any person who deserves
excommunication, and may charge the several congregationall Presbyteries whom
it concerns to do it.

6. We conceive that in case the particular Eldership refuse to do their duty,
the Classis, may and ought not only to withdraw communion from them, but also
when need is, exercise the sentence of excommunication themselves. Instead of
this sixth Proposition, some of the Brethren do insert this, In case the
aforesaid particular Churches and Elderships offending shall refuse to submit
to this course, that then the Classis or Synod are to acquaint their
congregations respectively, and so withdraw from them, denying Church Communion
and fellowship with them.

7. In case of appeal if it appear to the Classis that the sentence was
unjust, they may judge that the particular Presbytery ought to reverse it: and
in case they obstinately refuse to do it, the Classis may reverse it. Others of
the Brethren only say that they are to proceed as in the former Article.

8. The Classis or Synod have power to ordain Ministers for such congregations
as have not a sufficient presbytery in them, and let all congregations
associated, first advise with the Classis, and take their assistance before
they ordain a Minister. Some of the Brethren do refer themselves for this, to
the last clause in the third Proposition delivered in.


