A True RELATION Of the sad Passages, between the Two Armies in the West:

Showing the perfidious Breach of Articles, by the Kings Party:

Their horrid Cruelty, offered to the Lord Generals Soldiers in their March
from FOY:

As it is certified by several Letters, under the hands of Judicious Godly
men, Commanders in the Army; who were themselves Eyewitnesses, and patient
Sufferers in all these Cruelties herein Expressed.

Read and Judge.

Published by G. S.

Ierem. 34. 18, 19, 20. And I will give the men that have transgressed my
Covenant, which have not performed the words of the Covenant, which they had
made before me, when they cut the Calf in twain, and passed through the parts
thereof.

The Princes of Judah, and the Princes of Jerusalem; the Eunuchs, and the
Priests, and all the people that passed between the parts of the Calf.

I will give them unto the hands of their enemies, and into the hands of them
that seek their lives; and their dead bodies shall be for meat unto the Fowls
of the Heaven, and to the Beasts of the Earth, etc.

London, Printed according to Order for L. C. October. 2. 1644.

A true Relation of the sad Passages, between the two Armies in the West.
WHile the Lord General was quartered at Listithell in Cornwell, He drew out
his Army several times, attempting to give the Enemy battle, but the Enemy
refused, (So imbelbick have they always been, and would never fight but upon
great advantage) only they had daily Skirmishes by parties, about passages,
which the Enemy labored to take, to hinder all Provisions, for Horse and Foot,
from coming to His Excellencyes Army: In all which Skirmishes the Enemy had the
worse; till the Enemy at last grew numerous, and by advantage of inclosiers,
which was with sto^e walls, the Enemies Foot got very near His Excellencyes
quarters, which was great annoyance, and kept them to continual duty,
necessitated them to a narrower compass, and hindered provisions every way: So
that on Friday the 30. of August, His Excellency drew his Carriages to Foy; It
being concluded by a Counsel of War, that His Excellency, and the Lord
Roberts should go by Sea to Plymouth, and that the Horse should break their way
through the Kings quarters: Leaving all the Foot under the Command of Major
General Skippon: The Lords, (God be praised) came safe to Plymouth, and the
Horse safely past through the Enemies Army, with loss to the Enemy, more then
to themselves. The Plymouth Regiment of Horse only stayed with the Foot, who
were resolved to live and dye with them: These Horse with all the Foot, stood
upon their Guard, in hope some relief might come, or at least to make their own
conditions.

The Enemy having felt the Animosity of our Horse, in breaking through their
Army, had little heart to pursue them; but presently withal their force, fell
on our Foot, on every side, supposing them to be all at their mercy, but
resolved to show them no mercy at all, but to have swallowed them up wholly:
For by a Counsel of War they had resolved, to put every man to the Sword, and
give quarter to none: This was on Friday, the King was in Person in the Army;
Then to put a quick dispatch in execution, of their cruel resolutions, they
fell with all violence on our Foot, and at the first assault having taken about
30. they put them to the Sword, who asking quarter, they answered, God damme,
not a man of you shall have quarter.

This inhumanity of theirs, increased resolution and courage in our men, who
resolved to set their lives at a high rate, beyond what the Enemy durst bid, as
indeed they did, for after Major General Skippon had made a short Speech to
the Army, they threw up their Hats and gave a great shout, resolving
unanimously to fight it out to the last man, and to ask no quarter, and upon
the Enemies approach, they gave them many fiery Salutations, which much amazed
the Enemy, for by their great and small shot, sent with resolved courage, there
fell of the Enemy at least six for one, insomuch that the enemy made a stand,
and drew back, changing their resolutions of giving no quarter: and offered
quarter, which that Gallant Gentleman, Major General Skippon refused, except
he might have Honorable conditions: at last it was granted that he should
draw his own conditions, which he did, but not granted; yet after some debate,
there was a Treaty, and this was on Sunday, the first of September. The
Treators, for the Enemy was Prince Maurice, the Lord Forth, and the Lord Digby.
For Major General Skippon, was Colonel Wichcot, Colonel Barkley, and
Colonel Butler. That night they agreed to the Articles, which here I have set
down Verbatim, that the world may see their incongruent performance, by the
relations following.

The Articles are these.
FIrst, It is agreed, That all the Officers and Soldiers, as well of Horse and
Foot, under the Command of the Earl of Essex, being at the time of the
conclusion of this Treaty, on the West Side of the River Foy, shall to morrow,
being the Second of September, by Eleven of the clock in the morning, deliver
up in their quarters, near the old Castle, all their Cannon, and Train of
Artillery, withal Carriages, Necessaries, and Materials thereunto belonging,
and likewise all the Arms offensive, and defensive, both of Horse and Foot,
and all Powder, Bullet, Match, and Ammunition whatsoever, unto such Officers, as
the General of His Majesty's Artillery shall appoint, to receive the same,
except only the Swords and Pistols of all Officers, above the degree of
Corporals: who are by this agreement to wear and carry away the same.

Secondly, It is agreed, that immediately after the delivery up of the said
Artillery, Arms, and Ammunition, etc. That all the Officers and Soldiers, both
of Horse and Foot, of the said Army, shall maroh out of their quarters to
Listithiell, with their Colors both of Horse and Foot, Trumpets, and Drums,
and that all Officers above the degree of a Corporal, shall take with them
such Horses, and Servants, as properly belong to themselves, as also all
Reformadoes, their Horses, and Arms, not exceeding the number of Fifty, and
likewise to take with them all their Bag and Baggage, and Wagons, with their
Teemes of Horse, Properly belonging to the said Officers.

Thirdly, it is agreed, that they shall have a safe convoy of a 100. Horse,
from their quarters to Listithell, and from thence in their march the nearest
convenient way to Poole, and Warham: and that in their march they touch not at
any Garrison.

Fourthly, it is agreed, that in case they shall march from Pool, to any other
place by land, that neither they nor any of them shall bear Arms, more then is
allowed in this agreement: nor do any Hostile Act, until they come to
Southampton or Portsmouth.

Fifthly, it is agreed, that all sick and wounded Soldiers of this Army, who
are not able to march, shall be left at Foy, and there secured from any violence
to their persons, or goods: and care taken of them till such time as they can
be transported to Plymouth.

Sixthly, it is agreed, that all Officers, and Soldiers of that Army, for the
better convenience of their march, shall be permitted to receive all such moneys,
provisions of victuals, and other accommodations, as they shall be able to
procure from Plymouth; to which end they shall have a Pass granted to any
persons, not exceeding the number of twelve; whom they shall send for the same.

Seventhly, it is agreed, That there be no inviting of soldiers, but that such
as will come voluntarily to his Majesty's Service shall not be hindered.

According to these Articles, The Artillery, Carriages, Ammunition, Arms, etc.
Were delivered into the Kings possession: But how contrary to these Articles,
they dealt with us, these following Testimonies do testify.

SIr, I have writ twice to you before, but have not received on line from you;
which makes me think my Letters have miscarryed; what our Straits were, and
have been, I formerly writ in the extremity of our straits: After the Lord
General was gone by Sea to Plymouth, and our Horse made their way through the
Kings Army (of which I assure my self you have heard) the enemy made violent
assaults against us, greedily thirsting after our blood, as the ravening Beasts
after their prey; intending not to leave one of us alive: But God has in mercy
preserved us, and did wonderfully uphold the courage of our Soldiers, who were
resolute and valiant, resolving either to die like men, or to come off with
honor; insomuch, That after some showers of great and small shot, the heat of
the raging enemy was well cooled, and they willing to be shut of us, upon
reasonable terms; rather then to buy our blood at so dear a rate; and were
willing to accept of a Treaty: And after some time spent about the conditions,
on Sunday night the first of September, we were all agreed, and were to march
away with a safe Convoy the next day, with our Colors, and Drums, etc. but
with no Arms, except Officers: But then came our misery; For when we had laid
down our Arms, and came to march through the enemies Army, we were inhumanely
dealt with; abused, reviled, scorned, torn, kicked, pillaged, and many stripped of
all they had; quite contrary to the Articles: For presently, even in the
presence of the King, and of their General, they took away our cloakes, coats,
and hats, calumniating us by reproachful words, and threats, if we would not
desert the Parliament, and turn to the King; And after a day or two march, they
Stripped many of our Officers to their shirts, taking away their Boots, Shoes,
Hose, etc. notwithstanding Major General Skippon stoutly urged the Condition
several times, and with much wisdom behaved himself: nor was this the worst,
for they hindered us in all our march from provisions, and quarter, on purpose
to destroy us: and truly the Mercy and Providence of God was wonderful to us,
that we perished not in our march; I hope I shall have opportunity to see you
shortly, and shall then tell you something of my own particular usage and
loss, I pray, etc.

Southampton, the 19. of September. 1644. Your assured Friend, and Servant, R.
B.


This Letter was writ to a Gentleman of quality and worth, from his intimate
and faithful Friend: here follows another, writ to a Gentleman of Eminency in
the City, from a Captain of his acquaintance, who is known to be Discreet,
Honest, and Religious; a Sholler, and a Valient Soldier.

Most worthy Sir, My service to your self, and to, etc.
When my Lord General advanced into the West, He comm^nded our Regiment out
of Plymouth, amongst which I was one. We oftentimes skirmished with the Enemy,
and had ever the better, which presaged a Victory to us (as I conceived) if we
would fight. The first time, our Plymouth Horse (being but a handful) charged
a vast body of the Enemies horse, and put them all to flight: I cannot describe
in writing, what I saw that day act^d: I was my self present in that Charge;
It was wonderful to see the courageous hearts of our men, and the baseness of
the Enemy. This was the first skirmish of note; the rest I omit. The next of
any note, was the day my Lord General began to draw from ^istithiel toward
Foy: At that time both Horse and Foot skirmished, but especially the Foot; That
day, in the morning, we beat the Enemy back, for diverse fields; took three
Foot Colors, and one Horse Color, and diverse prisoners and men of note: I
that day got the Princes Colors in the field: The whole body of the Enemies
horse and foot, stood amazed at our Footmens resolution. All that day we
skirmished very hot, and the Enemy stuck very close on every side, plying us
continually with shot. The night coming on, the Enemy drew into diverse bodies
of Horse and Foot; but especially toward our Right and Left Wing, two vast
bodies of Horse appeared, their Foot concealing themselves as well as they
could; yet we plainly perceived, their intention was, that night to fall on, or
to give us a great Alarm; which they did to the purpose. The next night, my
Lord General, and the Lord Roberts, and Sir John Merrick took boat for
Plymouth: and, as it fell out, it was well they went, (I mean the Lord
General, and Lord Roberts) for without all question the Enemy would have
killed them. On Sunday we had a Parley, and it ended the same night: the
Articles agreed upon, I believe you have heard: but how they were violated, I
am sure you cannot know, except you had seen it. Sir, believe it, no tongue can
express the barbarous usage of our men by the Enemy: They stripped many
hundreds stark naked, wounded many, and pillaged most of their money, coats and
hats. This was on the Monday, September. 2. They made us, after we had laid down
our arms, to ma^ch through the Kings Army, where the Soldiers came upon us in
most barbarous manner, moyling our men in the dirt, and kicking them, pulling
all from them, doublets, hose, and shirts, leaving many stark naked. When we
came from the Kings Army to Listithiel, the poor Soldiers were assaulted with
more cruelty by the Townsmen and women of Listithiel, who stripped many men
stark naked, not leaving them any thing to cover their nakedness: And I saw
them strip a woman of our party, to her smock; she had lain in but three days
before: they took her by the hair of her head, and threw her into the River,
and there had almost drowned her: the woman dyed within twelve hours after.
Diverse other women and men were served in the like nature. Also, upon
Listithiel Bridge, there met three brethren, two were on the Kings party, and
one for the Parliament; The two laid hold on the other brothers throat; one of
them would have killed him; but the other was more merciful: yet they stripped
him, and beat him, and swore, If ever they caught him again, they would kill
him. It is not five sheets of paper will contain the Stories and Tragedies of
this kind. They so coursed and hurried our Soldiers, that many fell down
under their merciless hands; others, with excessive thirst, were forced to
drink water, worse then runs in the channels in London streets.

After we were past Listithiel, we marched something quietly, till night; and
then we were set upon as we marched, and diverse of our Captains were stripped
at that time, to the great terror of the Common Soldiers. We marched about
seven miles from Listithiel on Monday: that night we lay in the fields near to
a spring, which was some refreshing, having no other provision. This night they
stole away diverse of our horses; my horse was stolen that night, and I was
forct to foot it to Southampton.

On Tuesday morning we marched toward Horsebridge: when we came within two
miles of the Bridge, on the Down, we were stayed: they told us, we must not
march, till further order from the King; which much amazed us: Sir John Brown
commanded the Convoy; and General Major Skippon urged the Articles to him, and
pressed the unjustnesse of the action, in staying us: but within the space of
an hour, news came, we might march; We with much. willingness advanced; and
having gone about two miles farther, we were stoped again for the space of an
hour, by General Goring; yet we marched that night to Bren-farr, where we
scarce had the benefit of water; we lay in the open fields that night also, it
being a bitter Rainy night.

On Wednesday morning, we advanced toward Ockhampton, which Town we desired to
have to quarter in; when we came within a mile of the Town, news came to us, We
must advance no further, the Kings Force being before us in the Town: this
caused no small trouble; you might read discontent in every man's face, and
hunger in all: this being the third day they had marched without victual's The
Major General freely spoke his mind to the Convoy, entreating for us with
threats, rather then flatteries; and desiring to have quarter in the Town, at
last it was granted, and into the Town we came: they quartered in the Town, and
we quartered in the Town; but they stopped all manner of Provisions from our men:
the Soldiers lay this night in the field, but they lay near the Town; where
you might have heard, the saddest moans, and direful complaints for Bread,
that ever ear heard. That night a Penny Loaf would have been sold for half a
Crown, and many thanks besides: I my self offered twelve pence for three ounces
of Bread, at last I got about three ounces for six pence: I see some of the
Soldiers pay six pence for a piece of poor Cheese, not weighing three ounces;
and many of them pay the same rate for that proportion.

On the Thursday, we marched from Ockhampton, forth of London Road, that we
might avoid the Kings forces, which always lay in our way, on purpose to eat
up our Provisions from us: we came that night to a little Village; where we had
some accommodation for our selves and Soldiers: the next morning we advanced
toward Teverton, where we intended to quarter, and our Soldiers were
exceeding willing to go thither, expecting good quarter there; but when we came
within three miles of the Town, news came, we must not come near it, for the
Kings forces were there, which made us betake our selves to a little Village,
two miles on our l^ft hand; when we came to the Village, the Kings forces were
there also, which constrained our poor, wearied, and hungry Soldiers, to lie
in the hungry fields. In the next morning, we were to march toward Collington;
in the way, some of our Soldiers mistook their way, and went a mile from the
Army: many of which, were most miserably wounded; some were killed within a
little of Tiverton: and diverse men we never see since, and many that escaped,
came to us all blood, and wounded. After this we were pretty well rid of our
enemies, and our poor starved men began to gather courage. In all this trouble,
I observed Major General Skippon in his carriage: but never did I see any man
so patient, so humble, and so truly wise, and valiant in all his actions, as
he: his Lieutenant Colonel was stripped to his shirt, by a Sergeant Major of
the Kings. I bless God, though I lost all my Clothes, and other things, which
my man had in his custody; yet my self was untouched: I brought off my Pistols
and my Sword; it was Gods great goodness to me, for there was much inquiry
after me: they asked of my own Soldiers, which is E. H. they fearing some
evil, would not tell them. I thank God, I rescued some of our men out of the
Enemies hands: for they took me to be one of the Kings side. I give thanks to
God for all. Sir, I beseech you take not his for a full Relation, though it be
a true Relation, my self being an eyewitness to all that I write. This is but
the least part of what some others have seen, and felt: I am now ready to take
Boat for Plymouth, which is besieged: I am in extreme haste. I wish you may
make sense of my scribbling Lines: I desire your prayers, who am,

Sir, From Southampton, the 20. Sept. 1644. Your most humble servant, E. H.


The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel; much more cruel is their direful
wrath: but God will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: as they
have done to others, so shall it be done to them; as their Sword has made
women childlesse, so shall their mothers be childlesse ^^^ngst women. Joab shed
the blood of war, in peace, and put the blood of war upon his girdle, about his
loins; therefore Joabs Hoar-head must not go in peace to the Grave.

FINIS.

