Five Treatises, viz.

THE GOLDEN TREATISE, OF THE Ancient and Learned Father Vincentius Lirinensis.

THE VERITY OF CHRISTIAN FAITH.

THE FELICITY OF A CHRISTIAN LIFE.

Written by Hierome Savonarola.

THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING By Saint Augustine.

S. AVGVSTIN'S BOOK DE Cura pro Mortuis. *

PRINTED, Anno Dom. MDCLI.

THE GOLDEN TREATISE OF THE Ancient and Learned Father Vincentius Lirinensis.

Written about twelve hundred years since.

FOR The Antiquity, and Universality of the Catholic Religion: against the
profane Novelties of all Heresies.

Translated into English by A. P.

Very profitable for all such as desire in these dangerous times, to embrace
the true Gospel of Jesus Christ, and to remain free from all infection of false
doctrine, as in the Preface more at large is declared. *

Printed, Anno Dom. 1651.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader zealous of Truth, and desirous of Salvation: A. P.
wishes the knowledge of the one in this life, and the fruition of the other in
the life to come.
I PRESENT thee here (gentle Reader) the ancient Father Vincentius Lirinensis,
Native indeed of France but clothed in an English habit: a Book though little,
yet learned, and no less profitable then pleasant: of small volume, if thou
respect the quantity, but of rare price if thou consider the quality. The
Discourse is not of gathering and scraping together the pelf of this world,
which choaketh the heavenly seed of Gods word, and puts man in a dangerous
state, if we credit him who being rich, for our sake became poor: Mat 13.22.
and 19.24. it disputes not of attire, nor of the art of pampering this
corruptible carcass, which brought that gay belli-god, of whom we read in the
Gospel, Luc. 16. to the furious flames and endless torments of Hell fire: it
prosecuteth not wicked and wanton discourses, which corrupt good manners, being
in very deed the bellows to kindle the coals of carnality, the nources of
unchaste thoughts, and the very bait with which the Devil does daily angle and
catch the unfortunate souls of men: But it handles that which redoundeth to
the benefit of our soul, created to the image of God, and shows us the way
how we may so govern this frail vessel of ours, in the tempestuous Sea of this
wicked world, that at last we may safely arrive at the port and harbor of
Celestial happiness, For if the first step to heaven be to believe aright,
and the foundation and ground of all salvation be faith, as I think no man can
doubt, that believes that there is any God or truth at all, then cannot this
golden Treatise but be acceptable to all such as love Jesus Christ, and tender
the salvation of their souls, being as it were the heavenly pillar of fire that
may guide us through the desert of this world, unto the land of promise, Exodus
13. and that glittering star to lead us unto the new born King of the Jews and
Savior of mankind. Mat. 2. But to the end that thou may more plainly and
particularly view the excellency and great necessity of this rare book, and as
it were with Moses, from the top of Mount Nebo, contemplate the land of Canaan,
flowing with Milk and Honey, Deuteronomy. 34. I will briefly set down such motives as
invited me to the labor of translating it; for the self same, as I verily
think, cannot but in flame thee to the diligent reading of it also. Three
principal reasons then especially moved me. The first was, because it is very
ancient, being written above eleven hundred years past, for it was composed
three years after the general Council of Ephesus, as appears in the
conclusion of the book. And as the Author himself is of great antiquity, so is
his doctrine more ancient, being the self same which flourished in his time,
and came from the Apostles of Christ: which thing as it was never of any good
man doubted of, so it is also most apparent: First, by sound reason, grounded
in Gods word; because when any man writes ought concerning faith and religion,
and the same is not controld of any of that time, it is an evident argument,
that it was consonant to the doctrine then generally taught and received;
otherwise those Prestours and Doctors which God (as S. Paul says) has given,
that we he not little ones, wavering and carried about with every blast of
doctrine, Ephesians. 4. could never have held their peace, but would, as the
Prophet admonishes, Have cried out, exalted their voice like a trumpet, Esa.
58. as we find in like case, the licentious Nicholai^s noted by S. Jo^^ for
their false doctrine: Apoc. 2. Himoneus and Philetus reproved by S. PAVL. for
an error about the resurrection. 2. Tim. 2. Secondly, because the author
himself does not only confess the same, in serting down the answer of many
excellent, holy, and learned men, which lived in his days; not only because he
acknowledges that what he has here written, he received it from his
ancestors, and forefathers, both which he does is the very first entrance, and
generally throughout the whole book: but especially for that toward the later
end he so highly commends the general Council of Ephesus, that is, the
Parliament of the world: which surely he never would have done, had he not
joined with them in opinion, concerning faith and religion; and what their
opinion was himself records, for he says that those Fathers, inspired by
God, decreed that nothing was to be believed, but that which the sacred
antiquity of out forefathers agreeing together is Christ, had holden and
believed. Which surely is a notable argument, that what faith was by Christ
planted, and his Disciples preached, was by them carefully kept and maintained:
which thing is especially of us Englishmen to be noted, because the first four
General Counsels, amongst which this of Ephesus is one, and the third in
order, are worthily allowed by act of Parliament. Anno 1. Eliz. Wherefore moved
with such reasons, we may without all scruple or doubt, not only read this
book, but also embrace and entertain it, as the common doctrine of that time,
as the religion practiced and reverenced in the primitive Church as the faith
and belief of the Ephesine Council and so consequently, as the true doctrine
of Jesus Christ. Now then seeing we live in those days in which so many new
sects and doctrines, such strange and monstrous opinions, such superstitious
and newfangled devises fly up and down the world, and seeing we are fallen
into the later times in which Men shall heap up to themselves masters according
to their own desires, and shall not endure sound doctrine, but avert their ears
from truth, and be converted to fables: 2 Timothy 4. In which they shall love
pleasures more then God, have a show of godliness but yet denying the virtue
thereof: 2 Timothy 3. In which many scoffers shall come, walking according to their
own desires whodevide themselves, sensual, not having the spirit. In which
many false Christ's, and many false Prophets shall arise and seduct many: Very
necessary it is being thus forewarned of God, that before all things we take
great heed not to be perverted, and seduced by erroneous teache^s, or false
Prophets, but on the contrary do diligently preserve our faith, the light of
our souls, the root and foundation of al goodness, and with our which it is
impossible to please God as S. Paul says. Wherein we can take no better course,
no way more sure, then to repair to the time of the primitive Church, when the
blood of Christ was yet fresh bleeding in men's hearts, when the Gospel was
instantly preached, firmly believed, sincerely practiced, confirmed by
miracles, established by the death of so many Martyrs; especially being
exhorted hereunto by the holy scriptures: for as by them we are admonished of
the dangers and troubles of the later days, so are we for a preservative
against them, sent to ancient times to conduct us to Gods true religion. Stand,
says the Prophet leremy Chap. 6. upon the way and inquire of the ancient
paths, which is a good way and walk in that, and you shall find rest for your
selves. Solomon likewise in his Proverbs admonishes us in this sort: Do not
pass the ancient bounds which thy Fathers have set down: Chap. 22. And in
Ecclesiasticus. Chapter 8. Do not set light by the report of thy elders for they
have learned of their forefathers, because of them shall thou learn
understanding, and in the time of necessity shall thou give answer. To the end
therefore (gentle Reader) that thou be not carried away with the sweet
benedictions of those licentious masters, with which the later times, according
to the predictions of the Apostles, should be much pestered, nor seduced with
the erroneous doctrine of those false Prophets, and false Christ's, of which the
son of God, the true Prophet and true Christ, has forewarned us; and that thou
may find out a good way to walk in, and keep thee within the ancient bounds
set down by our forefathers, and by their report learn wisdom and
understanding: I am to request thee to vouchsafe the reading of this old Father
newly translated, and I nothing doubt but thou will give that censure which the
Queen of Sheba gave of the wisdom of Solomon, 3. Reg 10.

The second reason which set me forward was, for that I find this book not
written against some one or a few particular false teachers (as St. Augustine
and diverse ancient learned Doctors did against the Arians, Pelagians, and such
like) but against all heresy, or erroneous doctrine whatsoever; which is a
thing of so great importance, as I know not what can be devised more. What gold
were too much, or what treasures too dear for that medicine which had virtue to
cure all diseases? False doctrine and heresy is a great sore, a canker more
pestilent then any corporal infirmity whatsoever, seeing this works only
the temporal destruction of our body, but that causes death both of body and
soul everlasting. In other books we find the confutation of some special point
of false doctrine; in many the overthrow of diverse; but to destroy all at one
blow, and those each so contrary to themselves, so distinct for time, so diverse
for place, so many for number, is a property peculiar only to this most
excellent treatise: and therefore it may fitly be compared to that miraculous
pond, whereof we read in the Gospel, John. 5. which cured all diseases: for as
that water, moved by the Angel, cured whatsoever infirmity of him that first
entered in: so this book written, no doubt, by the motion of the holy Ghost,
has force to cure any such as is corrupted with erroneous doctrine, or to
preserve him from all infection, if he vouchsafe to enter in, that is to read
it, to consider, and weigh diligently what is said, and discoursed of. The
reason why this book has this rare quality, in my opinion is, because it
shows the right way of expounding. Gods divine Scripture in which so many to
the great danger of men's souls, do so greatly go a stray: and therefore as
David overthrowing Golias the chief Champion of the camp, put all the
Philistines to flight, 1 Reg. 17. so no marvel, though this ancient Author
discovering the false expositions and glosses of sacred Scripture, the
principal pillar of all poisoned doctrine, overthrows also all wicked
heresy.

The third and last motive which encouraged me to this labor, and ought partly
to move thee to the reading is the brevity of the work, the finenesse of the
method, the eloquence of the style: and therefore if long and large volumes do
little please, this is short which cannot cause dislike; if confusion be
ingrate full, a methodicall order can not but like thee; if a style harsh and
course fitteth not thy taste, then I trust that which is fine, pleasant and
delicate, will content thy humor. Only I am to crave pardon, that my rough
and rude English, nothing answers his smooth and curious Latin. And therefore
I could wish thee, if skill serves rather to consult with the author himself,
then to use the help of his rude interpreter; otherwise for such as be not of
so deep reading, for whom especially I have taken this pain, I am to desire
that they nothing dislike the sovereign medicine for the wooden box, nor the
exquisite and rare gemme for the course casket.

These be the reasons (Gentle Reader) which especially moved me to the
translating of this ancient and learned Father: I beseech thee as thou
tenderest the salvation of thy soul, that thou would vouchsafe to read him
attentively, in whom thou shall see clearly as in a glass the faith of our
forefathers, the religion of the primitive Church, and in whom thou shall find
by Gods word and authority of sacred Scripture, the madness of all Heretics
crushed in pieces, and that in a short, methodicall, and eloquent Treatise. The
Holy Ghost which moved, no doubt, this ancient learned Father to the writing of
this Work, incline and move thy heart to the diligent reading, and sincere
following of the same. *

An Advertisement in the reading of the XIII. Chapter of the Verity of
Christian Faith.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, that wheresoever in this treatise the
term Adoration is applied unto the Mother of God, or to any other person or
thing beside God himself, it imports only Dulia that is such an inferior
degree of reverence and veneration as creatures may be capable of according to
the several degrees of excellency which is in them, and according at the Word
is frequently understood in Holy Scripture, viz. Gen 23:7. 12. 18:2. 19:1.
50:18. Acts. 10:25. Dan. 2:46. Matthew. 2:2.8.1 Chron. 29:20. Exodus 3:15. 33. 10.
Jos. 5:14. 15. Apoc. 19:10. 22:9. and not to signify that supreme Honor and
estimation, which is incommunicable, and proper only to God Almighty, and
commonly called from S. Austin Latria.

Errata's in the Profit of Believing.
In the Preface, Page 3. line 23. read thus, S. Augustine, who (as D. Field
lib. 3. de Eccles. fol. 170. asserteth) was etc. p. 6. l. 9. for dear r.
desire. p. 12 l. 20. r. pure offering.

In the Book, p. 13. l. 15. for when r. whom. p. 50. l. 11. for one r. or. p.
82. l. 24. r. adorning. p. 85. l. 10. for reserve r. refer. p. 89. l. 16. r.
probable. p. 98. l. 7. r. retractations. p. 124. l. 14. r. virtue and power. p.
125. l. 6. for divens r. diverse. p. 127. l. 11. r. bosom. p. 128. l. 20. for
the r. them. p. 130. l. 9. r. too. p. 133. l. 9. leave out a.

This Golden Treatise is fitly divided into five Parts.
From the begnining to the fifth Chapter the Author delivers a general and a
regular way to discern the true Faith from heresy, by Universality and
Antiquity, and satisfies the objections to the contrary.

From the fifth to the eleventh he treats of the causes why God suffers
heresies, where he brings in the fall of Origin and Tertullian, and of some
heretics, Photinus, Apollinaris, and Nestorius, and sets down their heresies
and the Catholic doctrine opposite unto them.

From the eleventh to the fifteenth he shows the duty of atrne Catholic in
keeping the depositum of faith, and carefully avoiding all Novelties.

From the fifteenth to the Recapitulation he treats of the subtilty of
heretics in alleging the Scriptures.

The Recapitulation conteins the substance of the former discourse.

Vincentius Lirinensis FOR The Antiquity and Universality of the Catholic
Faith against the profane Novelties of all Heresies.
THe holy Scripture of God saying and warning us in this sort: Ask thy Fathers
and they shall tell thee, thy elders and they shall report unto thee. And
again, Accommodate thy ears to the words of wise men. Likewise, My son forget
not these speeches but let thy heart keep my words, Deuteronomy. 52. Prove. 22. and 3.

It seems unto me a stranger of this world and the least of Gods servants,
that it shall by his gracious help be a matter of no small profit to set down
in writing what I have of holy Fathers faithfully received, being a thing very
necessary for mine own infirmity, having always thereby in readiness, how by
daily reading thereof I may help my weak memory. Unto which labor not only
the profit to be reaped by the work, but also the very consideration of the
time, and opportunity of the place moved and invited me: the time, because
reason it is, that seeing it consumes and bereaueth us of all humane and
earthly things, we should also take out of it something which may avail us to
life everlasting: especially seeing the terrible judgment of God, which we
expect drawing near upon us, does seriously inuit and provoke us to increase
our studies and exercises in religion, and the fraudulent dealing of new
Heretics requires much care and attention. The place because having forsaken
the company and troubled of the world and chosen a solitary Abbey in a little
town for mine abiding, where I may without any great distraction of mind put in
practice that which is sung in the Psalm 45. Be vacant and see that I am God.
With which reasons also accords the purposed end and resolution of my whole
state of life, in that I have by the help of Christ, after long and diverse
storms induced in the watres showded my self in the harbor of a religious
life (a secure port for all states of men) where contemning the blasts of
varity and pride, I may pacify God with the sacrifice of humility, and so
escape not only the shipwreck of this present life, but also the fire of the
next.

But now in the name of God will I set upon that, which I have taken in hand,
that is, to set down i^ writing such things as our forefather have delivered
and committed to our charge, using herein rather the fidelity of a reporter,
then the presumption of an author, meaning yet to keep this rule in my writing
not copiously to lay forth all, but briefly to handle each necessary points
neither that in fine and exact words, but in easy and common speech, in such
sort that most things may seem rather touched then declared. Let them write
delicately and pen curiously, which trust ^^ either upon wit, or moved with
respect of duty, enterprise any (...) action, but for me it is sufficient, the
for helping my memory or rather forgetfulness I have gathered (...) there this
Commonitory, which ^^ withstanding by Gods grace I (...) daily endeavor by
little and little (calling to mind such things as in times past I have learned)
to correct and make more perfect. And this have I thought good to forewarn,
that if happily this work of mine passing forth, fall into the hands of
Censurers they do not over hastily reprehend in it that which they understand
present promise to undertake with future correction better to polish and mend.

CAHP. I.
INquiring therefore often with great desire, and at^^^ion, of very many
excellent, holy and learned men, how and by what means I might assuredly and as
it were by some general and ordinary way discern the true Catholic faith,
from false and wicked Heresy. To this question I had usually this answer of
them all, that whether I or any other desired to find out the fraud of
Heretics, daily springing up, and to escape their snares, and willingly would
continue safe and sound in religion, that he ought two manner of ways by Gods
assistance to defend and preserve his faith, that is first by the authority of
the law of God: secondly by the tradition of the Catholic Church.

Here some man perhaps may ask, that seeing the Canon of the scripture is
perfect and most abundantly of it self sufficient for all things, what need we
join unto it the authority of the Church her understanding and interpretation?
The reason is this, because the scripture being of it self so deep and
profound, all men do not understand it in one and the same sense, but diverse
men diversely this man and that man, this way and that way expound and interpret
the sayings thereof, so that to ones thinking, so many men, so many opinions
almost may be gathered out of them, for Novatus expounds it one way, Photinus
another, Sabellius after this sort, Donatus after that: Arius, Eunomius,
Macedonius will have this exposition: Appolinarius and Priscillian will have
that: Iovinian, Pelagius, Colestius, gather this sense: and to conclude
Nestorius finds out that: and therefore necessary it is for the avoiding of so
great windings and turnings of diverse errors that the line of expounding the
Prophets and Aposties, be directed and drawn, according to the rule of the
ecclesiastical and Catholic sense.

Again in the Catholic Church, we are greatly to consider, that we hold that,
which has been believed every where, always, and of all men: for that is
truly and properly Catholic (as the very force and nature of the word does
declare, which comprehends all things that be truly universal) and that
shall we do if we follow universality, antiquity, consent. Uniuersalitie
shall we follow thus, if we profess that one faith to be true which the Church
throughout the world acknowledges and confesses. Antiquity shall we follow,
if we disagree not any whit in opinion from them, whom all know that our holy
Elders and Fathers reverenced, and had in great estimation. Consent shall we
likewise follow, if amongst our forefathers we hold the definitions and
opinions of all or almost of all the Priests and Doctors together.

CHAP. II.
WHat then shall a Christian Catholic do, if some small part of the Church cut
it self off from the communion of the Universal Faith? What else but prefetre
the health of the whole body before the pestiferous and corrupt member? What if
some new infection goes about to corrupt not only a little part, but the
whole Church? Then likewise shall he regard, and be sure to cleave unto
antiquity, which cannot possibly be seduced by any crafty noveltie. What if in
Antiquity it self, and amongst the Ancient Fathers, be found some error of two
or three men; or happily of some one City or Province? Then shall he diligently
take heed that he prefer the decrees and determinations of the Universal
Ancient Church, before the temerity or folly of a few. What if some such case
happen where no such thing can be found? Then shall he labor, by conferring
and laying together amongst them selves the ancient Fathers opinions, not of
all, but of those only which living at diverse times, and sundry places, yet
remaining in the communion and faith of one Catholic Church, were approved
masters and guides to be followed: and whatsoever he perceives, not one or
two, but all jointly with one consent, plainly, usually, constantly, to have
holden, written, and taught, let him know that without all scruple or doubt he
ought to believe, hold, and profess that faith, that doctrine, that religion.
But for more perspicuity and light of that which has been said: each part is
to be made clear with several examples, and somewhat more at large to be
amplified, least too much brevity breed obscurity, and overmuch have in speech
take away the substance and weight of the matter.

When in the time of Donatus, of whom came the Donatists, a great part of
Africa fell headlong into his furious error, and unmindfull of her name,
religion, and profession, preferred the sacrilegious terrietity of one man,
before the Church of Christ; then all those of Afriek which detested that
profane Schism and united themselves to the universal Churches of the world,
they only amongst them all remaining with in the bosom of the Catholic
Church could be saved, leaving certainly a notable example to their posterity
how ever after by good custom the sound doctrine of all men, ought to be
preferred before the madness of one or a few. Likewise when the heresy of the
Arians had near corrupted not a little part, but well nigh the whole world, in
such sort that (almost all the Bishops of the latin Church deceived, partly by
force, partly by fraud) men's minds were covered as it were with a mist, what
especially in so great a confusion was to be followed: then whosoever was a
lover and a follower of Christ, and preferred ancient faith before new error,
was not touched with any spot of that infection. The danger of which time does
abundantly show, what calamity enters in, when a new doctrine is admitted. For
at that time not only small matters, but things of great importance were
overthrown: for not only alliance, kindred, friends, families, but also
cities, commonwealths, countries, Provinces, yea and at length the whole Roman
Empire, was snaken and overturned. For when the profane novelty of the Arians,
like some Bellona or sury, had first taken captive the Emperor, afterward
subduing all palaces to her new laws never ceased after that to trouble and
confound all things private and public, holy and not holy, putting no
difference betwixt good and truth but as it were from an high place did strike
all at her pleasure. Then married women were defiled, widows spoiled, virgins
violated, Abbeys suppressed, Clergymen vexed, Deacons beaten, Priests
banished, Dungeons, Prisons, Mines, filled with holy men, of which the greater
part banished the City, like exiles, pined and consumed away amongst deserts,
dens, and wild beasts, with nakedness, thirst and hunger. And all this misery
had it any other beginning? but because humane superstition was admitted for
heavenly doctrine, well grounded antiquity subverted by wicked novelty, whilst
our Superiors decrees were violated, our Fathers ordinances broken, the Canons
of our ancestors abrogated, and whilst the licentious liberty of profane
and new curiofitie, kept not it self within the chaste limits of sacred and
sound antiquity. But perhaps we devise all this of hatred to Noveltie, and
affection to Antiquity? Who so thinks, at least let him give credit to
blessed Ambrose who in his second book to Gratian the Emperor bewailing the
sharp persecution of that time, says thus: But now O God (quoth he) we have
sufficiently washed and purged with our ruin and blood, the death of the
Confessors, the banishment of Priests, and the wickedness of so great impiety,
it has manifestly appeared that they cannot be safe which have violated and
forsaken their faith. Likewise in his third book of the same work. Let us
therefore (quoth he) keep the precepts of our elders, and not with temerity of
rude presumption, violate those seals descending to us by inheritance. None
durst open that prophetical book close sealed, not the elders, not the powers,
not the Angels, not the Archangells: to explicate and interpret that book was
a prerogative only reserved to Christ. The Preistlike book sealed by the
Confessors and consecrated with the death of many Martirs, which of us dare
presume to open? which book such as were compelled to unseale notwithstanding
afterward when the fraud was condemned, they sealed again, they which durst not
violate or touch it became Martirs: how can we deny their faith, whose victory
we so praise and commend? We commend them I say, O venerable Ambrose, we surely
commend them, and with praises admire them. For who is so senseless, that
although he cannot arrive to their perfection, desires not yet to imitate,
whom no force could them remove from defending their aunce^ours faith: not
threatenings not flatterings, not life, not death, not the King, not the
Emperor, not men, not Devils; those I say whom for maintenance of religious
antiquity, our Lord vouchsased of so high, and so great a grace, that by them
he would repair the overthrowen Churches, give life to the dead spirituality,
restore the overthrown glory of Priests, blot out and wash away with a
fountain of heavenly tears (which God put into the hearts of the Bishops)
those wicked, not books, but blottes and blurres, of new impiety, finally to
restore almost the whole world (shaken with the cruel tempest of upstart
heresy) to the ancient faith, from new error, to old sobernes, from new
madness, to ancient light, from new darkness. But in this divine virtue which
they showed in the confession of their faith this thing is especially of us to
be noted, that in that antiquity of the Church they took upon them not the
defense of any one part, but of the whole. For it was not lawful that such
excellent and famous men, should maintain and defend with so great might and
maine the erroneous suspicions, and those contrary each to other, of one or two
men; or should stand in contention for the temerarious conspiracy of some
small Province, but they did choose by following the Canons and decrees of the
Catholic and Apostolic verity of all the Priests of holy Church, rather to
betray them selves, then the universal ancient faith. For which fact of theirs
they merited so great glory that they are accounted not only Confessors but
also justly and worthily the Princes of all Confessors. Great therefore and
surely divine was the example of these blessed Confessors and of every true
Catholic continually to be remembered who like the seven branched Candlestick,
shining with the sevenfold gifts of the holy Ghost, delivered unto all
posterity a most notable example; how afterward in each foolish and vain
error, the boldness of profane noveltie was to be repressed with authority of
sacred Antiquity.

CHAP. III.
NEither is this any new thing, but always usual in the Church of God, that
the more religious a man has been the more ready has he always resisted
novell inventions, examples whereof many might be brought, but for brevity sake
I will only make choice of some one which shall be taken from the Apostolic
sea, by which all men may see most plainly with what force always, what zeal,
what endeavor the blessed succession of the blessed Apostles have desended the
integrity of that religion which they once received. Therefore in times past
Agrippinus of venerable memory Bishop of Cart hage, the first of all mortal
men maintained this assertion against the divine Scripture, against the rule of
the universal Church, against the mind of all the Priests of his time, against
the custom and tradition of his forefathers, that rebaptization was to be
admitted and put in practice. Which presumption of his procured so great
damage and hurt to the Church, that not only it gave all heretics a pattern
of sacrilege, but also ministered occasion of error to some Catholics. When
therefore every where all men exclaimed against the novelty of the doctrine,
and all priests in all places, each one according to his zeal did oppose, then
Pope Steven of blessed memory, bishop of the Apostolic sea, resisted in deed
with the rest of his fellow bishops, but yet more then the rest, thinking it as
I suppose, reason so much to excel all other in devotion toward the faith, as
he was superior to them in authority of place. To conclude in his Epistle
which then was sent to Africa, he decreed the same in these words. That nothing
was to be innovated, but that which came by tradition ought to be observed. For
that holy and prudent man knew well, that the nature of piety could admit
nothing else but only to deliver and teach our children that religion and that
faith which we received and learned of our forefathers, and that we ought to
follow religion whither it does lead us, and not to lead religion whither it
please us, and that nothing is more proper to Christian modesty and gravitie,
then not to leave unto posterity our own inventions, but to preserve and keep
that which our Predecessors left us. What therefore was then the end of that
whole business? What else but that, which is common and usual, to wit,
antiquity was retained, noveltie exploded. But perhaps that new invention
lacked patrons and defenders? To which I say on the contrary, that it had such
pregnant wits, such eloquent tongues, such number of defendants, such show of
truth such testimonies of scripture, but (...) after a new and naughty
fashion, that all that conspiracy and schism should have seemed unto me
invincible, had not the very profession of noveltie it self, so taken in hand,
under that name defended, with that title recommended, overthrowen the very
ground of so great a schism. To conolude, what force had the Council or
decree of Afric? By Gods providence none, but all things there agreed upon
were abolished, disanulled, abrogated, as dreams, as fables, as superfluous.
And O strange change of the world, the authors of that opinion are judged and
thought Catholics, the followers accounted and reputed Heretics, the masters
discharged, the scholars condemned, the writers of those books shall be
children of the kingdom of Heaven, the maintainers of those books shall burn
in Hell. For who doubts but holy S. Cyprian, that light of all Saints, that
lantern of Bishops, and spectacle of Martirs, with the rest of his companions
shall reign with Christ for ever? And contrariwise who is so wicked to deny
that the Donatists and such other pestilent Heretics, which by the authority
of that Council vaunt that they do practice rebaptization, shall burn for ever
with the Devil and his Angels. Which judgment in mine opinion seems to have
come from God, for their fraudulent dealing especially, which endeavoring
under the cloak of an other man's name cunningly to frame an heresy, commonly
lay hold of some dark sayings of one ancient Father or other, which by reason
of the obscurity may seem to make for their opinion, to the end they may be
thought, that whatsoever I know not what they bring forth to the world, neither
to have been the first that so taught, neither alone of that opinion: whose
wicked device in mine opinion is worthy of double hatred, both for that they
fear not to sow their poisoned feed of herefie amongst others, and also
because they blemish the memory of some holy man, and as it were with profane
hands cast his dead ashes into the wind, bringing with shame that to light,
which rather with silence were to be buried, following therein the steps of
their father Cham, who not only neglected to cover the nakedness of venerable
Noe, but also showed it to others to laugh at, by which fact of his he incurred
so great a crime of impiety that his posterity was subject to the malediction
of his sin: Genesis 9. his blessed brethren doing far otherwise, who neither
with their own eyes would violate the nakedness of their reverend father, nor
yet permit it to remain uncovered for others to behold, but going backward as
the holy text says, they covered him: which is as much as to say that they
neither approved with heart, nor blazed with tongue the holy man's fault, and
therefore they and their posterity were rewarded with their fathers blessing.
But to return to our purpose.

CHAP. IIII.
WE have therefore much to fear the sacrilege of a changed faith, of a
violated religion: from which fault not only the discipline of the
ecclesiastical decree does restrain us, but the authority also of the
Apostles censure deterreth. For all men know how gravely, how severely, how
seriously the blessed Apostle S. Paul inveigheth against certain which with
great levitie. Gal. 1. Were so soon transferred from him that called the^ into
the grace of Christ unto another Gospel, which is not another. 2 Timothy 4. That
had heaped up to them solves masters according to their own desires, averting
their ears from truth, being converted to fables: Having damnation because they
have made void their first faith. 1 Timothy 5. Whom those men had deceaved of whom
the same Apostle, in his epistle to the Romans thus writes. I beseech you
brethren to mark them that make dissentions and scanda^ls contrary to the
doctrine which you have learned and avoid them, for such do not serve Christ
our Lord but their own bolly: And by sweet speeches and benedictions seduce the
hearts of Innocents. Romans 16. That enter into houses and lead captive silly
women laden with sins, which are led away with diverse desires, always
learning and never attaining to the knowledge of truth. 2 Timothy 3. Vain speakers
and seducers who subvert whole houses teaching the things they ought not for
filthy lucre: Tit. 1. Men corrupt in their mind; reprobates concerning the
faith: 2 Timothy 3. Proud, and knowing nothing but languishing about questions and
strife of words, that are deprived of the truth, that esteem gain to be
piety: 1 Timothy 6. 1 Timothy 5. And with all idle they learn to go from house to
house, not only idle, but also full of words and curious; speaking things which
they ought not: 1 Timothy 1. Which repelling a good conscience have made sh^pwrak
about the faith: Whose profane speeches do much grow to impiety, and their
speech spreads as a cancre. But that is also worth the noting which is
written of them. But they shall prosper no further, for their folly shall be
manifest to all as theirs also was. 2 Timothy 2. 2 Timothy 3, When therefore such
kind of men wandering up and down through Provinces and Cities to set their
errors to sale, came also unto the Galathians, who after they had heard them
and were delighted with the filthy drugs of heretical Novelty, casting up
again the heavenly Manna of the Apostolic and Catholic doctrine; The
Apolstle used his authority decreeing very severely in this sort. But although
(quoth he) we or an Angel from heaven evangelize unto you beside that which we
have evangelized be he Anathema. Gal. 1.

What means this that he says But although we, why did he not rather say
But although I? That is to say, although Peter, although Andrew, although John,
yea finally although the whole company of the Apostles evangelize unto you
otherwise then we have evangelized, be he accursed. A terrible censure, for
maintaining the possession of the first faith, not to have spared himself, nor
any other of the Apostles. But this is a small matter: Although an Angel from
heaven (quoth he) Evangelize unto you beside that which I have Evangelized be
he Anathema: he was not contented for keeping the faith once planted to make
mention of man's weak nature unless also he included those excellent creatures,
the Angels. Although we (quoth he) or an Angel from heaven, not because the
holy Angels of Heaven can now sin but this is the meaning of that he says:
Although (quoth he) that might be which cannot be, whosoever he be that goes
about to change the faith which was once planted, be he accursed. But
peradventure he uttered those words slightly and cast them forth rather of
humane affection then decreed them by any reason grounded in Gods word. God
forbid: For it follows, and that very earnestly urged, very often repeated.

As I have foretold you (quoth he) and now again I tell you If any body
evangelize unto you beside that which you have received be he Anathema. He said
not if any man preach unto you beside that which you have received let him be
blessed, let him be commended, let him be received, but Anathema, that is,
separated, thrust out, excommunicated, least the c^uell infection of one sheep
with his poisoned company corrupt the sound flock of Christ. But peradventure
this was given in commandment only to the Galathians: then likewise were these
precepts following commanded only to the Galathians, to wit. If we live in the
spirit, in the spirit also let us walk, let us not be made desirous of vain
glory, provoking one an other, envying one another, Gal. 5. and such like which
if it be absurd to say, and no man doubts but that they were indifferently
commanded to all, then certain it is, that as these precepts touching manners
include all, so likewise those concerning faith and doctrine, except none. And
therefore as it is not lawful for any to provoke one another, to envy one
another, even so it is unlawful for any to admit or to receave any other faith
or religion then that which the Catholic Church every where teaches; or
happily shall we be so mad to say that then it was commanded to curse and
anathematize him that preached any otherwise then before had been preached, and
that now it is not commanded, then was that likewise which is there said. But I
say walk in the spirit and you shall not fulfill the desires of the flesh, then
only commanded but now is not; which if it be impious and dangerous so to
believe, then of necessity it follows that as these precepts of life and
manners are to be kept of all ages, so likewise those set down against
innovating of religion and changing of faith, are commanded to all posterity,
wherefore to preach unto Christian Catholic men, besides that which they have
received never was lawful, no where is lawful, nor ever shall be lawful.

And on the contrary to say Anathema and curse those which teach otherwise
then once has been received, was at all times needful, is every where
convenient, and ever shall be requisite. Which being so, is there any man
either so bold that dare teach that, which in the Church has not been taught,
or of such levitie that will receive ought besides that which he has received
of the Church. Let that vessel of election, that master of the Gentiles, that
trump of the Apostles, that preacher of the world, he that was acquainted with
heavenly affairs, cry out, and again cry out in his Epistles, to all men, to
all times, to all places, that whosoever preaches a new doctrine is to be
accursed. And on the contrary part, let certain Frogs, corruptible Gnats and
Flies, such as the Pelagians be, reclaim and that to Catholics: We being your
Authors (quoth they) we being your Leaders, we being your Interpreters,
condemn that which before you did hold, hold that which before you condemned.
Cast away your old Faith, your Forefathers Laws, your Elders Constitutions, and
receive, what a Gods name? I tremble to speak, for they be so proud and
presumptuous, that as they cannot be maintained without sin, so neither
impugned without some blot of offense.

CHAP. V.
BUt some man will say, why then does God very often permit certain notable and
excellent men in the Church to preach unto Catholics a new Religion. A very
good question and such as deserves a more diligent and ample discourse, unto
which notwithstanding I will not answer out of mine own head, but with the
authority of sacred Scripture, and the doctrine of a notable Master in Gods
Church: let us then hear holy Moses, let him give us the reason, why learned
men, and such as for their great gift of knowledge are called of the Apostle
Prophets, be sometimes permitted to preach new Doctrine, which the old
Testament Allegorically calls strange gods, because their opinions are so
observed and honored of Heretics, as the gods were of the Gentiles: thus then
writes blessed Moses in Deuteron. 13. If there shall arise (quoth he) in the
midst of thee a Prophet, or one which says he has seen a dream, that is
some Master of the Church, whose Disciples or followers suppose to teach by
some revelation from God: what then? and shall foretell (quoth he) some sign or
miracle, and that shall happen which he has said: some great Master is here
surely meant, and one of so deep knowledge whom his followers imagine not only
to know things humane, but also to foresee future, and such as shall happen,
which is far above man's reach, as the scholars for the most part of
Valentinus, Donatus, Photinus, Apollinaris, and such like did brag that their
masters were. What follows? And shall (quoth he) say unto thee let us go and
follow strange Gods, which thou know not, and let us serve them. What is
meant by strange Gods, but foreign errors, which thou know not, that is new
and never heard of before, and let us serve them, that is believe them, follow
them. What then? Thou shall not (quoth he) hear the words of that Prophet or
Dreamer. And why I pray you, is not that forbidden by God to be taught, which
is by God forbidden to be heard? Because (quoth he) the Lord your God does
tempt you, that it may appear whether you love him or no, in your whole heart,
and in your whole soul. The reason then is more clear then day, why the
providence of God does sometime suffer certain teachers and masters of the
Church to Preach certain new opinions that your Lord God (quoth he) may tempt
you. And surely a great tentation it is, when as he whom you think a Prophet, a
diseiple of the Prophets, whom you esteem a Doctor and maintainer of the
truth, whom you have highly reverenced, and most entirely loved, when he
suddenly and privily brings in pernicious errors which neither you can
quickly spy lead away with prejudice of your old teacher nor easily condemn,
hindered with love to your old master.

CHAP. VI.
HEre some man happily does earnestly desire to see that proved by some
Ecclesiastical examples which by the authority of Moses has already been
avouched. The demand is reasonable, and therefore of reason not long to be
deferred. Wherefore to begin with those which are yet fresh in memory, and to
the world best known. What kind of tentation think you was that of late days,
when that ungracious and cursed Nestorius suddenly from a sheep transformed
into a wolf, began to devour the flock of Christ, at such time as those which
were spoiled, commonly took him for a sheep, and therefore were more subject to
his cruelty. For who would have easily imagined him to have erred, whom every
man knew to have been chosen with such judgment of the Empire, who was so
highly in grace with the Clergy, so much beloved of all holy men, so greatly in
favor with the people, who openly expounded the Scriptures, and also confuted
the pestiferous error of the Jews: why could not this man, by such means
easily persuade any, that he taught aright, preached aright, believed aright,
who to smooth the way, and make entrance for his own heresy, persecuted and
preached against the blasphemies of all others. But this was that which Moses
says: The Lord your God does tempt you, if you love him or no. And to pass
over Nestorius in whom was always more admiration then profit, more fame then
experience whom for some time humane favor had made greater, then Gods grace
exalted. Let us rather speak of them which endowed with many gifts and men of
great industry, have been no small tentation to Catholics, as amongst the
Pannonians, in our Fathers memory Photinus is recorded to have tempted the
Church of Sirminum, in which being preferred with the liking of all men unto
the dignity of Priesthood, for sometime he behaved himself very Catholickly but
suddenly like that naughty Prophet or Dreamer of whom Moses speaks, he began
to persuade the people of God committed to his charge, to follow other gods,
that is strange and unknown errors, which before they were not acquainted
with. But as this is usual, so that was very pernicious, that he had so great
helps and furtherance for the advancing of so great wickedness: For he was
both of an excellent wit, and singularly well learned, and passing eloquent, as
he which both in disputation and writing was copious and grave, in either
language, as appears by the Books which he wrote, partly in Greek, and partly
in the Latin tongue. But it happened well that Christ's sheep committed to his
charge very vigilant and careful in keeping the Catholic faith, did speedily
remember Moses warning, and therefore albeit they admired much the eloquence of
their Prophet and Pastor: yet were they not ignorant of the temptation. And
therefore whom before they followed as the chief leader of the flock, the same
very man afterward they avoided as a ravening wolf. Neither do we learn only
by Photinus but also by the example of Apollinaris the danger of this
ecclesiastical tentation, and thereby also be admonished diligently to keep and
retain our faith and religion. For this Apollinaris procured his auditors
great trouble and anguish of mind, whilst the authority of the Church drew
them one way and the acquaintance of their master haled them another, so that
wavering and tottering betwixt both, they were uncertain whether part was best
to be followed. But happily he was such a one as easily deserved to be contemned.
Nay he was so famous and worthy a man, that in very many things he vvon
credit to fast. For who surpassed him in sharpnes of wit? in exercise, in
learning? how many heresies in many and great books has he overthrown? how
many errors against the faith has he confuted? That most notable and great
work of thirty books in which with great weight of reason he confounded, the
frantic cavills of Porphirius does give credit to my report, and testify the
truth of my relation. It were too long to rehearse up all his works for which
he might have been compared to the chief pillours of Gods Church, had not the
profane licentiousness of heretical curiosity, by inventing I know not what
new opinion spotted and discredited all his former labors, whereby his
doctrine was accounted not so much an edification, as an ecclesiastical
tentation.

CHAP. VII.
HEre some man perhaps requires to know what heresies these men above named
taught: that is Nestorius, Appollinaris, and Photinus. This pertains not to
the matter, whereof we now entreat, for it is not our purpose to dispute
against each man's particular error, but only by a few examples plainly and
clearly to prove, that to be most true which Moses says, that if at any time
any ecclesiastical doctor, yea and a Prophet for interpreting the mysteries
of the prophetical visions, goes about to bring in any new opinion into the
Church, that the providence of God does permit it for our proof and trial.
But because it will be profitable, I will by a little digression briefly set
down what the forenamed heretics Photinus, Apollinaris, and Nestorius taught.
This then is the heresy of Photinus, he affirms that God is as the Jews
believe singular and solitary, denying the fullness of the Trinity, not
beleving that there is any person of the word of God, or of the holy ghost; he
affirms also, that Christ was only man, who had his beginning of the virgin
MARY, teaching very earnestly that we ought to worship only the person of God
the father, and to honor Christ only for man. This then was Photinus opinion.
now Apollinaris vaunteth much as though he beleved the unity of Trinity with
full and sound faith but yet blasphemeth he manifestly against our Lords
incarnation. For he says that our Savior either had not man's soul at all, or
at least such a one, as was neither endued with mind or reason; furthermore he
affirms that Christ's body was not taken of the flesh of the holy virgin MARY,
but descended from heaven into the womb of the Virgin, holding yet doubtfully
and inconstantly some time that it was coeternall to the word of God, some time
that it was made of the divinity of the word: for he would not admit two manner
of substances in Christ, the one divine, the other humane, the one of his
Father, the other of his Mother, but did think that the very nature of the
word was divided into two parts, as though the one remained in God, and the
other was turned into flesh, that whereas the truth says, that Christ is one
consisting of two substances, he contrary to the truth affirms, of the one
divinity of Christ to be two substances: and these be the assertions of
Apollinaris. But Nestorius sick of a contrary disease whilst he faineth a
distinction of two substances in Christ, suddenly brings in two persons: and
with monstrous wickedness, will needs have two sons of God, two Christ's one
that was God, and another that was man, one begotten of the Father, another
begotten of his Mother. And therefore he says that the holy Virgin MARY is
not to be called the mother of God, but the mother of Christ, because, that
Christ which was borne of her was not God but man. And if any man think that in
his books he says there was one Christ and that he preached one person of
Christ, I must needs confess that he lacks not ground to say so, for that he
did either of crafty policy, the rather to deceave, that by some good
things, he might the more easily persuade that which is evil, as the Apostle
says. By the good thing he has wrought me death. R. 7. Wherefore either
craftily as I said in certain places of his writings he vaunteth to believe
one person in Christ, or else surely he did hold, that after our Ladies
deliverie, two persons became in such sort one Christ that yet in the time of
our Ladies conception or deliverie, and for some time after, there were two
Christ's, and that Christ was born first like unto another man, and only was man
and not yet joined in unity with the person of God the word, and that
afterward the person of the word descended down assuming and joining him self
to that man in unity of person, and although he now remain in glory
assumpted for some time yet there seems to have been no difference betwixt
him and other men. Thus then Nestorius, Apollinaris, Phatinus, like mad dogs
barked against the Catholic Church: Photinus not confessing the Trinity:
Apollinaris maintaining the nature of the Word convertible, and not confessing
two substances in Christ, denying also either the whole soul of Christ, or at
least that it was endued with mind and reason, believing for his pleasure what
he liked of the second person in Trinity: Nestorius by defending either
always or for some time two Christ's. But the Catholic Church believing aright
both of God and of our Savior, neither blasphemeth against the mystery of the
Trinity, nor against the incarnation of Christ, for it worshipeth one
Divinity in Trinity and reverenceth the equality of the Trinity in one and
the same majesty, confessing one Christ, not two, and the self same both God
and man, believing in him one person, yet acknowledging two substances, but yet
believing one person: two substances, because the word of God is not mutable
that it can be turned into flesh: one person, least professing two sons, it
may seem to worship a quaternitie and not to adore the Trinity.

CHAP. VIII.
BUt it is worth the labor to declare this matter more plainly, more
substantially, more distinctly. In God is one substance and three persons; in
Christ be two substances, but one person. In the Trinity there is another, and
another; but not another and another thing: In our Savior is not another, and
another, but another and another thing. How is there in the Trinity another
and another, but not another and another thing? Marry because there is another
person of the father, another of the son, and another of the holy ghost: But
yet not another and another nature, but one and the self same: How is there in
our Savior another and another thing, not another and another? because there
is another substance of the divinity, and another substance of the humanity,
but yet the deity and the humanity is not another and another, but one and
the self same Christ, one and the same son of God, and one and the self
same person, of the self same Christ and son of God. As in a man the body is
one thing, and the soul is another thing, but yet the body and the soul are
but one and the self same man. In Peter and Paul the soul is one thing, the
body is another thing, and yet the body and the soul are not two Peter's, nor
the soul is not one Paul, and the body another Paul, but one and the self
same Peter, one and the self same Paul, subsisting of a double and diverse
nature of the body and the soul. So therefore in one and the self same Christ
there are two substances, but one a divine substance, the other humane, the one
of God the Father, the other of the Virgin his Mother, the one coeternall and
equal to the Father, the other substantial to his Mother, yet one and the
same Christ in both substances. Therefore there is not one Christ God, another
Christ man, not one increated, another created, not one impassible, another
passible, not one equal to the Father, another less then the Father, not one
of the father, another of the mother, but one and the self same Christ, God
and man, the same increated and created, the same incommutable and impassible,
the same changed and suffered, the same equal and inferior to the Father, the
same begotten of his Father before all times, the same conceived of his Mother
in time, perfect God and perfect man; in him as God is perfect Divinity, in
him as man is perfect humanity: perfect humanity I say, because it had both
soul and body, yet a true body, such as our body is, and such as his mothers
was; and a soul endued with understanding, with mind and reason. There is
therefore in Christ, the Word, the Soul, the Flesh, but yet all these together
is one Christ, one son of God, our only Savior and Redeemer: One I say, not
by any I know not what corruptible confusion, of the divinity and humanity
together, but by a certain perfect, and singular unity of person: for that
conjunction did not change or convert either into other (which is the proper
error of the Arians) but did rather so unite both in one, that as the
singularity of one and the same person remains always in Christ, so likewise
the properties of both natures do for ever continue; so that neither God ever
begins to be a body, nor now at any time cease to be a body; which thing
is also more apparent by some humane example: for not only in this world, but
also in the next every man shall consist of body and soul, and yet never shall
either the body be changed into the soul, or the soul ever converted into the
body; but as every man shall live for ever, so for ever of necessity in each
man the difference of either substance shall continue: So likewise in Christ
each property of either substance shall continue for ever, saving always and
reserving the unity of person. And when we often name this word Person, and say
that the Son of God was made man, we must take great heed that we seem not
to say that God, the Word, the second person in Trinity took upon him our
actions only in imitation, and and rather in show and shadow, and not as a
perfect and very man practiced humane conversation: as we see used in Theaters
and Stages, where one man in a little time takes upon him many parts, of which
notwithstanding himself is none; for as often as we counterfeit another man's
actions, we so exercise his office, that yet we be not those men whose actions
we take upon us; for neither a tragedy player (to use profane examples and
such as the Maniches allege) when he plays the Priest or King, is therefore
a priest or king, for so soon as the tragedy ends, that person also which he
played forthwith cease. God keep us from this horrible and wicked mockery.
Let this madness be proper to the Maniches, which preaching abroad their own
fantasies, affirm God the son of God not to have been substantively the
person of man, but to have fained the same by supposed action and conversation.
But the Catholic faith affirms that the word of God was so made man, that he
took upon him our nature and the proprieties belonging to the same, not
deceitfully and in show, but truly and verily, and did such things as belong
to man, as his own, and not as one that imitated other men's actions, and was
verily that which in life and conversation he did show himself to be, as we
our selves also, in that we speak, understand and subsist, do not counterfeit
our selves to be men, but are verily men. For neither Paul and John (to speak
of them especially for example sake) were men by imitation, but by subsistence,
neither likewise did Paul counterfeit the Apostle or feign himself Paul, but
was in verity an Apostle and was Paul by subsistence. In like manner God the
Word, by assuming and having flesh, in speaking, doing and suffering, in flesh,
yet without any corruption of his nature, vouchsafed perfectly to perform
this, to wit not that he should imitate or counterfeit, but exhibit himself a
perfect man, not that he should seem or be thought a very man, but should in
verity so be and subsist. Therefore as the soul joined to the flesh; and yet
not turned into the flesh, does not imitate a man, but is a man, and not a man
in show and appearance, but in substance: so God the Word without any
conversion of himself, uniting himself to man, was made man, not by confusion,
not by mutation, but by subsisting. Let that exposition therefore of a fained
and counterfeit person utterly be rejected, in which always one thing is in
show, another in deed, inweh. he that does ought, is never the same person whom
he represents: for God forbid, that we should believe that God the Word took
upon him the person of man, after such a deceitful manner; but rather in this
sort, That his substance remaining incommutable in it self, and yet taking upon
him the nature of perfect man, was himself flesh, was himself a man, was
himself the person of a man not deceitfully but truly, not in imitation, but in
truth and substance; not finally after that sort which with action should
desist, but after that manner which perfectly in substance should persist. This
unity therefore of person in Christ was not framed, and finished after the
Virgins delivery, but in her very womb. For we must diligently take heed that
we confess Christ not only one, but also to have been always one, because it
is an intolerable blasphemy to grant him now to be one, and yet contend that
once he was not one, but two, that is one after the time of his Baptism, but
two in the time of his Nativitie; which great sacrilege we cannot otherwise
avoid, but by confessing that man was united to God in unity of person, not in
his Ascension, not in his Resurrection, not in his Baptism, but in his mothers
womb, and immaculate conception: by reason of which Unity of Person, both the
Proprieties of God are indifferently and promiscually attributed to man, and
the proprieties of man ascribed to God: hence comes that which is written in
the Scripture, That the Son of man descended from Heaven, and the Lord of
Majesty was Crucified upon earth: Joan. 6. hence also it proceeds that we
say, that when our Lords flesh was made, when our Lords body was framed, that
the very Word of God was made, the very wisdom of God was replenished with
created knowledge, as in the foresight of God His hands and feet are said to be
dug, Psalm. 21. From this unity of Person, I say it proceeds, by reason of
like mystery, that when the flesh of the Word of God was born of his pure and
immaculate mother, we do most Catholickly believe that God himself the Word was
born of the Virgin, and most impiously the contrary is maintained. Which being
so, God forbid that any one should go about to deprive the holy Virgin Mary of
the privileges of Gods favor as her especial glory: For she is by the
singular grace of our Lord and God her son, to be confessed most truly and most
blessedly to have been the mother of God, but yet not in such sort, as impious
heretics imagine and suspect, who affirm, that she is to be reputed in name
only and appellation the mother of God, as she forsooth which brought forth
that man which afterward became God, as we say, such a woman is the mother of a
Priest or Bishop, not because she brought him that then was either Priest or
Bishop, but by generating that man which afterward was made a Priest or Bishop:
not in that manner I say the blessed Virgin is to be called the mother of God,
but rather, because, as has been said, that most holy mystery was finished in
her sacred womb, wherein by reason of a singular, and one only unity of
person, as the Word in flesh is flesh, so man in God is God.

CHAP. IX.
BUt now what has already been said touching the foresaid heresies, or
concerning the Catholic faith, let us in few words and compendiously for
memory sake repeat them over again, that thereby with more facility they may be
understood, and with greater certainty retained. Accursed therefore be
Photinus, not admitting the fullness of the Trinity, and affirming our Savior
Christ to have been only man. Accursed be Appollinaris, maintaining in Christ
corruption of changed divinity, and bereaving him of the propriety of perfect
humanity. Accursed be Nestorius, denying God to have been born of a Virgin,
teaching two Christ's, and so abandoning the faith of the Trinity, bringing in a
quaternity. But blessed be the Catholic Church which adoreth one God in
perfect Trinity, and likewise worshipeth equality of Trinity in one Divinity,
so that neither singularity of substance confounds propriety of Persons, nor
distinction of Trinity separateth unity of Deity. Blessed I say be the Church,
which believes in Christ two true and perfect substances, but one only
person, so that neither distinction of natures does divide the unity of person,
nor unity of person does confound the difference of substances. Blessed I say
be the Church, which, to the end she may confess Christ always to be and to
have been one, acknowledges man united to God, not after our Ladies delivery,
but even then in his mothers womb. Blessed I say be the Church, which
understands God made man, not by any conversion of nature, but by reason and
means of person, and that not a fained and transitory person, but substantially
subsisting and permanent. Blessed I say be the Church, which teaches that this
unity of person has so great force, that by reason thereof by a mystery
strange and ineffable, she ascribes unto man the proprieties of God, and
attributes to God the proprieties of man. For by reason of this unity of
person she confesses, that man as he was God, descended from Heaven; and God
as he was man, was made upon earth, suffered and was Crucified. Blessed
therefore is that venerable, happy, and sacred confession, and comparable to
those supernall praises of the Angels, who do glorify one only Lord God, yet
with a triple Hagiologie: For this is the principal reason why the Church
teaches the unity of Christ, lest otherwise she should exceed the mystery of
the Trinity.

And let this suffice touching this matter, spoken by way of digression:
hereafter if it please God, I will entreat and declare these points more
copiously. Now to return to our former purpose.

CHAP. X
WE have said in the premises, that in the Church of God, the error of the
master is a great tentation to the people; and the more learned he were that
erred, so much the greater was the tentation: Which we showed first by the
authority of holy Scripture, afterward by the examples ecclesiastical of those
men, which for some time were reputed and accounted sound in faith, yet at last
fell either into some other man's error, or else coined a new heresy of their
own: This surely is a great matter, profitable to be learned ^^d necessary to
be remembered; which once again we must inculcate and make plain by great store
of examples, that all Catholics may know, that with the Church they ought to
receive Doctors, and not with Doctors to forsake the faith of the Church. But
I suppose that, although I could bring forth many to show this kind of
tentation, yet there is almost none which can be compared to the tentation of
Origin, in whom were very many gifts, ^o rare, so singular, so strange, that in
the beginning any would have thought that his opinions might have been believed
of all men. For if life procures authority, he was a man of great industry of
great chastity, patience, and labor: if family or learning, who more noble?
being of that house which was honorable for Martyrdom, himself afterward for
Christ deprived not of father only, but also spoiled of all his patrimony, and
so much he profited in the mysteries of holy poverty, that as it is reported,
for the confession of Christ's name he often endured much affliction. Neither
was he only adorned with these gifts, all which afterward served for tentation,
but was endued also with a force of wit so profound, so quick, so elegant, that
he far excelled almost all other whatsoever. A man of such wonderful learning
and erudition, that there were few things in Divinity, in humane Philosophy,
happily nothing which he had not perfectly attained: who having gotten the
treasures of the Greek tongue, labored also about the Hebrew. And for his
eloquence what should I speak of it, whose talk was so pleasant, so delectable,
so sweet, that in mine opinion, not words but honey flwed from his mouth? What
things were so hard to believe which with force of argument he made not plain,
what so difficult to bring to pass, which he made not to seem easy? But
perchance he maintained his assertions by arguments only. Nay, without question
there was never any Doctor which used more examples of sacred scripture. But
yet happily he wrote not much. No man living more; yea so much that in mine
opinion all his works are so far from being read over, that they can not
possibly all be found; who not to lack any furtherance to learning, lived
also until he was passing old. But yet perchance unfortunate in his scholars.
What man ever more happy, having trained up and been master to infinite
Doctors, to Priests without number, to Confessors and Martyrs? Now who is
able to prosecute with words, in what admiration he was with all men? in what
glory? in what credit and grace? Who more zealous in religion repaired not to
him, from the furthest parts of the world? What Christian did not almost
worship him as a Prophet? What Philosopher did not honor him as a master? and
how greatly he was reverenced, not only of private men, but also of the Empire
it self, histories do speak, which report that he was sent for of Alexander
the Emperors mother, to wit, for the merit of his heavenly wisdom with the
grace and love whereof he was inflamed. His epistles also testify the same
thing, which with the authority of a Christian master he wrote unto Philip the
Emperor, the first Christian amongst all the Roman Princes. And if any man
upon our report admiteth not the testimony of a Christian touching his
wonderful knowledge, and learning, at least let him receive (...) confession
of an heathen Philopher. For that impious Porphyrie ^h, that himself being but
yet as were a boy, moved with his fame, ^vailed unto Alexandria where (...) did
see him being then old, but (...) such a one and so learned as he ^t had
attained to the perfection (...) all knowledge. Time would soon^^ fail me, then
I could touch though ^efly those notable gifts which ^^re in that man, all
which not^^thstanding pertained not only to (...) glory of Religion, but also
to (...) greatness of the temptation. For ^ho is he that would willingly ^^ve
forsaken a man of such wit, (...) so deep learning, of so rare grace, and would
not sooner have used ^^at saying, that he had rather err ^ith Origin then
believe aright ^^th others? And what should I ^^y more, the matter came to that
(...), that as the end showed, not an usual and common, but a pass^^ dangerous
tentation of so worthy man, so famous a Doctor, so no^ble a Prophet, earried
very man^ from the true and sound faith of th^^ Church: For this Origin so ra^^
and singular a man, abusing (...) grace of God, too insolently flatt^^ing
himself, too much in his ow^ wit, believing himself more the reason would,
little esteeming (...) old simplicity of Christian religion, presuming to be
wiser then another, contemning the traditions (...) the Church, and the old
Father documents, waded so far in expounding certain chapters of the Scriptu^^
after a new fashion, that he dese^ed that the Church of God shou^^ also say of
him: If there arise up the midst of thee a Prophet, a^^ a little after, thou
shall not h^^ (quoth he) the words of that Pr^phet, and again, because (quoth
h^ your Lord God does tempt you whether you love him or no. And surely it is
not only a tentation, but also a great tentation, when a man seduceth secretly
and by little and little the Church depending upon him (admiring his wit,
knowledge, eloquence, conversation, and grace, nothing suspecting him, nothing
fearing him) suddenly from the old religion to a profane and new doctrine. But
some will say that Origens books be corrupted: I will not gainsay it, but
rather wish it were so: for that has both been said and written by some, not
only Catholics, but also Heretics. But this is now the point we are to
consider, that although not he, yet the books passing abroad under his name are
a great tentation, which stuffed with many horrible blasphemies, are read and
used, loved, and liked, not as the books of others, but as his works: so that
although Origin gave no cause of erroneous doctrine, yet his authority has
been the occasion why the error has been liked and followed.

The case also of Tertullian is the very same with the former: for as Origin is
to be thought the best amongst the Greek Doctors, so Tertullian without
controversy is the chief of all the latin. For who was more learned then he?
Who in Divinity or Humanity more practiced? for by his great and wonderful
capacity of wit, he attained to, and understood all Philosophy, all the sects
of Philosophers, all their authors and patrons, all their learning, all sorts
of histories and studies. And for his wit, was he not so excellent, so grave,
so sharp, that he almost undertook the overthrow of nothing which either by
quicknes of wit or weight of reason he crushed not in pieces? Now who is able
to set down the commendation and praise which his style and phrase of speech
deserved, which was so fraught (I know not how) with that force of reason, that
such as could not be persuaded, were compelled: whose almost so many words,
were so many sentences so many senses, so many victories? This is well known to
Marcion and Appelles, well known to Praxeas, and Hermogenes, the Jews
understand this, the Gentiles have tried it, the Gnostics have proved it, and
diverse others have felt it: whose blasphemous opinions he has overthrown with
his many and great volumes, as it had been with thunder and lightning. And yet
this man after all this, this Tertullian I say, not holding the catholic
religion, that is the universal and old faith being far more eloquent then
faithful, changing afterward his mind, did at last that which the blessed
Confessor Hilarie in a certain place writes of him. He discredited (quoth
he) with his later error his probable writings; and therefore he was also a
great tentation in the Church. But hereof I will say no more, only this I add,
that by his defending against the precept of Moses, for true prophesies the new
madness of Montanus springing up in the Church, and those mad dreams of new
doctrine of that frantic woman, he deserved that we should also say of him and
his writings: If a Prophet shall rise up in the midst of thee, and straight
after, thou shall not hear the words of that Prophet. Why so? Because (quoth
he) your Lord God does tempt you whether you love him or no. We ought therefore
evidently to note by these so many, so great, and diverse others such weighty
examples, and by the law of Deuteronomie most clearly to understand that if at
any time any ecclesiastical teacher shayeth from the faith, that gods
providence does suffer that for our trial whether we love him or no in our
whole heart, and in our whole soul.

CHAP. XI.
WHich being so he is a true and perfect sincere Catholic that loves Gods
truth, that loves his body the Church that prefers nothing before the
religion of God, nothing before the Catholic faith, not any man's authority,
not love, not will, not eloquence, not philosophy; but contemning all these
things, settled in faith, stable and permanent, whatsoever he knows the
Catholic Church universally in old time to have holden, that he purposes with
himself only to hold and believe: and therefore whatsoever new doctrine, and
not before heard of such a one perceives to be brought in, of some one man,
beside or contrary to the old Saints and Doctors, let him know that doctrine
does not pertain to religion, but rather to tentation, for his proof and
trial, especially being instructed with the saying of the Apostle St. Paul:
For this is that which he writes in his first epistle to the Corinthians:
There must (quoth he) be heresies also that they which are approved may be made
manifest amongst you. As though he should say. This is the cause why the
authors of heresies are not straight rooted out by God, that the approved may
be made manifest, that is, every one may appear how steadfastly, faithfully and
constantly, he loves the Catholic faith. And certain it is that straigh:
upon the springing up of any Noveltie, the weighty corn is discerned from the
light chafe; then is that easily blown out of the floor which before lightly
remained in the floor; for some by and by fly away, others only shaken are
both afraid to perish, and ashamed to return remaining wounded, half dead,
half alive, like unto those which have drunk so much poison, as neither
kills, nor well digesteth, neither brings death nor yet permits to live.
O the miserable state of such persons! with what seas of cares, with what
storms are they tossed! for some time as the wind drives them, they are carried
away headlong into error, another time coming again to themselves, they are
shaken and beaten like contrary waves striving together, sometime with rash
presumption they allow such things as seem uncertain an (...) time of
pusillanimitie they fear those things which are certain, doubtful which way
to take, which way to return, what to desire, what to avoid, what to hold, what
to let go: which misery and affliction of a wavering and unsettled heart, were
they wise, is as a plaster of Gods mercy toward them. For this is the reason
why (being out of the safe port of the Catholic faith) they are shaken, tossed
and almost killed with storms and troubles to the end they should take down
the sails of their proud mind, which they vainly hoised up to the winds of
novelties, and so retire and keep themselves within the most sure port of their
calm and good mother; and first cast up those bitter and turbulent waters of
errors, that afterward they may drink of the flowing rivers of lively and pure
water. Let them learn to forget that well, which well they never learned, and
those articles which the Church teaches, and by reason are to be attained to,
let them in Gods name endeavor to understand, and those which surpass reason
let them by faith believe.

CHAP. XII.
WHich being so: often times calling to mind and remembering the self same
thing; I cannot sufficiently marvel at the great madness of some men, at so
great impiety of their blinded hearts, to conclude, at so great a licentious
desire to error, that they be not content with the rule of faith once
delivered us, and received from our ancestors but do every day search and seek
for new doctrine, ever desirous to add, to change, and to take away something
from Religion, as though that were not the doctrine of God, which was once
sufficiently revealed, but rather man's institution which cannot but by
continual correction (or rather corruption) come to perfection.

Whereas the divine scriptures cry out: Do not translate the bounds which thy
fathers have set down; and, Do not judge over thy judge; and, the Serpent will
bite him that cutteth the hedge; and that saying of the Apostle by which all
wicked novelties of all heretics have often been cut in pieces, as it were
with a spiritual sword, and always hereafter shall be: O Timothy keep the
depositum, avoiding the profane novelties of voices, and oppositions of falsely
called knowledge, which certain promising have erred about the faith. And yet
for all this, some there be so shameless, so impudent, so obstinate, as not to
yield to such force of divine scripture, not to be moved with such weight of
reason nor yet shaken with such heavenly hammers, to conclude, which will not
be beaten in pieces with such celestial lightning. Avoid (says he) the
profane novelties of voices. He says not avoid antiquities, he says not avoid
antientness; nay rather, shows what contrariwise should follow. For if
novelty is to be avoided, antiquity is to be retained; if novelty be profane,
antiquity is sacred. And oppositions (quoth he) of falsely called knowledge.
Verily the name of knowledge in the Schools of Heretics is false, where
ignorance is called knowledge; mist, reputed clearness; and darkness termed
by the name of light. Which certain (quoth he) promising have erred about the
faith. What promised they, when they erred about the faith? What else, but I
know not what new and unknown doctrine? For you may hear some of them say. O ye
unwise and silly souls, which commonly are called Catholics, come and learn
the true faith, which no creature understands besides us, which has been
hidden many hundred of years past, but of late has been revealed and laid
open: but learn it privily, learn it secretly, for it will delight you. And
again, when you have learned it, teach it secretly, that the world may not
understand it, that the Church may not know it; for it is granted to few to
understand the secret of so great a mystery. Are not these, think you, the
words of that Harlot, which in the Proverbs of Solomon calls unto her the
passengers: Who is (quoth she) most fool amongst you, let him turn unto me.
Proverbs 9. And such as be of small judgment, she exhorts, saying: Touch
willingly secret bread, and drink sweet water privily. What follows? But he
knows not (quoth he) how in her company earthly men do perish. Who be these
earthly men? Let the Apostle declare: Those (quoth he) which have erred about
the faith. But it is worth the labor more diligently to examine the Apostle
his whole Chapter. O Timothy (quoth he) keep the depositum, avoiding profane
novelties of voices. This exclamation O, both shows foresight, and also
argues charity: for he foresaw certain errors which beforehand he was sorry
for. Who at this day has the place of Timothy? but either the whole Church, or
especially, the whole body of Prelates, who ought themselves to have the whole
knowledge of divine religion, and also to instruct others, what is meant by
keep the depositum. Keep it (quoth he) for fear of thieves, for danger of
enemies, lest when men be a sleep they oversowe Cockell amongst the Wheat,
which the son of man has sowed in his field. Keep (quoth he) the depositum:
What is meant by this depositum? that is, that which is committed to thee, not
that which is invented of thee: that which thou have received, not that which
thou have devised: a thing not of wit, but of learning: not of private
usurpation, but of public tradition: a thing brought to thee, not brought
forth of thee: wherein thou must not be an author, but a keeper: not a
beginner, but a follower: not a leader, but an observer: Keep the deposttum.
Preserve the talent of the Catholic faith pure and sincere, that which is
committed to thee, let that remain with thee, and that deliver unto the people.
Thou have received gold, render then gold; I will not have one thing for
another: Do not for gold give me either impudently lead, or craftily brass; I
will not the show, but the very nature of gold it self. O Timothy, O Priest, O
Teacher, O Doctor, if Gods gift has made thee meet and sufficient for thy
wit, exercise and learning, show thy self Beseelel, that divine workman in
building of the spiritual tabernacle, ingrave those precious stones of Gods
religion, faithfully set them, wisely adorn them, give them brightness, give
them grace, give them beauty. That which men before believed obscurely, let
them by thy exposition understand more clearly. Let posterity rejoice for
coming to the knowledge of that by thy means, which antiquity without that
knowledge had in veneration. Yet for all this, in such sort deliver what thou
have learned, that albeit thou teach newly and after a new manner: yet thou
never preach a new religion, and deliver a new faith.

CHAP. XIII.
BUt peradventure some will say, shall we then have no advancement of religion
in the Church of Christ? no growing on, no proceeding forward? To which I
answer and say. Let us a Gods name have the greatest and most that may be. For
who is either so envious to men, or hateful to God which would labor to stop
or hinder that? but yet in such sort and with this proviso, that it may appear
to be truly an increase in faith, and not prove to be a change in religion; for
this is the nature of such things as increase, that in themselves they become
and grow greater; and this is the nature of a change and mutation, that
something be turned from one thing which it was, to an other which it was not:
Convenient it is, and very necessary, that the understanding, knowledge and
wisdom, as well of every man in particular, as of all in common; as well of one
alone, as of the whole Church in General, of all ages and times past, should
abundantly increase and go forward, but yet for all that, only in his own kind
and nature; that is, in the same faith, in the same sense, in the same
sentence. In this cafe, let the religion of our soul imitate the nature of our
bodies, which although with process of time they pass over many years, yet
they remain the same that they were. There is great difference betwixt
flourishing youth and withered age, yet the self same men become old which
before were young; so that although the state and condition of one and the self
same man be altered, yet one very nature and person does still remain. The
limbs and members of infants be small, of young men great, yet not diverse but
the very same. So many joints as young children have so many have they when
they be men, and if any parts there be, which with increase of years spring
forth, those before by nature were in man virtually planted, so that no new
things come forth in old men, which before were not contained in them being yet
children. Wherefore there can be no doubt, but that this is the due and right
order of growing, the most natural and goodlyest way of increasing, only to
have in old years, those members, those parts and joints which the wisdom of
our Creator before framed when we were yet but little ones: And therefore if a
man be afterward changed into some other shape or likeness then his nature
requires; or if the number of his members be more or less then nature
prescribes; then of necessity the whole body must either perish, or become
monstrous, or at least remain lame and maimed. In like manner Christian
religion must follow these rules of increasing and growing; to wit, that with
years it wax more sound, with time it become more ample, with continuance it
be more exalted, yet remain pure and incorrupt, and continue full and perfect
with each of his parts, and as it were, with all his members and proper senses:
And furthermore that it admit no change or mutation, sustain no loss of his
propriety, no variety or mutabilitie in definition: for example sake. Our
forefathers in old time in the spiritual field of the Church, sowed the wheaten
seed of true faith and religion; it were now very injurious and unreasonable,
that we their posterity in stead of the perfect and true grain should reap
the false error of cockle: And contrariwise it is reason and very convenient,
that the beginning and ending not disagreing with it self, we should of the
increase of wheaten seed reap the fruit of a wheaten religion; so that when
with tract of time, any of those first seeds begin to bud and come forth, let
them be tilled, let them be trimmed, yet without changing ought of the
propriety of the corn springing up: and albeit fashion, shape, and
distinction, be added and put to, yet must the nature of each kind remain and
abide. For God forbid that those rosy plants of the Catholic doctrine should
be changed into thistles and thorns; God forbid I say, that in this spiritual
paradise, of the slippes of Cinnamon and Balsame should suddenly grow up darnel
and poison. Therefore whatsoever has by the grace of God and our Fathers faith
been sown in this Church, reason it is that the same be cultivated and
maintained by the industry of the children, meet that it flourish and wax
ripe, convenient that it grow and come to perfection; lawful indeed it is,
that those ancient articles of heavenly philosophy, should be trimmed,
smoothed, and polished: but unlawful that they should be chaned, mangled, and
maimed. And albeit they receive perspicuitie, light, and distinction, yet of
necessity must they retain their fulness, soundnes, and propriety. For if
once this licentiousnes of wicked fraud be admitted, I tremble to speak what
danger is like to ensue of rasing and subverting religion; for if we take away
any part of the Catholic faith, straight ways other parts, and after that
other, and again other, and that as it were of custom and by a kind of law,
shall be abolished. And what follows when every part by little and little is
undermined, but that in conclusion the whole corpse of religion at one blow be
come subverted and over thrown? And contrariwise if new things and old,
foreign and domestical, profane and sacred, begin once to be confounded
together, then must needs this custom generally follow, that nothing hereafter
remain in the Church untouched, nothing without corruption, nothing sound,
nothing pure, nothing sincere; and so where before was the sacred school of
chaste and immaculate truth, there shall be a very brothel house of wicked and
filthy errors. But God of his goodness deliver his servants from such minds
and let the impious rather, and graceless follow that furious and mad
proceeding. For the Church of Christ is a careful and diligent keeper of
religion committed to her charge, she never changes or alters in it any
thing, she diminishes nothing, she adds nothing: What is necessary she
loses not, what is superfluous she forces not, her own she maintains, what
is not her own she usurpeth not, but with all industry labors only about
this one thing, that is, by faithful and prudent handling of our forefathers
doings, what by them in times past was well entered and begun, she polisheth;
what then was well polished and declared, she confirms; what then was
confirmed and defined, she retains. To conclude what has she else
endeavored by the decrees of Counsels, but that that doctrine which before
was simply credited, the same afterward should be more diligently believed:
that religion which before was taught more slowly, the same afterward should be
preached more instantly: That faith which before was more securely reverenced,
the same afterward should more carefully be practiced. This I say always and
nothing else has the Church, provoked with the novelties of Heretics, set down
by the decrees of her Councels, to wit, only to confirm that to posterity by
writing (comprehending a great sum of things in few words, and often times
for more easy understanding, to an old article of faith giving a new name)
which before by tradition she had received of her forefathers.

CHAP. XIV.
BUt to return to the Apostle. O Timothy (quoth he) keep the depositum, avoid
profane novelties of voices. Avoid (quoth he) as a viper, as a scorpion, as a
ba^ilisk, least they infect thee, not only by touching, but also with their
very eyes and breath. What is meant by Avoid? 1 Cor. 5. that is, not so much as
to eat with any such: what imports this (Avoid) if any man (quoth he) come
unto you and bring not this doctrine? what doctrine but the Catholic and
universal, and that which with sound tradition of the truth, has continued
one and the self same, through all successions of times, and that which shall
continue to the worlds end? What then? Receive him not (quoth he) into the
house nor say God save you for he that says unto him God save you,
communicates with his wicked works. Profane novelties of voices; (quoth he)
What is Profane? Those which have no holiness in them, no jote of religion,
wholly unknown to the Church which is the temple of God. Profane novelties of
voices, quoth he, (of voices) that is novelties of opinions, novelties of
things, novelties of senses, contrary to our forefathers faith, contrary to
antiquity, which if we admit and receive, of necessity the faith of our
blessed ancestors, either all, or a great part of it, must be overthrown, the
faithful people of all ages and times, all holy Saints, all chaste, all
continent, all virgins, all widows, all Clerks, all Deacons, all Priests, so
many thousands of Confessors, so many bands of Martyrs, so many famous and
great cities, and commonwealths, so many Islands, Provinces, Kings, countries,
kingdoms, nations, to conclude, almost the whole world incorporated by the
Catholic faith to Christ their head must needs be said, so many hundreds of
years to have been ignorant, to have erred, to have blasphemed, to have
believed they know not what. Avoid (quoth he) Profane novelties of voices, to
receive which, to follow which never was the custom of Catholics, but always
the property of heretics. And to say truth, what heresy has ever peeped
forth, but under the name of some certain man, in some certain place, and at
some certain time? Who ever set abroach any heresy, who first divided not
himself from the consent of the universality and antiquity of the Catholic
Church? Which to be true, examples do plainly prove. For who ever before that
profane Pelagius presumed so much of man's free will, that he thought not the
grace of God necessary to every particular good act? Who ever before his
monstrous disciple Celestiut, denied all mankind to be tied and bound with the
sin of Adams prevarication? Who ever before facrilegious Arius, durst tear in
pieces the Unity of Trinity? Who ever before wicked Sabellius, attempted to
confound the Trinity of Unity? Who ever before cruel Novatian, affirmed God to
be so merciless, that he had rather the death of a sinner then he should
return and live? Who ever before Simon Magus (punished by Apostolical
censure, from whom that old sink of filthiness came by continual and secret
succession unto Priscilian that was the last) durst ever affirm that God our
Creator was the Author of evil, that is the Author of our wickedness,
impieties, and horrible crimes; because God (as he said) so made man's nature,
that by a certain peoper motion and impulse of an enforced will, it can do
nothing else but sin, desire nothing else but to offend, because being
provoked and inflamed with the surious rage of all vices, it is with an
insatiable desire carried away headlong into the pit and sink of all
filthiness? Such examples are infinite, which for brevity sake I omit; by all
which notwitstanding it appears plainly and clearly that it is an usual and
common thing in all Heresies to take great pleasure in profane novelties, to
loath the decrees of our forefathers, and so fall from the faith, by pretending
the false and counterfeit name of knowledge and learning: contrariwise that
this is proper to all Catholics, to keep that faith which the holy fathers
have left and committed to their charge, to condemn profane novelties, and as
the Apostle has already said, and again does say: If any man shall preach
otherwise then that which is received, to accurse him.

CHAP. XV.
HEre happily some man may demand whether heretics also do use the testimony
of holy scripture. To which I say that they do and that very earnestly, for a
man may behold them ranging and coursing in every part of the Bible, in Moses,
in the Kings, in the Psalms, in the Apostles, in the Gospels, in the Prophets:
for whether they be amongst their own brethren, or with strangers, whether in
private or in public, whether in talking, or writing, whether in the house
reasting, or abroad walking, they almost never allege any thing of their
own, which they do not pretend to shadow with the words of sacred scripture.
Read the pamphlets of Paulus Samosatenus, of Priscilian, Eunomius, Jovinian,
and the rest of such like pestilent Heretics, and you shall find through all
their works an huge heap of examples, almost no page omitted which is not
colored and painted with the sayings of the new and old testament. But the
more closely they lurk under the shadow of Gods law, the more carefully are
they to be feared, the more narrowly to be watched; for they know full well
that their stinking and unsavory drugs be not likely almost to please any, if
simply and nakedly they be set forth: and therefore they do temper them as it
were with the sweet powder of Gods word, that he which would have contemned man's
erroneous invention dares not so readily reject Gods divine scripture: wherein
they are like to those, which minding to minister bitter potions to young
children, do first anoint the brim^^^ of the cup with honey, that thereby
unwary youth feeling the sweetness, may nothing fear the bitter confection.
This devise also practice they, which upon noxious herbs and juyces, write the
names of good and wholesome medicines, whereby almost no man reading the good
superscription any thing suspecteth the lurking poison. The self same thing
likewise our Savior cries out to all Christians. Take ye heed of false
prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening
Wolves. Ma. 7. What is meant else by sheeps clothing, but the sayings of the
Prophets and Apostles, which they with sheep-like sincerity did wear like
certain fleeces of that immaculate Lamb, which takes away the sins of the
world? And what is to be understood by ravening wolves, but the cruel and
destructive opinions of heretics, which always trouble the sheep-folds of the
Church, and by all means possible tear in pieces the flock of Christ? But to
the end they may more craftily set upon the sheep of Christ mistrusting
nothing, remaining still cruel beasts, they put off their wolvish weed, and
shroud themselves with the words of scripture, as it were with certain fleeces,
whereby it happens, that when the silly sheep feel the soft wool, they little
fear their sharp teeth: But what says our Savior? By their fruits you shall
know them. That is, when they begin not only to utter those words, but also to
expound them, not only to cast them forth, but also to interpret them, then
does that bitterness break out, then is that sharpness espied, then is that
madness perceived, then is that fresh and new poison ejected, then are profane
novelties set abroach, then may you see straightway the hedge cut in two, the
old fathers bounds removed, the Catholic doctrine shaken, and the Churches
faith torn in pieces. Such were they whom the Apostle sharply reprehendeth in
the 2. Epistle to the Cor. Chap. 11: For such false Apostles (quoth he) are
crafty workers transfiguring them selves into the Apostles of Christ. What is
transfiguring them selves into the Apostles of Christ, but this? The Apostles
alleged the examples of scripture and they likewise cited the^: The Apostles
cited the authority of the Psalms, and they likewise used it: The Apostles used
the sayings of the Prophets, and they in like manner brought them forth. But
when that scripture which was alike alleged, alike cited, alike brought
forth, was not alike, and in one sense expounded, then were discerned the
simple from the crafty, the sincere from the counterfeit, the right and good
from the froward and perverse: and to conclude, the true Apostles from those
false Apostates. And no marvel (says S. Paul) For Satan himself transfigureth
himself into an Angel of light, it is no great matter therefore if his
ministers be transfigured as the ministers of Justice. Wherefore according to
Saint Paul, whenever either false Apostles, or false Prophets, or false
Doctors do bring forth the words of holy Scripture, by which they would
according to their corrupt interpretation confirm their error, there is no
doubt, but that they follow the crafty slight of their master, which surely he
would never have invented, but that he knows very well, that there is no
readier way to deceive the people, then where the bringing in of wicked error
is intended, that there the authority of the word of God should be pretended.
But some will say, how prove you that the Devil uses to allege the
Scripture? Such as doubt thereof let them read the Gospel, where it is
written: Then the devil took him up (that is our Lord and Savior) and set him
upon the pinnacle of the Temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of
God, cast thy self down, for it is written that he will give his Angels charge
of thee, that they may keep thee in all thy ways, in their hands shall they
hold thee up, lest perhaps thou knock thy foot against a stone. Mat. 4 How will
he, think you, handle poor silly souls, which so sets upon the Lord of
Majesty with the authority of Scripture? If thou be (quoth he) the Son of God,
cast thy self down. Why so? For it is written (quoth he): we are diligently to
weigh the doctrine of this place and to keep it in mind, that by so notable an
example of the Scripture, we make no scruple or doubt, when we see any allege
some place of the Apostles, or Prophets, against the Catholic Faith, but that
by his mouth the Devil himself does speak. For as at that time, the head spoke
unto the head, so now the members do talk unto the members; that is, the
members of the Devil to the members of Christ, the faithless to the faithful,
the it religious to the religious, to conclude, Heretics to Catholics. But
what I pray, says the Devil? If thou be the Son of God (quoth he) cast thy
self down. That is to say. Desire thou to be the Son of God, and to enjoy the
inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven, Cast thy self down, that is, Cast thy
self down from this doctrine and tradition of this high and lofty Church, which
is reputed to be the Temple of God. And if any one demand of these Heretics,
persuading them such things, how do you prove and convince me that I ought to
forsake the old and Universal Faith of the Catholic Church; straight ways is
ready at hand: For it is written: and forthwith he will allege you a thousand
Testimonies, a thousand Examples, a thousand authorities out of the Law, out of
the Psalms, out of the Apostles, out of the Prophets; by which, expounded after
a new and wicked fashion, he would throw headlong unfortunate souls, from the
Tower of the Catholic Church, into the deep dungeon of wicked Heresy. Now
with these sweet promises which follow, Heretics do wonderfully deceive simple
men. For they dare promise and teach that in their Church, that is in the
conventicle of their communion, is to be found a great and special, yea and a
certain personal grace of God: So that whosoever be one of their crew, they
shall straightwayes without any labor, without any study without any industry,
yea although they never seek, nor crave, nor knock, have such special
dispensation, that they shall be carried up with the hands of Angels, that is,
preserved by Angelical protection; that they never hurt their foot against a
stone, that is, that they never can be scandalized. But some man will say, If
the Devil and his Disciples, whereof some be false Apostles, false Prophets,
and false Teachers, and all perfect Heretics, do use the Scriptures, cite
their sayings, bring forth their promises; what shall Catholic men do? How
shall the children of the Church behave themselves? How shall they in the holy
Scriptures discern truth from falsehood? To which I answer, that, They must have
great care (as in the beginning of this Treatise I said, holy and learned men
taught me) that they interpret the Divine and Canonical Scripture according to
the Tradition of the Universal Church, according to the rules of the Catholic
doctrine: in which likewise they must of necessity follow, universality,
antiquity, and consent of the Catholic and Apostolic Church. And therefore,
if at any time a part rebel against the whole, novelty against antiquity, the
dissension of one or a few (seduced with error) against the consent of all, or
the far greater part of Catholics; in that case let them prefer the
integrity of universality, before the corruption of a part; and in
universality, let them also prefer the religion of antiquity before profane
novelty; and again in antiquity, let them prefer, before the temerity of one
or a few, the decrees of a general Council, if any be; or if no such be
found, let them take that which is next hand, that is, to follow the opinions
of many and great learned Doctors agreeing together: All which faithfully,
soberly, diligently observed and kept; by Gods grace, we shall without any
great difficulty discover the errors of new upstart Heretics.

CHAP. XIV.
HEre I perceive in order it follows, to show by examples how the profane
novelties of Heretics are, by bringing forth and comparing the old Doctors
opinions agreeing together, to be found out and condemned: which ancient
consent of holy Fathers, is not so carefully and diligently to be sought for
and followed in every small question of the Scripture; but only, and that
especially in the rule of faith; neither yet always, nor all Heresies are
after this sort to be impugned, but only such as be new and upstart; to wit at
their first springing up, and before they have (as hindered by the shortness of
time) falsified the rules of the ancient faith, and before the poison spreading
far abroad, goes about to corrupt the Fathers works: But those heresies
which have already got ground, and be of some continuance, are not this way to
be dealt withal; because by long tract of time they have had opportunity to
steal truth. And therefore such kind of profane schisms and heresies which be
of longer standing, we must not otherwise convince, but either only, if need
be, by the authority of the Scriptures, or else avoid and detest them being
already convicted and condemned in old time by general Councels of the
Catholic Church. Therefore so soon as any infectious error begineth to break
forth, and for her defense to steal certain words of holy scripture, and
craftily and fraudulently to expound them; straight-wayes for the right
understanding thereof the Fathers opinions are to be gathered together, by
which let any what soever new, and therefore profane, doctrine growing up with
out all delay be dejected and speedily condemned. But those Fathers opinions
only are to be conferred together which with holiness, wisdom, and constancy,
lived, taught, and continued in the faith, and communion of the Catholic
Church, and finally deserved tody in Christ, or happily for Christ to be
martyred: whom notwithstanding we are to believe with this condition, that
whatsoever either all, or the greater part with one mind, plainly, commonly,
and constantly, as it were a Council of Doctors, agreeing together have
decreed and set down, receiving it from their ancestors, holding it for their
time, and delivering it to their posterity; let that be had and accounted for
undoubted, for certain and firm truth. And whatsoever any, although holy and
learned, although a Bishop, although a Confessor, and Martyr has holden
otherwise then all, or against all, let that be put aside from the authority
of the common, public, and general faith, and reputed amongst his own proper,
private, and fecret opinions, least with great danger of eternal salvation, we
do according to the custom of sacrilegious Heretics and Schismatics, forsake
the truth of the universal faith, and follow the novell error of some one
man. The holy and Catholic mind of which blessed Fathers least any man think
that he may rashly contemn, The Apostle says in his first epistle to the
Corinthians: And some verily has God set in his Church, first Apostles 1 Cor.
12. of which himself was one: Secondly Prophets as Agabus was, of whom we read
in the Acts, cap. 11. Thirdly Doctors, which now are called Tractatours,
vvhem also this Apostle some time narneth Prophets, (because their office was
to expound and declare to the people the mysteries of the Prophets;) these
therefore, disposed and placed by God at diverse times and sundry places,
agreeing and consenting all in one mind in Christ, touching the understanding
of the Catholic faith whosoever contemns, does not contemn man but God: and
that we disagree not by any means from the perfect and true unity of those
Fathers, the same Apostle does earnestly beseech all Christians, saying: I
beseech you brethren that you say all one thing, and that there be no Schisms
among you, but that you be perfect in one sense and in one knowledge. 1 Cor. 1
And if any man separate himself from the communion of their opinion, let him
hear that saying of the same Apostle: He is not the God of dissension, but of
peace: chapter 14. that is, not of him that leaves consent and unity, but of them
that remain in peace and agreement: As I do (quoth he) teach in all the
Churches of the Saints, that is, of the Catholics, which therefore be holy
because they continue in the communion of the faith. And least happily any one
should contemn others, and proudly require only to be heard, only to be
believed, straight after he says: What has the Word of God (quoth he)
proceeded from you, or has it only come unto you? And least this might be
taken as spoken slightly, he adds: If any (quoth he) seems a Prophet or
spiritual, that is, a master in spiritual matters, let him be a zealous lover
of unity and peace, in such wise that he neither prefer his own opinion
before the judgment of others, neither leave or forsake the sense and common
consent of all men. The commandments of which things he that is (quoth he)
ignorant of, that is, he that learneth not those things which he yet knows
not, or contemns those which he knows, he shall not be known, that is, he
shall be thought unworthy, whom amongst such as be united in faith and equal
humility, God should regard and look upon: a greater evil then which I doubt
whether any man can invent or devise; which yet notwithstanding (according to
the Apostles commination) we see to have fallen upon Julian the Pelagian, who
either contemned to be joined at all in opinion with his fellows, or else
presumed to separate himself from their society and communion.

But now it is time to bring forth the example which we promised: how and after
what sort the judgment and opinions of holy Fathers were gathered together,
that according to them by the decree and authority of a Council the rule of
faith might be set down: which to the end that I may more commodiously do, I
will here make an end of this commonitorie, and so take another beginning for
declaring of those things which do follow.

A Recapitulation of all that has been said in the former two books.
WHICH being so, it is now time that in the end of this second book we
recapitulate and touch in few words the Sum of all that which in these two
commonitorie books has been spoken. We said in the premises that this
always has been, and at this day is the custom of Catholics to try and
examine true faith two manner of ways. First by the authority of the divine
scripture: secondly by the tradition of the Catholic Church; not because the
Canonical scripture is not as to it self sufficient for all things, but
because very many expounding Gods word at their own pleasure, do thereby bring
forth and hatch up diverse opinions and errors. And for that cause it is
necessary that the interpretation of the divine Scripture be directed according
to the one only rule of the Churches understanding: especially in those
questions upon which the foundation of the whole Catholic religion does
depend. Likewise we said that in the Church we were to consider the consent
both of universality, and antiquity, so that we be neither carried away from
sound unity to schism, nor yet cast headlong from antiquity of religion into
the dangerous gulf of heretical novelties. We said also that in antiquity we
were diligently to observe and seriously to consider two things, unto which all
those that will not be heretics must of necessity stand. The first is, that
which has in old time been determined by all the Bishops of the Catholic
Church by authority of a general Council. The second is that, if any new
question did arise in which the determination of a Council were not to be
found, that then we ought to have recourse to the sayings of the holy fathers,
but yet of these only who in their time and place, were approved masters, being
such as lived and dyed in the unity of the communion and faith: And whatsoever
we knew that they believed and taught with one mind and consent, to judge and
take that without all sctuple to be the true and Catholic Religion of the
Church.

And least any man might think that we said this rather of presumption then of
any authority of the Church, we gave an example of the holy council, holden
almost three years thence at Ephesus a City in Asia in the time of the right
horourable Consuls Bassus and Antiochus, in which disputation was had of
constituting and setting down rules of faith ^ and least there might by chance
some profane Novelty creep in, as happened at that persidious meeting in
Ariminum, this was reputed and thought the most Catholic, holy, and best
course to be taken, by the judgment of all the Bishops there present, which
were almost two hundred in number, that the opinions of those Fathers should be
brought forth, of whom it was certain that some of them had been Martyrs,
diverse Confessors and all to have lived and died Catholic Priests, that by
their authority, consent and verdict, the old religion might be rightly and
solemnly confirmed, and blasphemous prophant novelties condemned; which being
so done worthily and justly, Nestrius was judged to have taught contrary to the
old Catholic religion, and blessed Cyrill to have maintained holy and sacred
antiquity. And to the end nothing might be wanting which procures credit, we
put down also the names and number of these Fathers (although not remembering
their order) according to whose tonsent and uniform doctrine both the texts of
holy scripture were expounded, and the rule of Gods word established. Neither
will it here be superfluous for memory sake to repeat them all once agam. These
then be the names of them whose works were cited in that Council either as
judges or else witnesses. S. Peter Bishop of Alxandria, a most excellent
Doctor and blessed Martyr. S. Athanasius Bishop of the same sea, a most
faithful teacher and famous Confessout. S. Theophilus Bishop also of the same
City, a notable man for faith, life, and learning, next after whom succeeded
venerable Cyrill, who at this present does honor the Church of Alexandria. And
that no man happily should suspect that this was the doctrine of one City, or
of one Province: to the former there were adjoined those two lights of
Cappadocia, Saint Gregory Bishop, and Confessor of Nazianzene, and St. Basil
Bishop and Confessor of Cesaria, and also another Saint Gregory Nyssen worthy
for his merit of faith, conversation, integrity, and wisdom of such a brother
as Basil was. And for proof that not only the Greek and East Church, but also
the Latin, and West, were always of the same opinion, the letters of Saint
Felix Martyr, and Saint Julie, both Bishops of Rome, which they wrote unto
certain men, were there read. And that not only the head of the world, but
also the other parts should give testimony in that judgment: From the South
they had blessed S. Cyprian, from the North S. Ambrose Bishop of Millan. These
then be the holy Fathers, agreeing with that sacred number of the ten
Commandments, which were alleged in the Council of Ephesus, as Masters,
Councillors, Witnesses, and Judges; whose doctrine the blessed Synod holding,
following whose counsel, believing whose testimony, obeying whose judgment,
without spite, without presumption and without favor, pronounced, and gave
sentence concerning the rules of faith. And albeit a far greater number of
Fathers might have been set down, yet was it not necessary, because it was not
requisite that time should be spent with multitude of witnesses: and further,
no man doubted but that those ten did little differ in opinion from all the
rest of their fellow Bishops. After all this we set down the worthy sentence of
Cyrill, which is to be found in the Ecclesiastical acts of that Council. For
when the Epistle of S. Capreolus Bishop of Carthage was read, who intended
nothing else, nothing else desired, but that novelty might be overthrown, and
antiquity defended, Bishop Cyril spoke and gave his definition in this sort:
for I have thought good not to omit it here: these then be his words in the end
of the acts of that Council. And this epistle (quoth he) of the venerable and
rel gious man Capreolus Bishop of Carthage, shall be ad oyned to the faith of
the Councels acts, whose opinion is plain and perspicuous, for he desires that
the doctrine of the old faith may be confirmed, and new opinions superstuously
invemed, and impiously spread abroad, may be reproved and condemned. To which
all the Bishops with one consent cried out: This we speak all, this we teach
all, this we desire all. What I beseech you said they all, what desired they
all? surely nothing else But that that which was of old time delivered, might
be still retained, and that which was newly invented, might speedily be
rejected. After that we had admired, and highly commended the great humility
and holiness of that Council, in which were so many Bishops, almost the
greater part of whom were Metropolitans of such erudition, of such learning,
that they were almost all sufficient to have disputed of matters of faith;
Which great assembly and meeting together although it might in some man's
opinion have imboldened them to presume and determine somewhat of themselves,
yet they delivered nothing, presumed nothing, arrogated nothing to themselves;
but above all things, they were very careful not to leave any thing to
posterity, which before they had not received of their forefathers, not
thinking it sufficient to dispose well of the business then present, but also
to leave an example to their posterity, how they in like manner should
reverence the Religion of sacred Antiquity, and utterly condemn the inventions
of profane Noveltie; We inveighed also against the wicked presumption of
Nestorius: who boasted, that he was the first and the only man which
understood the Scriptures, and that all others which before his days preached
and taught, all that interpreted and expounded the word of God, were ignorant
and unskilful, that is, all Priests, all Confessors and Martyrs, of whom some
had expounded Gods law, others allowed and believed them; to conclude he
maintained that the Church both now did err, and always had erred, because as
he thought, it had and did follow unlearned and erroneous Doctors. All which,
albeit they were abundantly sufficient for the overthrow and extinguishing of
all profane novelties: Yet least that ought should in such plenty of proofs be
wanting, we added for a conclusion, a double authority of the Sea Apostolic,
the one of holy Pope Xistus, which venerable father now honors the Church of
Rome, the other of Pope Celestinus of blessed memory his predecessor, which I
have thought good also here to set down. Pope Xistus then in his Epistle which
he wrote to the Bishop of Antioch touching the cause of Nestorius, says thus.
Therefore (quoth he) because, as the Apostle says, the faith is one, that
which evidently has obtained to be so called, let us believe, and such things
as are to be holden let us believe. Afterward he prosecuteth and explicateth
what those things be, which are to be believed, what they be which are to be
kept saying thus: Nothing (quoth he) is further lawful for Novelly, because it
is convenient that nothing be added to Antiquity. The faith and belief of our
forefathers is clear and perspiouous, let it not be troubled nor defiled with
any permixtion of dirt or mire. A postolically spoken in commendation of our
forefathers faith, to compare it to light and perspicuity, and in likening
novell profaneness to the admixtion of frith and mire. Pope Colestinus likewise
is of the same opinion, for in his Epistle which he sent to the Priests of
France, wherein he reprehendeth their dissimulation, in that by their silence
they left the old says destitute, and suffered profane Novelties to spring up,
thus he writes: Worthily (quoth he) the cause does touch us, if with silonce
we foster er^ rour; therefore let such men be corrected let them have no liberty
to speak at their pleasure. Some happily may doubt who they be, whom he
forbideth to have their liberty in speaking, whether the preachers of
antiquity, or the inventours of novelties: Let him speak, and discharge the
Reader of this doubt, for it follows: Let Novelty cease (quoth he) if the
matter be sa: that is, if that be true which diverse accuse unto me your Cities
and Provinces, that through your pernicious dissimulation you cause them to
yield unto certain new doctrine: Therefore (quoth he) if the matter be so, let
Novelty cease to molest Antiquity. This then was the blessed opinion of holy
Celestinus, not that Antiquity should cease to overthrow Novelty, but rather
that Novelty should give over to trouble Antiquity. Which Apostolic and
Catholic decrees whosoever resists, first of necessity he must proudly contemn
the memory of S. Celestinus, who defined that novelty should give over to
provoke antiquity. Again he must jest and scoff at the decree of holy Xistus,
whose judgment is, that nothing is lawful for novelty, because it is not
covenient that ought be added to antiquity. Again he must contemn the
determination of blessed Cyrill, who highly commended the zeal of venerable
Capreolus, in that he desired, that the old Articles of Faith should be
confirmed, and new inventions utterly condemned. Likewise he must reject the
Council of Ephesus, that is, the judgment almost of all the holy Bishops of
the East, who inspired by God, would not decree that posterity should, believe
ought, but that which the sacred Antiquity of our Forefathers agreeing together
in Christ had holden and belceved, who with their uniform allowing and
acclamation testified, that they all decreed, all wished, all gave judgment,
that as all Heretics almost before Nestorius contemning antiquity and
defending Novelty were condemned: so likewise Nestorius himself the Author of
Novelty and impugner of Antiquity should be condemned. Whose sacred consent and
agreement proceeding from Gods goodness if aany dislike, what remains but
that he maintain that Nestorius his profane opinion was unjustly condemned?
Finally he must also reject and contemn the universal Church of Christ, and
her masters the Apostles and Prophets, and especially the doctrine of S. PAUL,
as dregs and dross. The universal Church, because she has always
religiously kept and maintained that faith which was once delivered; S. PAUL,
because he has thus written, O Timothy keep the depositum, avoiding profane
Novelties of voices: And again, if any preach unto you otherwise, then you have
received be he accursed. So that if neither the Apostle his definition, nor the
Ecclesia sticall Canons ought to be violated, by which according to the sacred
consent of universality and antiquity, always all heretics, and lastly
Pelagius, Celestinus, and Nestorius were justly and deservedly condemned;
surely necessary it is that hereafter all Catholics which desire to show
themselves true children of their mother the Church, adhere, join, and stick
close unto the holy faith of their holy Fathers, detesting and abhorring,
pursuing and opposing the profane novelties of all profane miscreants
whatsoever. This almost is the sum of that which in these two Commonitory
Books we have more amply discoursed of, and now after the manner of
recapitulation in fewer words gathered together, that my memory, for helping
whereof I have wrote this Treatise, may both with daily admonition be repaired,
and yet not overlaid with any tedious prolixity.

FINIS.
THE VERITY OF Christian Faith.

Written by Hierome Savanorola of Ferrara.

LONDON, Printed by R. Daniel, 1651.

The Contents.
CHAP. I. THat there is a true Religion. Page. 1 CHAP. II. There are two sorts
of Divine Worship. Page. 5 CHAP. III. That there is no better life then that of
Christians. Page. 9 CHAP. IIII. There cannot be imagined the last end of any
life better then that of Christians. Page. 13 CHAP. V. There can be no better
means to attain unto eternal bliss, then a Christian life. Page. 22 CHAP. VI.
By Christian Religion man most assuredly obtains eternal bliss. Page. 28 CHAP.
VII. The truth of Christian Faith is proved, by being the cause of a virtuous
life. Page. 32 CHAP. VIII. That Christian Doctrine containing the Grounds of
Faith, is from God. Page. 44 CHAP. IX. Christian Faith proved true out of their
use of Prayer and Contemplation. Page. 58 CHAP. X. The same Verity proved out
of the exterior Worship of Christians. Page. 67 CHAP. XI. The same Verity
proved out of the intrinsecall effects of Christian life. Page. 77 CHAP. XII.
The same truth proved out of the extrinsecall effects of Christian life. Page.
90 CHAP. XIII. The same confirmed by the wonderful works of Christ, and first
by his Power. Page. 101 CHAP. XIIII. The same concluded out of the Wisdom of
Christ. Page. 125 CHAP. XV. The same Verity confirmed out of the Goodness of
Christ, Page. 144 CHAP. XVI. The same proved out of the Power, Wisdom and
Goodness of Christ all together. Page. 161
THE TRIUMPH OF THE CROSS, OR, Of the Verity OF FAITH.

By Hierome Savanocola of Ferrara.

LONDON, Printed by R. Daniel, 1651.

The Preface.
HAving as far forth as I judged sufficient for my present purpose treated in
the precedent Book those things, which are of themselves obvious to natural
reason, it remains now that I discuss those also which are above the sphere of
our Nature, that I may thereby plainly show the Christian Faith to be most true
not only by natural motives, but out of the very actions of our blessed
Savior Christ Jesus; and because things before our eyes do more enforce our
under standing to assent, then things which are past; for it is harder to deny
what we plainly see before our eyes, then that which we receive at trust by
Traditions. I shall lay the first grounds of my proofs in those things which
are unquestionable unto all, as being daily seen practiced in the Church of
Christ, and are most apparent to sense it self. I do not speak of the vices of
evil Christians, who as such are sequestered rather, and cut off from the
communication and mystical Union of the Church; but of those good members of
it, which not only bear and profess the name of Christians, but also prove
themselves to be such by their virtuous lives and actions. This done, I shall
produce reasons grounded in those actions of Christ which are most generally
received and allowed of by all, so that the latter shall manifestly confirm the
former; the things present, those which are past. But because the chief effect
at which the institution of the Church aims, is Justice, and an irreprehensible
and unspotted life: our Savior saying (speaking of the members of his Church)
Ego veni ut vitam habeant and abundantius habeant: To this end I came that they
may live, and that they live more abundantly. First therefore I shall in due
order prove the truth of the Christian Faith, by reasons truly grounded in the
virtuous lives of good Christians. Secondly, in the causes of such a life: and
lastly in the effects of the same life, wherein I shall comprise all those
things which are daily exercised in the Church Militant of Christ.

The triumph of the Cross, or, of the verity of Faith.
CHAP. I. That there is a true Religion.
IT is altogether necessary that every one acknowledge, that in the world there
is a true Religion: By Religion we understand a due Worship exhibited unto
Almighty God, as he is the universal fountain, source, and moderatour of all
things: For every effect does exhibit a certain worship to its cause whilst
converting its self unto it, and as it were invocating it with a kind of
subjection, it strives to imitate and make it self like unto it, which
expresses nothing else but a certain return of honor from the effect to its
cause, that it may be more and more perfected by it. Wherefore Almighty God
being the universal Cause of all things, of whom heaven and earth and all that
has goodness in it, have their whole being and dependence: most clear it is
that in man there ought to be an ingrafted and natural instinct to convert it
self to God, and to invoke and subject himself unto him, to do his uttermost to
become like unto him, and to be perfected by him, which is nothing else then to
exhibit worship unto him. Now if there be such a natural inclination in the
rational nature of man to worship his Creator, and that this inclination
cannot be superfluous, or in vain, we must of force conclude, that there is a
true Religion to be found amongst men.

Moreover, seeing that man is naturally inclined to the divine Worship, (as
every effect is to its cause) and that he is rational, as not being
necessitated to any thing, as other brute and irrational things are, which are
naturally carried away by their appetites; but having a true dominion over his
actions, he freely disposes of them as he list. Now if all men (as natural
reason is oftentimes very defective) should fall into so general and gross an
error, that there should be no true and divine Worship found amongst them, it
would follow that they would be so deprived of the divine Providence, that
there would appear no Divine care exercised toward them in the thing which is
of all others most necessary and natural unto them; seeing that this true
divine Worship is that, by which man is to arrive to the fruition of his last
end. But this I have elsewhere plainly refuted.

I add that every country and nation, in every age both past and present,
having been (though in diverse ways) addicted unto the divine Worship, it must
necessarily follow that this truth is wholly ingrafted and natural unto man;
for that is natural (as I have elsewhere showen) which agrees unto all, and at
all times, wherefore if there should be no true divine Worship found, this
natural inclination would be wholly frustrate, seeing it were not able to
arrive unto the end which it was ordained for: whence it would follow that
Almighty God executed his Providence more toward unreasonable creatures then
toward man.

Lastly, seeing that every cause infuses its perfection and goodness, as much
as possible it may, into its effect, intending by all means to attract it, and
make it as far as it has capacity like unto it self; Almighty God being
superlatively good, and the first origin of all things, has questionless a
special care of the perfection of man, for whose sake and use, he made all
other inferior creatures: wherefore, the true perfection of man principally
consisting in the subjecting himself unto God, and in the Divine veneration in
the which Religion does chiefly consist, it follows that there is a true
Religion to be found in the world.

CHAP. II. There are two sorts of Divine Worship.
MAn having a capacity to exhibit veneration unto Almighty God two ways,
corporally and spiritually, we ought to distinguish two sorts of Divine Worship
in him, to wit, interior and exterior: interior is that which we perform by
the acts of our understanding and will: exterior is that which we exhibit by
a personal reverence, external ceremonies, and corporal sacrifices. Now as
all matters are naturally made and ordained for their forms, so questionless
the external Worship has a due subordination to the interior.

This interior Divine Worship is nothing else but a righteousness and
perfection of the interior man, by the which God is most honored, which I
prove in this manner. Every cause receives most honor from the perfection of
its more principal effects, whence artizans become famous by the excellence of
their masterpieces; but there is no visible effect more noble then man, who,
the more excellent he becomes in perfection, the more is the Divine Honor
increased. Now he is so much the more perfect, by how much his life is more
holy, for sanctity is the perfection of the interior man, by which even the
whole man is perfected; and therefore the chief honor that man does Almighty
God, is by a virtuous, holy, and perfect life, and in this manner, the true and
entire worship of Almighty God is the life of an upright and virtuous man
becoming so by his actions, as they have a reference unto his Creator.

We do not worship Almighty God merely and precisely for himself, but also that
we may obtain from him that supreme bliss for which man is created; wherefore,
the true Religion is the means and disposition for the gaining of this supreme
felicity of man, as we see natural causes exact the congruous dispositions of
that subject or matter into which they produce their effects, seeing therefore
it is manifest that man is much more perfectly disposed for the obtaining his
chief bliss by a virtuous life, then by sacrifices and exterior Ceremonies;
it is no less certain that the true Religion consists in the righteousness of
life.

Moreover, Almighty God not being a body but a pure act, man becomes more like
him by the purity of his interior part, then by any exterior integrity, and
therefore God is more perfectly worshipped by the spirit, then by any functions
of the body; for Almighty God being a Spirit, it behooves those that worship
him, to adore him in spirit and verity.

CHAP. III. That there is no better life then that of Christians.
THere is no life more perfect and holy then the life of Christians, for if we
take a view of all living creatures, we shall find in the lowest degree of life
those which only enjoy vegetation or growth, as plants, thence we raise us
unto the animal or sensitive life, which degree of life admits a latitude of
diverse degrees of sensitive perfection, whereof that degree is more perfect
which enjoyes the perfect degree of sensations. Now the intellectual life
far exceeding that which is only vegetive and sensible, we easily conclude
that the life of beasts is far inferior to the life of man, in which also we
distinguish diverse degrees of actual perfection, though not of essential, for
we prefer those that follow the light and dictamen of reason, before those
who swerving from it and neglecting reason, give the full scope and rains to
sense. The reason is clear; because the more they neglect reason, and addict
themselves to sensual pleasure, the less they participate the life of man,
and become more like unto beasts; but those who are guided by reason and do
suppress the brute and inferior part, do lead the life of man and not of
beasts; there being therefore in man a combination of these two degrees of the
rational and brute life, and the rational being far more excellent of the
two, it must needs follow that that man is more perfect who addicts himself to
a rational life, then he who gives himself over to the life of brutes, now
amongst those who addict themselves unto an intellectual life, there is a
great difference; for the soul of man becomes much more perfect by the
knowledge and love of the truth of spiritual things then of corporal,
especially as they are exercised about the divine Perfections: hence it is that
the life and powers of the soul of man become more perfect, the more it
refrains from corporal objects, and imployes it self in the contemplation and
love of spiritual things, especially of the divine Perfections. Now a
Christian life aims chiefly at this, that neglecting all created objects
whether spiritual or corporal, it wholly imployes it self in the
contemplation and love of Almighty God, so that it becomes in a manner by an
intellectual and affectionate union one and the Spirit with its divine Object;
wherefore, it being a thing impossible to find a life more perfect then that by
which a man is united with his first cause, and his last end, it appears
clearly that there can be no life more perfect then that of a Christian.

Morever, the righteous life of man, as he is man (as I have said before)
receives its value from the degree of reason which it exercises; wherefore, the
more rational it is, the greater is its worth and value: Therefore, seeing
that those which are true Christians are unwilling to do any thing at all
against reason, it must needs follow that their life far excells the life of
other Sects and Religions.

The virtuous life of man has a chief regard unto that for which it was
created, to wit, the contemplation of the said perfections, for which is
required a most pure serenity of mind; for if a mind be subject to humane and
sensual passions, it will be altogether unfit for so sublime and elevated an
object; But there is no life to be found which more undresses the interior
powers of the soul of man, then that of Christians, which spends its whole
endeavors in uniting it self only with its Creator: Therefore, there is none
which surpasses it in true dignity and excellency.

CHAP. IV. There cannot be imagined the last end of any life better then that
of Christians.
TO the end I may make it appear that there is no life to be compared with that
of Christians, we must know that there are two changes principally required to
a virtuous life, to wit, a perfect end, and proportionable means for attaining
to that end. First, I will show that there is no end of the life of man, so
consonant to reason, at that which Christians aim at; next I shall make appear
that the means which Christians are to put in execution for the gaining their
end, are the most accomplished and excellent of all others.

And as for the end, it will easily appear, if we daily consider that there are
two sorts of ends of the life of man; the end cujus, or, of which, and the end
quo, or, by which: that is the thing it self which we seek, and the means by
which we enjoy the same. Nothing questionless is so excellent as Almighty God;
But God is the end of the life of Christians, for whose sake, and unto whom
they address all their actions: This end therefore of theirs admits no color
of question. Their faith also aspires unto the clear vision and fruition of
Almighty God, not by the mediation of creatures, but immediately by his divine
Essence. Now man by his clear intuition and fruition becoming united unto
Almighty God, arrives by the same unto his most consummate and supreme
perfection, beyond which there remains not the least object of any rational
desire; Almighty God being that goodness which plenarily satiates all the
appetites of the soul of man.

It remains now that I show by most pregnant and convincing reasons, that the
last bliss and felicity of man consists in the clear intuition of the Divine
perfections, for I have now proved that it cannot be attained unto in this
life; and if we place it in the contemplation of Almighty God, this not being
had here, it is to be expected in the next life, where if it shall consist in
the intellectual possessing of the first verity not known by its own proper
species or immediate objective influence, but by the intervention of effects or
other representatives there will arise many difficulties; for first it will not
appear how man's intellectual appetite will be fully satiated and wholly
acquiesce in such a mediate contemplation, for if the soul of man in the state
of separation from the body has knowledge not only of material objects, but
of spiritual also, and immateriall substances; either it has this knowledge
perfectly or imperfectly; if imperfectly? by their intervention man cannot
arrive unto the perfect knowledge of God, and all things in the state of
imperfection have a capacity and appetite of their respective perfection (so
the matter seeks its form, and that which is foul to become beautiful)
certainly the soul of man as unsatisfied by such an imperfect knowledge of its
object, cannot be at quiet, which also may be seen in the endeavors of men,
whose understanding not content with a confused and perfect knowledge of
things, strives by all labor and industry to arrive unto the perfect knowledge
of them. If with a perfect knowledge they penetrate the effects, they are
presently inflamed with a desire to know their causes, for man naturally
desires true knowledge which consists in the knowing the causes of things. That
which is natural cannot be taken from nature, and as natural motion grows
more impetuous and swift in the end, then it was in its biginning; so man's
understanding, the more perfectly it has penetrated the effects, the more
earnestly does it seek to know the causes of them; therefore, I do not see how
the natural appetite of man's understanding may be satisfied without the clear
sight of Almighty God, which also is confirmed by experience, that the capacity
of man's mind is not satisfied by any limited object, beyond which it always
apprehends somewhat to remain unknown, whence it is that if any limited
dimension or number be presupposed, there remains always a faculty of our
understanding to add somewhat further and further without end, and this is the
nature of that infinity which the Mathemacians in their lines and numbers call
the infinity of increase or augment. Therefore all created substances being
finite and limited, our understanding never rests satiated until it behold
the increated substance of Almighty God, which alone as being a pure act admits
no bounds or circumscription. It is therefore unreasonable to prefix any other
end of the life of man, then that which our faith has established (to wit) the
clear vision of the divine Essence. For it is manifest to all, that Almighty
God is the last object in which the soul of man does finally acquiesce. All
natural motion tends to some last end or center whither being arrived, it
ceases. Now there being no created substance in which the heart of man can fix
its final affection, we may conclude, that it only rests then when he shall
behold face to face Almighty God, then whom there being nothing greater, there
can be nothing wanting in him to the full satiety of man; nor shall he further
affect inferior objects, because he shall make no account of them. For there
is no proportion between things limited and that which is infinite; as also
because there is no perfection in any effect, which is not more perfectly and
eminently contained in the first cause, and consequently there will be no
further desire of any thing, because our understanding will be most completely
perfected, as fully possessing its supreme and last object, in the which it
will most easily behold those other inferior things, toward which it is
naturally inclined; and this is one difference between the understanding and
senses, for the senses in the fruition of their principal object are exhausted
and corrupted; but the understanding is thereby exceedingly perfected.

But here we must observe, Almighty God being infinite, and above the sphere of
all cleated substances, that our understanding by its own proper forces,
virtue, and energy cannot raise it self so high as to behold the divine
Essence; but there is necessary a supernatural disposition or quality called
by Divines, the light of glory, which God infuses in the next life into the
souls which are free from all guilt of sin or pain, that be may thereby make
them capable and fit for this beatificall vision. For Almighty God always
supplies necessities, nor can there be any thing elevated above its own proper
sphere, unless it be assisted by some superior virtue; now the vigor alone
of the most intense natural light of our understanding, is no way sufficient
to produce the clear vision of Almighty God, because the excellence of the
object precisely does not elevate natural power to an act of another kind, or
of a superior nature, such as is the beatificall vision in regard of a created
understanding, which therefore ought to be supplied with some supernatural
disposition or quality, which we call the light of Glory. Whence it appears,
what a true and rational judgment our Faith frames of the end of humane life
and how easily it dissolves the difficulties of controversy, in the which
those of other opinions find themselves wholly entangled, as in so many
Labyrinths. Where whatsoever we say either of the end cujus, or the end quo,
there can be found none so good and rational, no nor even imagined, as that
which Christians profess and teach.

CHAP. V. There can be no better means to attain unto eternal bliss, then a
Christian life.
BEing now to treat of the means by which we are to arrive to the
forementioned ends, I shall make it appear that there is none which may
rationally be compared with those, which are approved by the Christian Faith;
for Almighty God doing nothing in vain, I suppose that no man can doubt, but
man is to arrive unto his last end, which is eternal beatitude, by some means
or other; for that thing questionless would be altogether vain and to no
purpose which could not arrive unto the end for which it was ordained, as for
example, the power of motion in man would be in vain, had he no limbs, muscles,
and joints to perform it, seeing therefore that man naturally thirsts after
eternal bliss, if the means of attaining it should be taken away, certainly
his desire of it would be altogether frustrate: Therefore there must be some
means found, by which man is to arrive to this clear vision of God, which is
his end. This means Christians call the purity of heart, and the divine Grace
supernaturally infused into our souls, which makes them perfect, and enables
them to operate and profit in all sorts of virtues.

No man can deny but that the purity of heart is the means to raise our selves
to the contemplation of the first Verity. I call the means that, which bears a
proportion with the gaining the ends, and to the clear knowledge of God, there
is exacted a great rapt or ecstasy, he being the most supreme object of our
understanding, and elevated far above all things which are pervious to the
senses. Wherefore there is necessary a most exquisite purity of mind, that is a
sovereign elevation of the soul from the love and affection of visible and
corporal things to the intense love of invisible and spiritual objects; for
that we call pure, which has no mixture in it of any thing which is of an
inferior nature and quality: Now our understanding being separated from all
corporal organs, and out soul being a spiritual and rational substance, the
more it abstracts and raises it self from corporal and material things, and
unites it self with Divine objects, the more pure it becomes. Whatever
Philosophers may have established and taught of the purity of heart, of
virtues, and of moral integrity is not only practiced and taught by the
Christian Religion, but by the same Religion there are found out new ways and
documents for the purifying our hearts with greater sanctity. For that purity
of heart, which is found out and gained by the force of nature, is a mean no
way proportionable with the end which we have prefixed for Christians; for
whatever exceeds the forces of any nature cannot be gained without the
assistance of another superior nature, even as water or any ponderous body is
not raised of it self, but by the motion of another; but to see the divine
Substance (as I have said in the precedent Chapter) is above the sphere of a
created nature, and therefore every intellectual nature operating according to
its capacity, it must needs follow, that a created understanding cannot purify
and undregge it self sufficiently, unless it be elevated by a superior
assistance, and therefore the moral integrity and righteousness of which
Philosophers have treated, bears not a sufficient proportion with the last end
and supreme bliss of man. Hence it is that Christians with great reason do
attribute this proportion to Grace, and other virtues supernaturally infused by
Almighty God, who is wanting to none in the requisits necessary for the
directing them, how with a most pure intention they may arrive unto their
wished end. To prove which more at large is not for my present intended
brevity, having manifestly demonstrated in my Treatise Of the simplicity of a
Christian life, that it is not derived from a natural love or imagination, or
from the light of natural reason alone, or from any celestial influence, or
from any other spiritual creature, but from the graces and supernatural gifts
which Almighty God infuses into our souls. Wherefore, not to repeat the same
thing oftentimes, those that are willing may read that Treatise, and see how
Christian life is a most perfect mean for the gaining the end of man's life,
whence it must needs follow that there is no other life so good and absolutely
perfect as that of Christians.

CHAP. VI. By Christian Religion man most assuredly obtains eternal bliss.
IF it be necessary (as I have proved it is) that amongst men there be some
true Religion, which consists in the righteousness of life, the Christian
Religion excelling others in this, must of force be the true Religion, by the
which Almighty God is both exteriourly and interiourly most duly worshipped.
For the exterior does either practice, or is an expression of the interior;
so that if the interior be true, it is manifest that the exterior is either a
practical execution or expression of the same verity, whilst corresponding to
the interior, it is rightly termed a true exterior worship, of which I shall
hereafter treat more at large. We therefore worshipping Almighty God chiefly to
exhibit a true honor unto him, and next for the obtaining our own true
beatitude, it must follow that God is truly worshipped by Christians, and that
Christians by so doing aim at their own bliss, which finally they are capable
on; and consequently those which do persevere unto the end in a true virtuous
and Christian life, may safely promise unto themselves eternal bliss.
Moreover, having plainly heretofore demonstrated a divine Providence over
humane affairs, to which Providence it appertains to direct things to their
proper ends by proportionable means, and there are no means which bear greater
proportion with eternal bliss then those of a Christian life; we may not
doubt but whoever shall have led a Christian life, (the Worship of Christian
Religion being the most perfect) shall be finally elevated to that eternal
bliss.

Further, if it be blasphemy to impeach the divine Goodness of Injustice,
Christians who observe this law cannot be frustrate of their bliss; for
Almighty God being the author or the first mover of all things to their proper
ends, either he will promote some mortals to their beatitude, or none; if none,
man's creation would be vain, and (as I have heretofore made appear) many
absurdities would follow: if some, then will he most justly prefer Christians
whom we know to be the most virtuous of all men.

For if Christians shining before others in Piety and Religion become destitute
of their final bliss, no man certainly must look for it because if that which
appears greater have no being at all, what may be expected of that which
appears less? As for Christians, certainly they appear to have a greater
proportion with their bliss then others, because (as I have proved) they have
lesser impediments, and are more disposed unto it; and therefore is the
Christian Faith and Religion to be preferred before all others. And truly, if
Christians living according to the prescript of their Religion become frustrate
of their expected bliss, we must conclude that there is no such thing, but a
mere fable, a fiction, a chymera; for in natural causes we see that they
produce their several forms and effects, if they be not hindered, and the
matter subjected have in it congruous dispositions, and shall the end and last
form of a virtuous life, which is eternal bliss, to which no life is better
disposed then that of Christianity, be denied, to that which is most habill and
disposed? Which if it be so, then truly there is no final felicity of man,
because (as I have shown) there is no other form of final bliss, and
consequently there is no last end of the life of man. Since therefore it would
follow (the end being the measure, or rule of the means by which the end is
gained) that man would be the most miserable of all living creatures, and void
of all order, would be subject to all casualty, and destitute of all
providence, which is the greatest of all absurdities, I conclude therefore
(that which I intended) that a Christian life by true Religion, is a most safe
and certain way to eternal bliss.

CHAP. VII. The truth of Christian Faith is proved by being the cause of a
virtuous life.
HAving proved the Verity of Christian Religion by Arguments grounded in the
virtuous life of Christians, now I intend to confirm the same out of the causes
of the same life. The principal causes of this life is the Faith of our
Savior Christ Jesus crucified, informed with Charity, that is, which works by
love: the Scripture teaching us, Justitia Dei per fidem Jesu Christi in omnes
and super omnes qui credunt in eum: that is, The Justice of God is by the Faith
of Jesus Christ for all and over all which believe in him: and without Faith it
is impossible to please God. This Faith of Christ informed, is that by which we
believe that Christ crucified is true God, and true man, the Son of God
identified in nature with the Father and the holy Ghost, but distinguished in
person, whom we love above all things. Faith therefore altogether with the love
of Christ is the cause of the forementioned life.

That it is so, daily experience teaches us, for that which is manifest cannot
be denied, and of this we have a most palpable experience, because we see
Christians make so much progress in the righteousness of life, as they profit
in the Faith of Christ; and on the contrary: for between these two sorts is
such a strict connection, as they infer a mutual consequence; and on the
contrary, the defect of one inferres the loss of the other; for no sooner
grows a Christian vicious of life, but the form of his Faith, which is Churity
toward God vanishes, and on the contrary. If therefore we perceive in the life
of man such an effect, which men have learned by their own and others
experience to have constantly endured from the coming of our Savior even unto
these present times and that all Christians do aver and teach the same, why
should we not out of admiration of so important a matter play the Philosophers,
enquiring and searching into the causes of it, even as the Philosophers having
perceived the effects of natural things, and being ignorant of their causes
began first to admire, and then by discourse to search into the causes of them?

First, therefore there is no effect perfecter then its principal, or total
cause, of whom its perfection has its dependence; if therefore the
righteousness and verity of a Christian life, which of all sorts of life is
the most excellent, has its dependence of the Faith of Christ, it is not
possible, but that Faith must be true; but if it be true, it follows that
Christ is true God, and that his Religion is true, which the Christians
profess.

It is no less impossible that that which is good, and true, has its
substantial dependence of that which is evil and false; for evil, as it is
evil false, as it is false, is a certain nothing or a negation of the positive
perfections of goodness and verity; now if the Faith of Christ should be
false, and the love of him vicious, certainly the perfection of a Christian
life which is known to be so good, could not substantially depend on that Faith
and love which are evil, as it is clear.

Further, if the Faith of Christ were false, it would be the greatest of all
errors; for to affirm a man crucified to be true God, if it were not true,
were an extreme madness and folly; how could the life of Christians therefore,
it being most perfect, (as I have proved) proceed from so great an error?
Seeing that the institution of a well-ordered life is derived from, and
grounded in the framing a right conceit and understanding of it; and all error
in affection and moral actions proceed from its in justice, and difformity
with the rule of equity.

Moreover, the better any nature or subject is disposed, the more is it
facilitated for the receiving a more perfect form; but the form and perfection
of our understanding is verity, and the disposition for the receiving of verity
is a purity and sincerity of heart, and therefore the more a man has his mind
undrossed from the affection of creatures, the more it is prepared for the
embracing verity, and rejecting that which is false; but I have proved, that
there is no disposition more undrossed and purified, then that of a Christian
life; and therefore if the Christian Faith were erroneous, none would more
easily discern the deceit, then Christians. But we behold the clean contrary:
for as they daily arrive to a more elevated degree of sanctity, the more
constantly and undoubtedly they assever its integrity; and as they grow more
grounded in their Faith, their lives also increase in perfection, whence it
undoubtedly follows, that their Faith is true.

Almighty God, as he is the first mover, and first cause of all things, does no
less produce and cause motions in spiritual things then he does in material
and corporal, and consequently causes motions in our understanding and will;
and no man must doubt, but he affords the light of verity at least of things
necessary to the salvation of reasonable creatures, more clearly to them who by
their concurrence and sanctimony of life become better disposed for it. Now if
virtuous and sincere Christians were erroneous in their Faith, they should have
no prerogative before the vicious and sinful, but as misled and blinded with
many enormious deceits and errors would be given over to a reprobate sense,
which is quite contrary to the goodness and present Providence of Almighty God.

The end is the cause of the means which are ordained for the gaining it;
wherefore, those that err in the end must needs go astray in the election of
the means to attain it: for if the end in practical things is as the principle
and cause in things which are speculative, seeing therefore that Christians do
not err in the means which serve for the gaining the end, (to wit) in the
virtue of their lives, but do far excel all others, it follows they err not
in the end: But all assuredly confess Christ to be their end; for they only
strive to become most like unto him, and with all their endeavors aim to enjoy
him; therefore we must conclude that which they most constantly profess, that
Christ crucified is true God.

The proceedings of Almighty God are always ordinate, ordering things by his
divine Wisdom, so as that he governs the inferior things by the superior;
and hence he subordinates nobler effects to nobler causes, for all causes must
be perfecter then their effects; now in humane affairs there is no nobler
effect then a Christian life, which consequently must proceed from the most
noble cause; now we see this wholly to flow from Christ, whom therefore we must
acknowledge to be the most perfect of all causes.

Secundary causes are the instruments of the primary or the First cause, a
Christian life therefore proceeding from Christ as from his cause, we must
confess that Christ being a man crucified is the instrument of producing this
excellent effect of Christian perfection; now if Christ were not also God as he
taught himself to be, there could be no man more wicked and execrable, and by
this means Almighty God would use a most detestable instrument for the
production of a virtuous life, which is extremely absurd.

The cause being the measure of the effect, by how much the perfection of the
effect approaches nearer to the perfection of the cause, and becomes more like
unto it, so much is it nearer its complete and full perfection; but we see the
more like a man is to Christ Jesus in his life, the more holy he becomes, and
in a manner Divine, which were not possible, unless he both were true God, and
his Faith most entirely true.

We know causes by their effects, as we experience in medicines by their
success; seeing therefore that Philosophers leave behind them unto posterity
the rules of a virtuous life, and yet very few of them have attained unto any
considerable degree of perfection, notwithstanding great endeavors done to
that effect; nay, in the great abundance of the most excellent of them, none
almost, without the direction of Christian Faith, have been able to effect any
thing; which yet we see in that short time, and exactly to be brought to pass
by Christian Discipline in the congregation of the faithful in every sex and
age: and the reason is, because in deed there is no comparison between
Philosophical documents and the rules of Christian life, neither for Morality
nor Religion. For what is more admirable, then that a most lewd and wicked man
(as we are taught by daily examples of all ages) as soon as he has truly
converted himself unto Christ crucified, becomes a new man, of proud and
envious, humble and courteous; of covetous and sordid, liberal and bountiful;
of lewd and luxurious, becomes continent and chaste, and as it were, with the
principles of his Faith sucks in the respective antidotes for his particular
vices, and with a manifold interest recompenses and repayes the debts of his
former vices; which never any sect of Philosophers has attained unto: whence
it necessarily follows, that Christ is the principal or isntrumental cause of
it, and a medicine which restores all morality and produces a most perfect life
in his faithful.

CHAP. VIII. That Christian Doctrine containing the Grounds of Faith is from
God.
THe reading, hearing, and contemplation of holy Scripture is the cause of
Christian perfection, and the substance of our Religion; for the verity of
Scripture is the object of Faith, and therefore the arguments of Faith are
those which are drawn out of holy Scriptures.

We know that in the understanding of man there is no determinate knowledge of
future contingencies, of which we can frame no acts nor science, which made the
most famous and learned of all Philosophers conclude, that men could have no
knowledge of future things subject to chance; and to have it was proper only
to Almighty God, who being eternal, comprehends in his eternity all things,
the which are clearly laid open to his understanding, and of the which men
cannot arrive unto the knowledge unless they be revealed unto them by Almighty
God: seeing therefore that the holy Scripture almost every where, but chiefly
in the Old Testament, does foretell future contingencies, which depend on men's
free will, not only in general terms, but most exactly intending unto
particulars, and that not those of one, ten a hundred, or a thousand years, but
has foretold those of two three, and four thousand years; and not only those
which befell unto the Jews, and those which were to be done by Christ his
Spouse the Church: but as it were foretold all the prosperities and adversities
which should happen to almost all Nations: as the Assyrians, Chaldeans,
Persians, Medes Greeks, Romans, and the rest; and that just as it was foretold
it most exactly came to pass; we must necessarily confess that the Scriptures
came from God, and were not written by the industry and wit of men, and
therefore those which as yet remain to be fulfilled, are to be held most
infallible; as proceeding from the same Spirit who foretold those others which
have so admirably beyond all imagination been accomplished. And hence we
clearly gather, that Almighty God has a most special care of men, and
exercises his divine Providence about humane affairs.

The foreseeing then of future contingencies appertaining only to Almighty
God, humane industry and sagacity cannot so order and dispose such combination
of affairs, as the heroical enterprises and warlike exploits of famous men,
but oftentimes do beyond all expectation light on most unexpected and variable
events. God only therefore can determine these actions of men so that they may
be signs of what is to follow in future ages; but we see how those things which
are already brought to pass in the new Scripture, or shall hereafter follow,
are deciphered and delineated under most proper types and figures in the Old
Testament.

Nor can it rationally be said that those interpretations are vainly raised or
feigned by Christians, or composed without ground, because in so great a
variety of things and times, in so manifold a composition of words, and in so
great a diversity of Authors and sacred Writers, there could not be so exact
an uniformity of the Old Law with the New, unless some understanding and
divine Providence had framed a correspondence of things which were to happen in
their due times: nor can it be said that it was done by chance, for there
cannot be found the least thing which is dissonant, impertinent, or
discomposed, but every thing with an equal tenor and most sweet harmony makes
up the concord; so that that which is obscurely touched in one place, in another
is found manifest, so as the whole Scripture may seem to explicate it self;
this if it be unknown to those which are ignorant of holy Scriptures it is
far otherwise with those who have enriched their understandings with the
treasures gathered out of the most sincere fountain of Verity: if therefore
they desire to know the truth, let them with piety, humility and purity search
into the same fountain of holy Scriptures, and questionless they will be of
our opinion.

Wherefore Allegorical Exposition agrees only to holy Scripture, because this
alone is that which has descended from Almighty God, as he exercised his
all-seeing and celestial Wisdom. I call an Allegory not the fabulous
Interpretations Poets use, (and we also do expound Parables without an
Allegory) nor a parabolicall and literal sense, which we use when in a fable
or parable, we do not intend to signify that which is couched under the bare
notion of the words, but only that which is raised in our conceits by those
words, and has a further sense. But an Allegorical sense we call that which
contains three things: first, that without all fiction according to the proper
signification of the words, the history both concerning the words, actions, and
relations be plainly and sincerely recounted. Secondly, that there be some
future thing signified by that thing which is done at present. Thirdly, that
those things which are done, be so fitly disposed and ordered, that when they
are put in execution there appear in them an insinuation of their future
correlatives: whence it is manisest, that no created industry could ever couch
such a confirmation of things in this sense but only the divine Providence,
which had an infallibility of all future contingencies.

Also the manner of speech and context of holy Scripture is so singular, that
it could not have been used by any the most excellent and skillful of all
Christians, although they were most exercised in all kind of knowledge; for
this manner of order and expression was only granted unto them unto whom the
holy Ghost vouchsafed to dictate and inspire it, because, although there
interceded several distances of times between those Hagiographers or holy
Writers, and also some of them used more elegance of writing; yet the substance
of the expression was always the same in all, which is a manifest sign that it
was not Humane, but Divine.

The same is also approved by the effects, by which we gather the virtue of the
cause; for (as I have already showed both in this book, and in another of the
simplicity of a Christian life) there is no nobler effect then a Christian
life, which cannot proceed out of any inferior and created cause, but only
from the free gift and liberal hand of Almighty God, seeing therefore that
that Doctrine is the chief instrument of a Christian life in which the whole
form of Christian Religion does consist, it clearly appears, that the same, and
even the manner of speech could not be Humane but Divine: for experience
teaches, that humane learning little avails mankind to a happy and blessed
life, because before this light appeared to the world, it was wholly drowned in
a dark night of vices and confusion; but after the rays of Apostolical
Doctrine displayed themselves, and the sound of Evangelicall Preachers was
heard, all those clouds and mists were dispersed, and the minds of men
replenished with those beams became resplendent with a most shining serenity of
truth and virtue.

But in case that some should deny things so long since past, I will relate
some domestical examples of my own experience; for I have experienced that men
have been by this divine Doctrine and the manner of it more illuminated,
delighted, and converted, then by any other; wherefore since the Preachers of
our times neglecting this sacred Doctrine, have betaken themselves to
Philosophical proportions and Rhetorical ornaments, they have profited their
Auditors very little, or nothing at all; whereas heretofore making use in
their Sermons of a plain manner of speech, and content only with the
instruction and textuall frequence of holy Scripture, they have wonderfully
inflamed the minds of their hearers, who were so mutually delighted, that both
in prosperity and adversity they did express their jubilee of mind, whence
they were wonderfully stirred up to lead most blessed and virtuous lives.

I call God to witness that I have been oftentimes preaching unto the people,
when I have made digressions to prove the profundity of the sacred Text unto
the wits of this age; to the learneder sort by Philosophical subtilties, and
humane learning: I have plainly perceived out of a certain impatience and
aversion of my Auditory very little attention in them; and this not only of
the mo^e ignorant but even of the learned sort: but as soon as I turned my self
again unto the Majesty of sacred Writ, either in the Interpretation of diverse
senses, or in the relation of the histories, I have seen an admirable attention
in every one, all fixing their eyes upon me as if they had not been living
creatures, but mere statues.

Yea, I have experienced, that when omitting other questions I have insisted
upon the Exposition of sacred Scripture my Auditory has been so delighted so
illustrated, and verity appearing so touched to the quick by Divine influence,
that they have immediately reformed their lives, insomuch that being delighted
with no other reading, or hearing any other thing renou^cing all terrene
delights and appetites, and stirring themselves up daily more and more, they
have lived lives more divine then humane. And what I now affirm happened far
more frequently in those Primitive Ages, when Christian Religion was but newly
planted.

This is that Doctrine which is more piercing then the two-edged sword; which
imbelished the whole with virtues, which defaced the worship of the devils, and
demolished the profane Oracles of their Idols; this is that which has
dispersed a world of errors, and has been so fruitful of all sorts of
wonders as I will hereafter declare.

Our understanding the more purified it is, the more capable it is of Verity;
and hence it is that so many most excellent and elevated wits, have not only
extolled the praises of this Doctrine by their writings, but giving testimony
of it by their preaching, life, and manners, have not doubted to spend their
lives in its defense, which certainly they would no way have done, had they not
seen almost a sensible and ocular evidence of its verity.

Further, truth gives testimony of truth, and falsity is the cause of division;
other disciplines, arts, and faculties are not contrary, but as servants unto
this; whence most learned and skillful Doctors, who are most versed and
exercised in all Sciences, do most constantly maintain, that there is no part
of Philosophy which is repugnant or inconsistant, nay, which is not most fitly
coherent with it; and therefore it is permitted all Christians to employ their
endeavors in the gaining of all Sciences, which would no way be tolerated, if
it were detrimentary unto the Catholic Faith: there are only some few
subject to superstition, which are forbidden, as that of Divination, being no
less pernicious then unprofitable; which by the learned, even of the
Philosophers, are hissed at, derided, and condemned, as not to be accounted
amongst the Arts and Sciences. And if at any time there appear any
contradiction between Philosophical and Christian Principles, they are so
apparently reconciled by our Doctors, that it clearly appears, that all
Philosophy is but the servant and handmaid of the sacred Doctrine; for the
easy dissolving of objections is the certain sign of Verity.

It is the nature of Verity, that the more it is impugned, the more (if it have
a fit champion) is it brought to light, because our understanding having Verity
for its object, is naturally inclined unto it, as to its proper perfection, and
where the more it shines, with greater delight it is embraced; but then Verity
appears most, when it is most sharply impugned, because in the very discussion
and conflict of disputation it manifests it self. Seeing therefore that
Christian Doctrine having been so vehemently impugned by so many Philosophers
and Tyrants, has always remained invincible and victorious, which the
infinite volumns of Christians testify, it is consequent that its truth
proceeded from Almighty God; otherwise in so many conflicts it had not so long
remained unconquered.

CHAP. IX. Christian Faith proved true out of their use of Prayer and
Contemplation.
AS Faith and the reading holy Scriptures, Auscultation, and Meditation is the
principal cause of a Christian life, so Prayer is its principal nourishment
where it has its growth and perfection: for by long experience we have found
in our Religion, that all those who profit in our Religion, and have arrived to
the highest degrees of sanctity have attained it by frequent and continual
Prayer; and we have observed, that they have taken such gust and complacence in
it, that they have despised all other humane delights as vile, abject, and
unworthy of them. Nor does this happen only to the most eminent and learned
sort of those which flourish in sanctity but it is commonly found in the simple
and ignorant, as well men as women, and even in all those who have learned to
lead a Christian life. By this effect therefore we may prove the Verity of out
Faith.

Almighty God being a pure Act, the first Verity, and an infinite Light, the
nearer a man makes his approach unto him, the more abundartly does he partake
this Purity, Verity, and Light; But man does not make his approach unto
Almighty God by corporal paces, but by the purity of life, elevation of mind,
and contemplation of Verity: Seeing therefore that there can be no life more
candid and more sincere, then that of Christians; and that then the mind of man
is most pure, when it is wrapped up in a soaring and extaticall contemplation of
the Divine perfections, it follows, that man is most possessed of this Verity
and Light, as he is in the very act of prayer and contemplation: and seeing
that we find by experience, that Christians as they increase in the fervor of
Devotion and frequency of Prayer, are more and more confirmed in their Faith,
and inflamed with the love of Christ, and profit in virtue we must confess
that the Faith, Verity, and Light of Christian Religion is Divine. Our
understanding affecting Verity as its proper perfection, and abhorring Falsity
as its greatest enemy; man is in nothing so disposed for the entertaining of
Verity and rejecting of contraries as in the very act of Prayer and
Contemplation; by which he does most steadfastly and ardently embrace the
documents of Faith, which therefore cannot be erroneous.

Moreover, all Christians in their Prayers to Almighty God, do beseech him to
grant that for the which they pray, by the merits of Christ; for in the end of
every prayer they most commonly add some such form, Through Jesus Christ our
Lord: or, Through Christ our Lord and yet they obtain admirable and incredible
graces from him; which if any should not believe, yet certainly they must grant
that which by daily experience is manifest, that they obtain that which they
principally seek after, the righteousness of a virtuous life, the quiet and
joyfulnesse of mind; so as they prefer the pious tears of Devotion far
before any delights and pleasures of the world. Now certainly if Christ were
not he whom our Faith proclaims him to be, they could not in so great a
serenity of mind, and at so near a distance of so great a light be environed
and buried in so great a darkness; nor would Almighty God permit them to be so
grossly deceived, or at least, if they were obstinate in an error, he would not
grant their petitions.

Again, every cause disposing its matter for the producing its effect, after it
has introduced its last disposition, immediately produces it, nor would it
dispose the matter unless it meant to Introduce the form; nor any cause of
motion would produce it, if it intended not some end of the motion produced;
but a just man unless he were invited and drawn on by Almighty God, who is the
first cause of all things, could not elevate his mind unto him by prayer.
Bliss therefore being the end of prayer and a virtuous life, Almighty God
would not induce man unto those means of prayer and virtue, unless he intended
to make him finally blessed. If therefore Christians makig progress in virtue
and prayers become more grounded and settled in their Faith and Contemplation
of Christ, their Faith cannot be but from Almighty God, by which he leads men
unto bliss.

Every cause grants (as I may say) unto its effect what it asks; the effect
asks of its cause its due and proper perfections, which then it is said to
exact, when it is rightly disposed: for then the cause, if not otherwise
hindered, delays not the execution of the effect, infusing that quantity of
perfection into it, which the degree of disposition does exact; which immediate
execution proceeds out of its facility and goodness which of its nature is
desirous to communicate it self. Almighty God therefore being the most
sovereign good, questionless will more then other causes which have not so
great goodness grant the petitions to this effect especially unto those which
are best disposed for the receiving his favors as are Christians, chiefly when
they are in the act of Prayer and Contemplation; but Christians ask nothing
more then the light of truth, according to that of the Psalmist, Ill umina
oculos meos ne unquam obdormiam in morte: Enlighten my eyes that I never sleep
in death. And therefore Almighty God never denies them their request; but
Christians the more they pray, the more they are confirmed in their Faith,
therefore this our discourse is of greater force.

Further, if Christ were not God, to profess himself so would be the most
supreme degree of blasphemy and detestation that could be. Now if Christians do
pray to God the Father through Christ, whom they believe to be of the same
nature with the Father and the holy Ghost, how does Almighty God permit them in
so great an error arising out of ignorance and simplicity, and does not draw
them out of it, knowing that they serve him with their whole affection, and
humbly beg of him the knowledge of truth? or if their obstinacy be in fault,
why does he leave so great a wickedness and treason against his Divine Majesty
unrevenged? or why does he (as we see him) favor this error and impiety?
whilst bestowing so many and great gifts on them he questionless grants them
that which they ask at his hands.

Our soul (as I have said) does chiefly delight in Verity, and is disturbed,
perplexed and confounded with Falsity, in which it can take no rest; if
therefore the Faith of Christ were false, there would be no imposture so absurd
and pestilent as it; for how should innumerable men, especially just and
wisemen, so employ themselves in the contemplation of Christ crucified, that
for this alone they should despise all humane affairs, and should not only
most willingly suffer want of sustenance, labors, heats and cold, contumelies,
threats, buffets, p^isons, and most cruel racks, and torments, nay, death it
self, but if they be without them, do wish to undergo them: duly we may say,
the finger of God is here.

CHAP. X. The same Verity proved out of the exterior worship of Christians.
I Have now showed out of the principal cause of Christian life, to wit, the
reading of holy Scriptures and exercise of Prayer, by which it is conceived
no^^ished, increased, and perfected, thru our Religion is true and void of all
falsity and deceit, which are the interior causes of it. Now I will briefly
run over the external causes, which serve as instruments and props of the
internal, to wit, the Sacraments and Ceremonies instituted in order to them,
all which appertain unto the exterior worship of Christian Religion; and that
I may not spend time about every one in particular, I will treat of them
altogether, as the different members of one and the same body. For all
sacramental Ceremonies, and even the other Sacraments having a reference unto
the Sacrament of the Eucharist, they may be rightly styled one thing.

From this external worship, if it be rightly observed, we see that Christians
gain great improvement in their Devotion and Sanctity, for we see by daily
experience even from the beginning of our Religion, to these very times by the
records, attestation, and examples both of the Primitive and Modern Fathers,
that those which piously and exactly practice this exterior worship, and do
often administer or receive those Sacraments and divine Mysteries, or do take
upon them some one, which before they had not, do increase in perfection, and
become daily more divine by their admirable sanctity; and those on the contrary
which do in a customary way, without Faith and Religion familiarly and
accustomarily frequent them, become the worst of all men; which most plainly
appears (to omit the examples of antiquity) in the Priests and Clergy of our
times, then whom, if good, none better; but if evil, none are found more
wicked and pernicious. For the good, as void of all affection to temporal
things, only insist in the worship of Almighty God, for whose sake and Faith
they doubt not to spend their lives; those which are bad are so excessive in
their impieties, so puffed up with pride, envy, avarice, and so overwhelmed with
all vices, that as altogether lost, and which is worst of all, they know not
how to think of amendment, and then chiefly, when by admonition, reprehension,
exhortation, and good examples, by which others are wont to enter into
themselves, they become more harsh, refractory and intractable. These things
being so and as present before our eyes, being no way refragable, we must seek
the reason why two such contrary effects proceed from the same Ceremonies of
the same Sacraments. Now it is not repugnant to Philosophy that two contrary
effects proceed from one and the same cause, if the matters subjected have
contrary dispositions; for the earth by the beams and heat of the funne of soft
becomes hard, and ice by the same of hard is dissolved into a liquid humor. A
tree, whilst it stands rooted in the earth, by influence of the Planets
brings forth blossoms and fruit, and by the same influence when it is rooted
up, it withers: and truly those effects being so opposite, that the one is most
excellent in those which perform those sacred Mysteries (as (I have said) with
due veneration; the other most pernicious in those which do abuse them, they
cannot proceed from any vain or false cause; and this not appearing so in men
of any other Religion, there can be no other reason of it given, but their
different and contrary worship of Almighty God; for if the exterior worship of
Christian Religion did not depend of God himself, and did not contain in it
self that divine Virtue and Verity in such a manner as instruments do contain
the virtue of their principal cause, they would no way be able to produce,
increase, and consummate the most excellent effect of Christian sanctity. This
exterior worship cannot produce this effect of its own proper force, because
Christian life being wholly spiritual, and consisting in the intellectual
part of man, cannot substantially proceed from corporal instruments: for what
can Baptism, the anointing with oil and balm, the use of incense, the oblation
of Bread and Wine, the Altars, and other such extrinsecall things of their own
virtue, conduce to the perfection of the soul, unless they were the
instruments of some superior cause? For if these were introduced for a
superstitious worship by any humane invention or diabolical imposture, a life
so holy would never proceed from so wicked and vain illusions.

But some may object that this worship is not the cause of perfection, but
rather the exercise of virtues and credulity of men, by which they believe it
to be divine: for the good striving daily by their virtues to root out their
vices, do every day more then other grow perfect by those exercises. But we now
seek the reason why others who are studious in the disciplines of virtue and
morality, who either do not make use of these Sacraments, or do a long time
refrain from the use of them, do swerve so far from the integrity they aim
at? Truly, if this worship were unprofitable or false, the more one should
recede from it and cast it away, the more he would profit in the exercise of
moral virtues: Priests also by deriding and contemning it would not grow more
vicious, but more virtuous, the contrary of which daily experience teaches.

Moreover, Almighty God being the supreme Verity, the more one is illuminated
by him, the nearer he approaches unto him; but the more a man is involved with
falsity and errors, the farther he becomes distant from him: Now we know that
those, who with Piety and Religion do frequent those mysteries, are so
vehemently delighted with this Divine Worship, that oftentimes rapt out of
themselves with the astonishment of their corporal part they remain
immovable, and their faces casting forth resplendent rays of sanctity make
them no less amiable then venerable; which though it happened oftener in the
Primitive Ages (as we read) then now-adayes it does, yet there are not wanting
those whom we know, which enjoy those privileges, and those not only of the
learneder sort, but of the simple and vulgar people. Whence therefore is this
kind of ecstasy? whence this absorpt and pleasant contemplation? whence this
servour of a spirit inflamed? those scalding lights, and sweet showers of
devout tears? whence this ineffable jubilee of the Church melodiously rejoicing
in her Hymns and Cantitles? Truly, unless this worship were from God, and
consequently true, there would be no where found so many dreams and lies, it
being wholly in a manner compacted of Types and mysterious Figures. For what
ever is contained in the Mysteries, Sacraments, Temples, Altars, Mytres,
Vestments, in all the world of Ceremonial Rites, in the modulation of Hymns,
and in the rest of the spiritual appurtenances would be a mere vanity and
labor lost; all which, nevertheless, are instituted for the worship of
Christ. If therefore this worship were sustained by the means of falsities,
men, at least the wiser and more perspicacious wits, would not out of the
meditation of those Sacraments be so wonderfully elevated to the contemplation
of Divine objects, nor replenished with so great and celestial delight; for
the understanding (as I have said) by falsities becomes more uncertain and
dull, and at a greater distance from Almighty God; wherefore out of the
contrary effect, we gather that this worship is true, and replenished with
Divine graces and favors.

The order also and signification of the things which are performed in the
Church, show clearly that it is no humane invention but a divine disposition;
for there is nothing in this worship irrational nothing vain, but every thing
has its order and proper mystery, of which I shall not now speak in
particular, although in the third book I shall touch some, as the necessity of
the subject will require. If any one desires more fully to be satisfied of this
Verity, let him revolve the explanations of the Fathers, where seriously
weighing every one in particular, he shall never be satiated with admiration,
to find in these Ceremonies no less order and harmony then in the universal
work of Nature, and shall receive most excellent contentment and dilatation of
heart; and if he be not of a perverse and obstinate condition, and have a mind
wholly darkened, he shall be forced to confess, that all those things are from
God, and not invented and instituted by men.

CHAP. XI. The same Verity proved out of the intrinsecall effects of Christian
life.
I Have hitherto proved to the power of my mean ability the Verity of Christian
Faith by Arguments drawn out of both the internal and external causes of a
Christian life, now therefore I judge it fit to prove the same by descending to
the effects of it; one of the principal effects, and immediately subsequent in
that is, the peace and quiet of mind, the joy and liberty of the soul: for
besides those examples which we read and hear of our Authors and
Predecessors, it is plainly seen in our age, that true Christians are not
moved by the brushes and storms of persecution, but do persevere more
immovable in the Faith and Confession of Christ then before, and even glory in
their tribulations and sufferings: we are to search therefore whence these
effects proceed, and how it happens that the more they follow Christ in the
perfection of their lives, they attain unto the greater liberty and serenity of
mind.

Christians themselves affirm this to be the reason of it, because (say they)
this bliss of man consisting only in our knowledge and contemplation of
Divine objects, it is manifest that the desire and appetite of man cannot be
bounded or limited by any ultimate and last end, which is not God himself: The
quiet (therefore) and peace of mind that Christians possess cannot proceed
from any other thing, then that they have prefixed unto themselves that last end
which of all others is the true one; whence if you should ask all Christians,
what was their supreme end to which they aim at, questionless all would answer,
that it was Almighty God; and therefore esteeming all worldly things as nothing
in comparison of God, and hoping after their transitory life to obtain and
enjoy him, they contemn and set at naught whatever the world contains. Hence
it is, that being bereft and despoiled of their worldly goods, they are not
contristated; when careless of their lives, they offer themselves to death,
that they may obtain Almighty God, their only and supreme good: and as God is
every where by his Essence, Presence, and Power, so is he in them also
particularly by love and contemplation as the thing beloved is said to be in
the party that loves. Now when the thing beloved is present, the mind of him
that loves is delighted, and rejoices; and therefore Christians who live
virtuously are extremely delighted with the presence of Almighty God, whom they
internally do perceive as present. And because God is an infinite Power, when
they experience his savours, slighting all other things, they fear nothing; and
in this manner being armed with great liberty and confidence, they are not
drawn from their purposes and resolves neither by fair means, nor by any
terrors whatsoever. But a man not being able by his natural forces by reason
of the sensual impediments and weakness of his understanding to arrive unto
this serenity and liberty of mind, we must necessarily (say they) confess that
this tranquillity and peace of mind is bestowed upon us as a most supernatural
and divine gift, by virtue of which Almighty God and our eternal bliss is
daily before our eyes.

That that is the true cause of peace, joy, and liberty of mind in the
Christians it is plain, our soul being one of the same, and having all its
powers radicated in the essence of it, as often as it is wholly employed in the
intense operation of some one power, it cannot use the service of another but
very remisly; for example, If one be in an intense contemplation, he is not
expedite in the use of the other powers of his soul; and if one be in great
pain, he is not at the same time fit for contemplation; if therefore Christians
were deceived by their Faith as by a vain credulity, no virtue of their
superior cause would affist them to confirm so great an error, and so they
would be left only to their natural perfections, nay, even those would be
much impaired by so great a deprivation of Verity; how therefore could they so
inviolably preserve so great a peace, joy, and liberty of mind amongst so many
calamities and oppressions, especially so universally retain it, as not only a
few, but innumerable do? For the Philosophers vaunt of one or two at most which
they pretend amongst them to have had this peace, quiet, and joy of mind; but
we can produce infinite of both sexes which in all parts of the world have
possessed the tranquillity and liberty of mind in most excessive tribulations
and torments, and this only by invocating, praising, and glorifying Christ
crucified. Moreover, we have found by the experience of our ancestors, and our
own, that this peace, joy, and liberty of mind is augmented by the increase of
Faith, and sanctimony of a Christian life, which certainly would not be so,
unless there was expected by Faith, Hope, and the true Profession of them, a
true and solid good; for as a man profits more in the righteousness of life,
so is he brought more into the knowledge and profession of the truth and good
which he seeks by eschewing the contraries, and therefore if Christians had not
found a solid good in the perfection of their lives, their joy would not be
increased by it, but rather decrease as they should find themselves deceived in
it.

This is very well confirmed out of the life of the religious, for to omit
examples of past Ages (which I cannot comprise in this short Treatise) we daily
see innumerable both men and women do betake themselves to strict Cloisters out
of the desire of a more perfect life, forsaking their parents, kindred,
friends, riches, and all pleasures together with their own liberty to live with
strangers and externs, to whom they become so subject and obedient, that as for
exterior subsisting and faculties they enjoy none, but those which by the
command of their superiors are permitted them, as precisely necessary for
their livelihood, and those to be changed and subtracted as things though
common to all, yet uncertain to every one in particular; but as for the
corporal perfections, they keep the chastity of their mind and body most
incorrupted and entire, subduing their carnal and sensual appetites, by
watching, fasting, abstinence, and other mortifications. And as for the
perfections of the mind, of which liberty is the chief, they renounce of their
own accord all the use of it with a perpetual and most strict obligation,
conforming themselves wholly to the will and disposition of their superiors.
Thus having forsaken all the goods which mortals are wont to call theirs, to
rejoice in, and be delighted with, all these who aspire to this perfection live
so contented and joyful, that one would think they had even the abundance of
all pleasures and delights, and by daily profiting in this way they become more
full of tranquillity and alacrity, rejoicing and triumphing only in the
praises of Christ crucified; and if one should ask why they did so, they all
unanimously would answer, that all their joy and delight is placed in Christ
Jesus, and in those things which have dependence of him.

First therefore I say that no man can with reason suspect that this should
proceed out of folly, seeing it has been the continual practice not only of
humble and simple men, but of innumerable eminent Saints and Doctors who would
easily by reason of their wisdom and sanctity discern the error and folly of
it, if it were vain and erroneous, for deceit and error cannot any long time
consist with wisdom and virtue; such men striving to attain unto the height
of perfections, there being none greater then that which they aim at (to wit) a
Christian religious life, of which that state is accounted the highest and
supreme degree, certainly there are none more apt then they to receive
celestial illumination. If therefore the Faith were not true, questionless
the vanity and deceit of it in many Ages, in so great a concourse of people of
all conditions, especially by such wise and virtuous men had ere this been
detected, nor had such men been able in so holy a servitude to preserve so
great a peace and tranquillity of mind, and perpetually to take such comfort
and joy in it. The contrary of which is manifest, for these are they who by
their words and experience have confirmed, and do confirm it by their Writings,
and as being set free, and only subject to the graces and favors of Almighty
God, do enjoy a most perfect peace and tranquillity of mind, and therefore all
kind of deceit is far distant from the Faith of Christ.

Every cause moved by its own goodness, which it seeks to extend and
communicate, does, as much as it may possible, direct its effect to its proper
end, especially, when the effect is disposed for it, to which the more it
approaches, the more it is delighted and does acquiesce in it. Now God is
supremely good, and a most liberal and bountiful dispenser of his own
goodness, and therefore he directs all his effects, which are well disposed,
to their proper and deserved ends, that they may take up their final rest in
them. Now there being no more intense disposition for the end of man then that
of most approved and religious men, he will questionless direct them unto
their wished end in which they obtain their desired rest in the enjoying their
end; but these by their daily progress are more confirmed in the orthodox
Faith, rejoicing in Christ Jesus, do bend their whole endeavors in gaining him
alone, setting all other things at naught. Whence it appears, that there is no
error or falsity in this Faith, otherwise, by the Divine direction, by
forsaking more and more this false delight of mind, they would be directed to
their true and wished for end and tranquillity.

All joy is grounded in some love or other, for love is the first act of the
will or rational appetite; from which the other acts have their influnce. The
joy therefore and jubilee of mind, which does most unfeignedly appear in the
countenances of those men, not consisting in any transitory, fading, or
natural perfection of the soul, and all of them affirming with one voice and
common consent, that it proceeds from the love of Christ crucified, cannot be
grounded in any error or vain affection because, the more uprightly and holily
such men did live, the more it would decay in them; for (as I have said) if the
Faith of Christ were false, they would daily more apparently perceive, that in
their preposterous affections they were wholly deceived, and thence they would
become more heavy and sorrowful, but the sincerity of their deportments, the
cheerfulness of their countenances, that refulgent kind of sanctity in their
exterior, for which they are in such reverence and veneration of all men, show
it to be far otherwise, whilst we may see them always in all events more
pleasant, content and joyful.

CHAP. XII. The same truth proved out of the extrinsecal effects of Christian
life.
ANother effect of Christian life is gathered from the exterior man, from
their manners and deportment, which is in a manner a sign and argument of a
certain kind of Divinity, by reason of which many are even enforced to esteem
and reverence them: whence the venerable aspect of humble men have blunted and
affrighted the proud and fierce minds of Tyrants; which we read of that
powerful and barbarous King of the Hunns, Attila, though he could be satisfied
by no slaughter or massacre of men, nor terrified by any power of enemies, yet
at Ravenna, a Speech of S. Leo Pope set him packing out of Italy, and he
contrary to his wonted custom, and not without the great admiration of his
followers, seemed not only to reverence the venerable Bishop, but to obey him
in a manner commanding him. And in like manner Totilas the cruel Emperor of
the Goths, after he had destroyed so many thousands by innumerable massacres,
wasted and consumed whole Nations, not being able to suffer the countenance of
S. Bennet a poor Monk, fell down prostrate on his face, and could scarce raise
himself, when the servant of God commanded and assisted him to rise. In like
manner Theodosius the Emperor returning to Millain after his cruel slaughter
of the Thessalonians, was by the authority of S. Ambrose chiding him, and
reviling his cruelty, denied the entrance into the Church, until he had by a
public penance enjoined him by the Bishop, expiated his cruelty and injustice.
I should want time, if I should recount the examples in this kind; but it is
not for my present purpose to prove that which by daily examples is known to
all, for I have often seen arrogant and wicked men in the presence of the holy
and virtuous, both to have changed their words, and with great sorrow and
compunction of heart to have reformed their lives. For the divine Spirit does
adorn the exterior both of men and women, the younger with a wonderful
sweetness and grace, the elder men with the veneration of their white hairs,
and makes them as the present matter requires, to become now amiable to some,
and now again to some others formidable.

This effect in the exterior proceeds out of the supernatural bounty of the
mind, that is, out of the grace of God adorning the understanding, will, and
other powers of the soul, which we gather hence, that our soul vehemently
altering our bodies by force of the imagination does exceedingly change the
countenance and visage: as by lascivious thoughts the body is stirred up to
lust, and by the instigation of hatred it is inflamed with desire of revenge,
whnnce we experience that the body is much altered by force of the imagination;
and by the alteration of the sensible appetite, and the commotion of the
spirits, the face and visage is straightway changed, so that by fear men are
wont to become pale and wan; by anger and bashfulnesse red and blushing, and
joy and sorrow make their several impressions in the countenance. The reason
is, because our understanding using corporal instruments and organs, what ever
passes in the interior, especially any vehement conceits, has its influence
into the corporal and exterior parts, especially into the face and eyes, for
we plainly discern in proud men an arrogance of look; in the cruel, a stern and
fierce cast of their eyes; in the light ones, a subtle and unconstant
deportment; and in the lascivious, a wanton aspect; nay, some malevolous old
women with the very contagion of their looks are said to infect and fascinate
little infants: to conclude, the good and evil habits of the mind, especially
if they have taken deep root, can scarce by any dissimulation be so hidden,
that they appear not in the exterior. Every cause therefore likening its
effect, and every effect making an expression of its cause, this exterior
beauty and comeliness of Christians, and this honest and venerable manner of
deportment cannot proceed from any other cause then the beauty of the mind and
integrity of their life.

Which effect we daily see to be of such virtue, that as we daily experionce
there is nothing to be found more energeticall and efficacious for the
conversion of sinners, for we experience that the examples of simple Christians
living uprightly have profited men more then the persuasions of learned and
eloquent Philosophers, nay, even the relations or beholding of miracles. For we
often see eloquent and learned men whilst they are preaching high and elevated
subtilties of knowledge to be hearkened unto with great attention, but their
lives not corresponding to their words, they have profited the Church very
little, but only born away the reports and praises of their eloquence and
wisdom. In past and present Ages there have been many miracles which little
conduced to the amendment of life; for though we see multitudes of men flock
together to see them, yet if we look more diligently into it, we shall find
that very few have reaped the profit of bettering their lives by them, but by
the perfection of a virtuous Christian, we both have known and seen innumerable
sorry and contrite for their sins, and converted unto Almighty God, and those
not only of the vulgar and simple sort of people, but most eminent in prudence
and learning; of the which very many having felt the odor of a good fame and
sanctity, contemning the pleasures and delights of the world, have betaken
themselves to these happy and religious Societies and Monasteries, where
loathing their former courses, they pass their lives with exceeding content,
pleasure, and sincerity.

Hence it is manifest, that there is some virtue in Christians by which these
admirable effects are produced, for a body has no substantial influence into
a spirit, which we see manifestly expressed in the most formal body of all, to
wit, the celestial which suffer nothing from any corporal virtue; for the
heavens suffer not from the neighboring fire, much less therefore shall a
spirit suffer by any corporal influence. Those things therefore that are
exterior and visible in a Christian life being corporal, they cannot have any
proper and substantial influence into the soul, by which it may receive
benefit, unless thereby some virtue be together infused into it; but in a
Catholic and virtuous man the most eminent and chief virtue, from which an
upright institution of life, exterior beauty, and holy conversation does
proceed is the immaculate Faith and Love of Christ crucified; for this Faith
and Love being augmented, their exterior ornaments and veneration are
increased, and of greater efficacy for the conversion of men. Faith therefore
which operates with love cannot be a deceit, seeing that falsity is void of all
virtue, and cannot penetrate the heart of man.

Verity is more powerful then falsity, but there was never any virtue or
remedy found more efficacious for the living well and virtuously, then a
Christian life, as we are taught by the comparison of Philosophers and other
men, by whose learning and examples very few have been converted to a good
life, and by the life of Christians innumerable do daily rise and lead most
unspotted lives; and therefore a vain and erroneous falsity cannot be the
ground or root of this life, otherwise, men would more easily be reclaimed to
the amendment of their lives, by the learning and morality of Philosophers,
then by Christian examples, which we find most false by experience.

Moreover Almighty God being the first mover without whom there is not the
least motion, and doing all things by his wisdom, he subordinates the nobler
effects to the nobler causes; but the most excellent of all effects is a
Christian life: Almighty God therefore by exhortations, and chiefly by
internal inspirations stirring up men to this life by most conspicuous
examples of the faithful, to the end that the cause may produce an effect like
it self, as the sun and men do generate a man, it follows necessarily that a
perfect Christian is the noblest cause and most perfect instrument of producing
this effect: Therefore the virtue of this instrument cooperating with Almighty
God is not a falsity, but a most supreme Verity; but this virtue is Faith
inflamed with a burning charity, as I have shown; our Faith therefore is most
true.

CHAP. XIII. The same confirmed by the wonderful works of Christ, and first by
his Power.
WE have proved now by the assistance of Almighty God the Verity of Christian
Faith out of the manifest effects, which daily are seen in the Orthodox Church,
and although there might be manifold other arguments brought to the
confirmation of it, yet having regard to my intended brevity, I will argue
only out of those events of former Ages, of the Verity of which the whole
world is a sufficient witness. Wherefore, as Philosophers by the effects which
they saw in natural things were moved to search into the causes of things, we
in like manner setting before our eyes the triumph of Christ, which we have
heretofore described, will most exactly, as far forth as the matter requires,
search into the causes of those effects. And as the Philosophers contemplating
the nature of things, out of the greatness, the wonderful order and
perfection of the whole world, did conclude that the cause of it was Almighty
God, who was more powerful, wise, and perfect then all others, whom they termed
the first principle and mover of all things; so we contemplating the triumph of
Christ crucified, will show him to have been, and to be beyond all comparison
more powerful then the feigned Gods of all other Religions, and to have done
greater things, and produced perfecter effects then any, and with an ineffable
and infinite wisdom and goodness to have infinitely surpassed them. Which
done it will be clear that this God, is the great Lord and King above all other
Gods.

I will begin with the effects of his Power, and placing his triumph before
your eyes, I argue in this manner. Either this Jesus the crucified Nazarean,
whom the Christians adore is true God, and first cause of all things, or he is
not; if he be, the disputation is ended, because, if he be God, the Christians
Faith, and his universal Doctrine and Religion must be true: if he be not, it
follows, that Jesus the Nazarean was a most prodigious monster, of a most
inexcogitable pride, and unheard of arrogance, whilst being a pure creature and
mortal man, he would be esteemed as the only supreme Deity, and adored above
all others: whence we might justly term him the most lying and worst of all
creatures, nay, even the most notorious of all fools, for undertaking phane
novelties set abroach, then may you see straightway the hedge cut in two, the
old fathers bounds removed, the Catholic doctrine shaken, and the Churches
faith torn in pieces. Such were they whom the Apostle sharply reprehendeth in
the 2. Epistle to the Cor. Chap. 11: For such false Apostles (quoth he) are
crafty workers transfiguring them selves into the Apostles of Christ. What is
transfiguring them selves into the Apostles of Christ, but this? The Apostles
alleged the examples of scripture and they likewise cited the^: The Apostles
cited the authority of the Psalms, and they likewise used it: The Apostles used
the sayings of the Prophets, and they in like manner brought them forth. But
when that scripture which was alike alleged, alike cited, alike brought
forth, was not alike, and in one sense expounded, then were discerned the
simple from the crafty, the sincere from the counterfeit, the right and good
from the froward and perverse: and to conclude, the true Apostles from those
false Apostates. And no marvel (says S. Paul) For Satan himself transfigureth
himself into an Angel of light, it is no great matter therefore if his
ministers be transfigured as the ministers of Justice. Wherefore according to
Saint Paul, whenever either false Apostles, or false Prophets, or false
Doctors do bring forth the words of holy Scripture, by which they would
according to their corrupt interpretation confirm their error, there is no
doubt, but that they follow the crafty slight of their master, which surely he
would never have invented, but that he knows very well, that there is no
readier way to deceive the people, then where the bringing in of wicked error
is intended, that there the authority of the word of God should be pretended.
But some will say, how prove you that the Devil uses to allege the
Scripture? Such as doubt thereof let them read the Gospel, where it is
written: Then the devil took him up (that is our Lord and Savior) and set him
upon the pinnacle of the Temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of
God, cast thy self down, for it is written that he will give his Angels charge
of thee, that they may keep thee in all thy ways, in their hands shall they
hold thee up, lest perhaps thou knock thy foot against a stone. Mat. 4 How will
he, think you, handle poor silly souls, which so sets upon the Lord of
Majesty with the authority of Scripture? If thou be (quoth he) the Son of God,
cast thy self down. Why so? For it is written (quoth he): we are diligently to
weigh the doctrine of this place and to keep it in mind, that by so notable an
example of the Scripture, we make no scruple or doubt, when we see any allege
some place of the Apostles, or Prophets, against the Catholic Faith, but that
by his mouth the Devil himself does speak. For as at that time, the head spoke
unto the head, so now the members do talk unto the members; that is, the
members of the Devil to the members of Christ, the faithless to the faithful,
the irreligious to the religious, to conclude, Heretics to Catholics. But
what I pray, says the Devil? If thou be the Son of God (quoth he) cast thy
self down. That is to say: Desire thou to be the Son of God, and to joy the
inheritance of the kingdom of Heaven, Cast thy self down, that is, Cast thy
self down from this doctrine and tradition of this high and lofty Church, which
is reputed to be the Temple of God. And if any one demand of these Heretics,
persuading them such things; how has that crafty commander of the Arabians
Mahomet done? he never affirmed himself God, true it is, by his eloquence and
power, by his arms, gifts, and a luxurious license of pleasutes, he drew unto
him a barbarous and unskilful multitude; and did not he give a most honorable
testimony of Christ? Assuming to himself nothing above humane forces and
policy, but such was not Jesus the Nazarean; never did any mortal propose more
difficult things to be believed and done then Christ did; for he absolutely
commanded the belief of a Trinity, to wit, the Father, Son and holy Ghost,
the same one God three really distinguished persons, which yet being identified
in substance, were one, and the self same entity. Then he commands himself to
be believed as God the Son, being the same with the Father and the holy
Ghost, and that he is at the same time true man, the son of the Virgin Mary,
whom he also commands to be adored as the true Mother of God; that the Cross
also, which was always esteemed as the instrument of equivalent ignominy,
should be held in most supreme honor and veneration, as the chief sign of our
salvation: In his last supper he commanded by his last Will and Testament, that
we believe that Bread and Wine by virtue of a few words of Consecration were
really and substantially changed and transubstantiated into his Body and Blood,
notwithstanding, that the wonted accidents of Bread and Wine persisted, and
that we should under those signs of Bread and Wine adore him, and receive him
as nourishment and a celestial viaticum by which he promised us eternal life,
and that no body could enter into the kingdom of Heaven unless they were born
again of water and the holy Ghost. Moreover, he commanded that all his
Scriptures should be believed to a tittle without hesitation, doubt, or
derogation, notwithstanding they contain things most difficult to humane
understanding, without the belief of all which, there was no salvation. Nor is
this constant and firm veneration of those things sufficient, unless
contemning visible things, and loving the invisible, we do patiently undergo
all kind of persecutions, In patientia enim vestra possidebitis (inquit) animas
vestras: In your patience you shall (says he) possess your souls. He promised
his followers and servants in this life, not riches, honors, and dignities,
but the clean contrary, to wit, poverty, ignominy, oppression, and what is
more, outrages blows, banishment, gaols, conflicts, and torments, by suffering
which for his sake, he promises us an unspeakable beatitude; promising things
unto us which exceed the understanding of man, as Glory, for example, in heaven
with the Angels, the Resurrection of the bodies, and that which neither eye
has seen, nor ear has heard, nor has ascended into the heart of man: These
things notwithstanding being so, he brought to pass whatever he pleased,
although the world fought against him. For innumerable men of all sorts and
conditions, have so received and maintained this Doctrine, that they chose
rather to leave their lives then to forsake their Faith. Kings also and Princes
(as we see at present) humbly inclining themselves under the yoke of Faith, are
obedient to his inferior Ministers. Let us set therefore before our eyes
Christ as a poor man, accounted formerly and esteemed the son of a Carpenter,
and contemned by those that knew him, and let us ask him what he thinks: Now
let him answer, I, though a poor man and a stranger to the world, do intend to
bring the whole world under my Laws, and do intend that men do adore me as a
true God, together with my Father, and the holy Ghost, and that they also
worship the Cross, on which being nailed, I shall die a most ignominious and
cruel death, between two thieves, and after this cruel death, that they do most
devoutly and honorably reverence the Instruments and Relics of my torments,
and preserve and place them amongst their chief and precious jewels and
treasures. And that above all things with Faith and their best Devotions they
adore this Sacrifice of Bread and Wine, as the true substance of my Body and
Blood, and that by the Water of holy Baptism, they believe their souls to be
cleansed from all spot of sin and that they are sanctified by the anointing
of Oil and Balm; and lastly, that receiving and observing my whole Doctrine
entirely, they esteem it as a great wickedness to derogate ought from it, even
to the last tittle; and that they honor and make their addresses unto my
Mother, being sanctified with an uncorrupted and perpetual Virginity, and
esteem her next unto God, as Lady and Queen of the Universe, by a special
prerogative exalted above all the quire of Angels, and that they make their
supplications to those whieh from being Fishermen I have chosen to be my
Disciples, and that they adore their very bones, ashes and other relics:
would thou not judge this poor man, thinking and speaking such things of
himself to be a sot, fool, and worthy only to be laughed at?

If further whilst thou laugh'st at him, he should go on, and say it is my
will, that they not only do most firmly believe all those things, but that for
this reason, they lead their lives most continently and uprightly, and for my
promise given them of an invisible happiness, they despise all terrene and
sensible things, and to show their most ardent affection toward me, they do
most willingly undergo poverty, thirst, famine, toils, miseries, torments, and
most cruel deaths, and that they choose rather all these things then deny the
least tittle of my Doctrine? Would thou not think this man wholly mad and out
of his wits? If he should add to this, it is my pleasure that all this be
brought to pass against the resistance of the whole world, against Kings and
Princes, against all the Religions and sects of Gods and men; I intend to fight
against infernal powers to gain the victory, and triumph over them,
questionless thou would burst into a louder laughter.

But if being asked by what confidence or arms he meant to effect those things?
he should answer, by no other then by the preaching of himself and his
Disciples; and because eloquence has a great force to persuade the minds of
men (lest any of his victories should be attributed unto it) that he should
affirm that faculty no way to fit his purpose, and that his Ministers should
bring those things to effect, without all art, by a sober, modest and simple
narration of those things, thou would ascribe this to a higher degree of
madness. If he should go on, I know that for my sake an infinite multitude of
men would perish; that the more there die, the more the number of the faithful
shall increase, and my Faith shall be propagated to the farthest ends of the
world; for the blood of my Martyrs shall, as the Seed of the Church, yield a
fruitful harvest of my Believers; and I will deliver unto one of those my
Fishermen, and to his Ministers, which shall never fail, by a continual
inheritance the perpetual Scepter of the Kingdom of Heaven, and I will make
to stoop the supreme City and Lady of the world, and the Emperor himself to
kiss the feet of my Substitutes. Oh! if thou should hear him say so, with
what furies, I will not say madness, would thou think him to be agitated?
what peals of laughter would thou not bestow upon him?

Hearken to him a little further, there shall be infinite Books written of me,
by most excellent and learned men, which shall praise and magnify both me and
my Doctrine, and extolling it above all others, shall defend it with their
whole forces; my Priests shall with great reverence of the people, with solemn
pomp and magnificence, and with torches lighted proclaim the same, which all
the auditors shall receive uncovered with a reverend and most humble
attention; would not these things seem dreams unto thee?

Hear him conclude, being armed with this only weapon, without all doubt I
will bring all those things to perfection, and with an invincible power, I will
prove my self victorious, and will bring the whole world under my obedience,
nor shall there ever any prevail against these ground-works and foundations of
my Religion.

Whilst he assevered these things who would not judge that this were a work
impossible to all mankind, to Nature and the heavens, and only feizible to the
divine Omnipotence?

Now all these things being brought to effect, it is manifest that it is the
only work of the divine Majesty, and that this Faith of Christ was only
established by Almighty God alone: for was there ever any of the ancient
wizards, or Philosophers, or Mahomet, or some one of the most powerful Kings
that ever did the like? Or are there any Gods of the Gentiles and Nations to be
compared to this? These kind of exploits have not been heard of from the origin
of things! let them blush therefore and be confounded which judge of Christ as
Infidels.

Nor may these things be said to happen by chance, seeing that the Prophets and
Sibylls foretold them long before, and the ancient and incorrupted Monuments of
the Jews and Gentiles give testimony of them, in which is written, that those
things were not only revealed by Almighty God to come to pass, but that
Almighty God did himself promise to perform them.

As in natural things there are some causes necessary, and others, as of most
things are indifferent, so in arguments and intellectual discourses, some
there are which necessarily enforce the understanding to assent, which are
called demonstrations; others are called learned, dialecticall proofs, which
though not always, yet for the most part incline the understanding, though it
do not firmly tie it to the asseriton; others again are so weak as they scarce
incline it at all. Wherefore, although in matters of small consequence, as in
Mathematics, there are found many demonstrations notwithstanding in natural
things there are found very few, but in the high and most eminent things, as
also in moralls there are found no demonstrations at all. But the light of our
understanding is so weak, that it does not discern the proper difference of
things: for the Philosophers use accidents instead of differences, and
therefore they are ignorant of the proper definitions of things; the essence
therefore or definition of the thing, being the mean or middle term of a
demonstration, it follows, that few or no demonstrations are found in natural
things; wherefore, it is very hard to settle or ground our understanding in
natural and moral Sciences, much more in metaphysicall, and most of all to
apply our understandings, and altogether to attract our will, that we draw it
from vices to virtues; for the sensual part, being opposite to the spiritual
and rational, it is very difficult that the affection follows the
understanding, but of all things it is most difficult to make both Powers so
agree, that the fruit of good works do issue from them, and persevere unto the
end of our lives; for of every Philosopicall Thesis there are almost as many
opinions as heads, and very few of them effect what they teach, and scarce any
of them have persevered unto the end of their lives without corruption of
vices, and if any one such be found, they account it a miracle. Now if the very
chief of those Philosophers could not convince the understanding of man to
believe those few truths which reason it self dictates, and are naturally
ingrafted in us, as that there is a God, and that he does exercise his
Providence about humane affairs; that good is to be sought after, and evil
avoided, and others of the like nature; and if they could not reconcile the
affection in a very few things with the understanding for their well-doing,
that they did not finally disagree, by how much would they be less able to
perform it in things which exceed the bounds of reason: But the Disciples of
Christ with their only preaching did unite the will and understanding of an
infinite multitude of men, and, as it were, transfixing them, did enforce them
to believe and love those things unto the which neither demonstration it self,
nor any humane reason could any way arrive, so that for the promise of heaven,
they have esteemed all earthly things as dross, and becoming indefatigable in
their labors, they could not be removed from their purposes, neither by fair
means, threats or torments. Now by what virtue have poor ignorant Fishermen
done these things? certainly by no Humane power, but Divine. For nature has
expressed the whole forces she had toward mortals in the Philosophers, and
yet we see, she has not had in them the force to accomplish those things.
Certainly if the Faith of Christ were stuffed with lies, questionless a few
Fishermen could not have done those wonders in confirmation of it, nor could
the Faith it self have persisted in its full force so long time against so
powerful and manifold oppositions.

Moreover, if Christ crucified and his Fishermen drew so efficaciously the
whole world to the Divine love as I have said, they could not do it by plain
and bare words, for grave, wise, and learned men are not led away with bare
words; wherefore it is certain that they confirmed their words with miracles,
which were so many, so stupendous, that far surpassing the limits of nature,
they could only be wrought by Almighty God, who alone is the author of
miracles. But the Divine Majesty does not give testimony to the confirmation of
lies, but of Faith, and therefore the Faith of Christ, in confirmation of which
they are done, cannot be false. Now if any should deny miracles, this would be
the greatest miracle of all, that those manifold and admirable things, of which
I have made mention should be done without miracles by Christ a poor man, and
those ignorant and unpolished Fishermen his Disciples. Therefore, whether
Christ and his disciples did shine with miracles or no certainly an infinite
power surpassing all the power of all Gods, does appear in his works; but as of
all causes that is the first which has more power then the rest, so amongst
Gods, he is truly to be esteemed the true God, which is most eminent above all
others in power, as is Christ our most invincible Conqueror.

CHAP. XIIII. The same concluded out of the Wisdom of Christ.
I Will now show that his Wisdom was inferior to none. First, then it is the
part of Wisdom to order and dispose things rightly, but in all things which
are to be directed to their ends, the rule of Government ought to be drawn from
the end of them; for then every thing is rightly disposed when it is directed
to its proper end, for the end of every thing is its supreme and chief good;
whence those that in the studies of arts do so regard the end, that they direct
all other subordinate things unto it, are called masters of that art. As in
Architecture, those workmen which carry the stones, wood, lime, and other
requisits are not said to be architects, but those which give the chief
disposition, proportion, and form to the building. In artificial things, they
having only their particular ends, in which the end of man does not consist;
he that shall be skillful in those is not to be termed absolutely wise, but
with a restriction to his art. He therefore is rightly to be styled absolutely
wise, who observing the supreme and consummate end of humane life, does dispose
all fit means and all his actions and operations unto it; But Jesus the
Nazarean efficaciously teaching his Disciples and Followers, showed them the
true end of man's life, and the true means by which they were to arrive unto it,
and this not only by his Word, but by his lively example, so that no end of
humane life can be found out, or imagined better, or more perfect then the life
of Christians. Wherefore it is clear that neither amongst the Gods of the
Gentiles (suppose the impossibility of their Deity) nor amongst men there ever
was or could be found a wiser then Christ.

The sign of a knowing man is to be able to teach, for when a man is arrived
unto the perfection of a Science he can easily teach it others, as in natural
things for example. When a man has attained unto a perfect age, he is capable
of propagating mankind by generation of children: but there was not any other
God or man from the beginning, who taught a more profitable wisdom then that
of Christians, or who taught it with greater facility: as for the learning of
Philosophers, it is obscure, and scarce to be learned in long time, and
perplexed with many difficulties and errors, by reason of which the very
masters themselves are very uncertain and anxious, as I have said before that
they were concerning the divine Providence, and in the end of humane life, but
after the supreme wisdom of our Savior and Master Christ appeared, the world
was so illustrated in a short time with the Doctrine of the divine Providence
and Goodness, of the immortality of the soul, of the end and beatitude of man,
of the means to arrive unto it, and many other documents that Christians of
both sexes, even in their tender age and infancy did more clearly penetrate
those things, then famous Philosophers had done by their great industry and
study. And they became so constantly grounded in this Doctrine, that they had
rather suffer a thousand torments even to death it self, then impiously deny
the least tittle of the Doctrine of Christ.

The virtue of the cause appears the greater, the further it operates and the
quicker; wherefore, the more quicker that Wisdom has its effect in men, the
more questionless is its power. It Is not the work of a principal virtue or
industry to make those wise which are docile, and have their minds greatly
disposed for wisdom: but suddenly to teach fools, children dullards, girls,
reprobates, and most wicked men, and strumpets wisdom, and convert them unto a
good life, exceeds all humane forces. But our Christ Jesus did not only
convert innumerable of those, but also of prudent and learned men presently,
with only a beck, and made a change in their lives by the true compunction of
their hearts, and daily does not cease from those effects, which none ever of
the Gods or men have done; and therefore his Wisdom and Doctrine is to be
preferred before all. When Nature is determined to do something in particular,
it is not to be esteemed the part of any rare virtue to effect it in natural
things by means which are natural, as if a spiritual creature by the
application of fire to a house should straight burn it, which was not hard for
any man to do; but if it were performed by contrary causes as by striking fire
out of ice to raise a great combustion, this would be esteemed a work of great
virtue. It is a sign therefore of a supreme and infinite virtue to produce all
natural effects without any natural instrument, or to do any thing with any
instrument, or to do it with the instruments ordained for contrary effects.
Wherefore, to teach wisdom by due and natural means according to the wonted
capacity of men as the Philophers do, is no matter of admiration; but to teach
us the supreme and ineffable wisdom by the folly of the world, that is by
those things which men commonly esteem foolish and absurd, and to convert those
follies into the instruments of divine Wisdom, and to place the chief Wisdom
in them is a most difficult work, and to be esteemed only Divine. For if the
horror and contumely of the Cross, together with the scorns, buffets, stripes
and torments, which Christ in his death did suffer, be rightly considered,
there could be found nothing more foolish and horrible then the Cross, before
Christ was nailed unto it; but Christ by means of it did infuse into the wood,
the most sovereign of all Wisdoms, as all Christians do profess and testify
by daily experience; therefore the supreme and divine Wisdom has been only
found in Christ Jesus.

Also, Wisdom being the honor and badge of Divine things, certainly that
Wisdom is to be preferred before all others, which teaches men Divine things
better then all others: but this has been done by none so well as by that of
Christ; therefore this must be the most excellent of all. But that it is so
appears out of the Writings before Christ, which are not contained in his
Doctrine, which if they be compared with the Books and Monuments of Christians,
thou will easily confess that there were very few things taught by the
Philophers and other Authors. Nay, what is more, Christian Doctrine does
extremely conduce to the increase and perfection of Philosophy it self, seeing
it does so wonderfully every way lay open the knowledge of Divine things, that
almost all Christians do profess, know and teach those things which before
them were scarce understood by the Prophets themselves. And after the preaching
of the Apostles men did so blush at their own errors, and strive to purge
themselves of them, in such sort, as if having wandered in a dark night and
weltred in the dirt of their errors, being environed on a sudden with a great
light, beholding their impurities and stricken with shame and confusion they
had endeavored to cleanse themselves; for both the Philosophers and Poets
being confounded at the worship of their Idols, at their old wives stories, and
impure dotage, the light of Christ once shining (at whose abundant luster they
were dazzled) they endeavored to make good one lie with another, to feign their
Allegorical Interpretations, when they saw they could by no other means hide
and justify the wickedness of their Gods, and their vices so enormious that
the worst of men would be ashamed to own them.

It belongs also to a wise man not only to have the knowledge of easy things,
but of those which are most difficult, and to be able to teach the same, and
defend them against their adversaries; no man ever taught more difficulties of
Divine things, nor ever made them appear with more ease then Christ, who did
not only instruct his own few Disciples, but even the whole world. And
Christians do easily defend those documents against infinite opponents, that
whoever shall have read their Arguments and Books they will not be able to
doubt, that the verity of them proceeded of an eternal and incomparable
Wisdom. Our adversaries fought against them most exactly, not only with
Sophistry, with captious and syllogisticall contentions, but with contumely,
threats, the sword and death it self, over all which their invincible Verity
remained triumphant. Truly, if the Tyrants had contended with the Princes of
the Philosophers with both arguments and torments, as they did against
Christians, I am confident they would have been contented to deny their very
first Principles; but Christ proposing those things which cannot be found out
by natural reason, and defending them both from the sword and from all the
wisdom and injuries of the Gods and Philosophers both by his solid force
established them for all eternity.

Moreover, Christians Faith is either true or fictitious; if true, we are
agreed; if fictitious, even thence may be drawn an efficacious argument: That
Christ was the most understanding and wise of all others which found out such
difficult and sublime things, and did so persuade them unto mortals, that they
would not be infringed or destroyed by any device or humane reason or power.
That Christian Doctors themselves do make profession of the science of
Philosophy, and although those things which Christ taught were above the sphere
of reason, yet they show that they are no way repugnant unto Philosophy; and
that other Sciences do rather serve to confirm them then otherwise. They do not
as certain superstitious and ignorant people, who reject or contemn Philosophy,
or some other true Science, challenging all things which are well said as their
own, from others whom they say are unjust possessours of them. Now who is there
to be found wise, cautious, and subtle which can maintain any fiction and lie
against all the arguments and reasons of so many wise and learned men, and show
that they are consonant to all Philosophy? Truth certainly is consonant to
truth, and all truth is dissonant to falsity. If therefore the Philosophers not
without great difficulty have been able to preserve and protect Verity
inviolate against their adversaries, by how much less will they be able to
defend falsity being of its own proper nature weak, against violent and subtle
opposition? therefore although it were granted that this Faith were fictitious,
yet we should necessarily conclude that Christ had the most piercing and
elevated wisdom of all others, who by his invitation has drawn men unto him
by most sublime and uninvestigable documents, and has enforced them by a
sacred inspiration to lead virtuous and blessed lives. But seeing that things
inconsistent cannot hang together, as for example, a false and true Philosopher
can have no true coherence; and that by his Doctrine men are directed as by a
straight rule to a virtuous life, we must confess that his Faith and Doctrine
is true, and that he is the wisest of all Gods and men.

Hence it is that men most versed and skillful in all Sciences, and most
eminent for the sanctity of their lives have embraced that Doctrine of Christ
as the supreme Wisdom, and have extolled it with their praises, magnified it
with their Works and Monuments, and confirmed it with the testimony of their
lives. Which had they not most certainly known that it was delivered unto men
by Almighty God, certainly they had not undergone so many labors toils amd
agonies for the defense of it.

The Wisdom of the greatest Master then chiefly appears, when by a compendious
epitome he brings his Disciples to the end and last perfection of all Sciences,
but this Christ alone has effected; for every Science is either rational or
real, as for rational, it is either Logic, Rhetoric, or Poetry, which
treats of ens rationis, or the entity of reason: and their end is by diverse
Arguments and Exhortations to force the understanding of man to assent to that
which they incend. To this Christ himself has above all other without all
difficulty brought his Disciples; which most appears out of this, that whereas
they were Fishermen formerly ignorant and unskilful, and innumerable others of
the simpler sort, who having once received this Doctrine have with most
efficacious persuasions changed, as it were, the face of the whole world, which
neither the force of arms, nor other endeavors of all Wisdom (if we consider
it aright) could ever have done. As for real Science it is divided into
practical and speculative; the practical is that which is moral, which
Christian Discipline does teach so exactly, and with such facility and
celerity, that the Philosophers (as I have said before) can find no defect in
it. If the Science be speculative, it either abstracts from all sensible and
intelligible matter, and so it is that which is termed Divine, in the which
Christ did so surpass all others, that he is not only the chief, but that
there is no comparison to be made with him: or it abstracts only from sensible
matter and not from intelligible, and this is called Mathematick, by which one
considers the form, and has no regard to the good or end of it, (as the
Philosophers say): and for this reason, the Doctrine of Christ only attending
the good and end of things imparts little to this Science, because it does not
appertain or conduce to salvation; yet if there be any profit to be gathered
out of it which helps to a good and virtuous life, this the Christian Doctrine
lays claim unto; for in holy Scriptures there are numbers and figures, which
are most fitly disposed and ordered for the improving morality, and the
contemplation of the Divine perfections, so that neither in the least
Disciplines of Philosophy has not this Doctrine its wholesome and profitable
influence; or the Science abstracts from neither sensible nor intelligible
matter, and this is natural Philosophy, to whose greatest good and last end
Christian Doctrine does by diverse means both easily and with great content and
pleasure lead us. For the knowledge of natural things in it self, is not that
supreme end unto which we strive by them to attain unto, but by these corporal
things we are brought unto the knowledge of invisible objects, which the
Christian Doctrine does afford with great satisfaction in great abundance,
whilst it represents most admirably, and to our great satisfaction the
invisible perfections and mysteries of Almighty God, in all natural things as
in so many mi rours; Christ therefore was the most wise Master of all, who most
easily brought the whole world to the last end and highest perfection of all
Sciences.

To conclude, the delights of the understanding far exceed the pleasures of
the senses, and that which chiefly appertains unto the understanding consists
in the knowledge of the first Verity, from which, as it is most perfectly
conceived, arises the greatest delight. The sign therefore of the sovereign
Wisdom of Christ is the supreme delight which Christians enjoy in his
contemplation, then which there has been none hitherto found so great: for
there have been innumerable, as now-adayes there are, which for the
contemplation of the first Verity contained in the Christian Doctrine,
forsaking all the pleasures and enticements of the world have betaken
themselves to desert and sequestered places, and which is most of all, they have
made such progress in that contemplation, that a man would think they were not
men, but petty Gods and Angels upon earth; for being as it were, elevated above
the terrene sphere of carnality they do not only not affect it, but do not so
much as vouchsafe to look upon it, having withing themselves like Gods and
Angels that which satisfies and suffices them. Out of all which we may easily
gather, that the Doctrine of Christ is the chief of all, and that Jesus Christ
himself is the true Wisdom of the eternal Father, which only was able to
bring so many and so wonderful things to pass.

CHAP. XV. The same Verity confirmed out of the Goodness of Christ.
I Have now shown that Jesus the Nazarean has so far surpassed all other
men, and all the Gods of the Gentiles in Power and Wisdom, that if any believe
there is a God, he must questionless judge no other beside him to be so. It
remains that I make the same appear out of his Perfection and Goodness, by
proving that he is the sovereign of all Goods and the last end of humane life,
in which we must in the first place observe, that humane actions are directed
to some end or other; for the actions of men as they are humane proceed
questionless from the free will or election of man, by which he differs from
brutes. Now the object of the will is some good or end prefixed, and therefore
there being no infinite or endless process of those prefixed ends (otherwise
the motion of every appetite would cease) it is necessary there be one last end
of man, for it is impossible there should be two substantial last ends of any
thing, seeing that beyond the last end there remains nothing to be sought
after. That is called the last end which does so satiate the appetite of any
thing that it formally includes, or at least subordinates all those things
which can be desired or sought after, and therefore there is but one and the
same last end of all men. Nevertheless we must know that all men do not agree
about their last end, as it is taken materially, that is, where and in what it
is found; although all agree in the formal conceit of it, that is, in the
nature of it, and in what it consists, because the nature of the last end of
mankind is the supreme felicity of it. Now all men agree in the desire of their
chief felicity, yet all do not think that that felicity consists in the same
thing. Having formerly proved that the last end of humane life is the first
Verity and first cause, that is Almighty God, if I shall now show that Jesus
Christ is this last end, it will manifestly appear that he is the first Verity,
the first Cause, and true God, and the supreme good in which most assuredly
does consist the nature of the last end.

Which that we may more clearly understand, we must consider, that when any
nature is directed; or affected toward any thing as to its last end, that by
the admixtion of another nature which distracts it, it may be so hindered, that
it do not prosecute its end at all, or at least but very remisly; for example,
a weight or ponderous body naturally tends downwards; and all gravity, or such
bodies inclined by the form of their weight, or of their nature seek their
center; but a bird flies upwards, because it has not only the form of gravity
but also that of an animal or sensible living creature, and so this animal or
living motion suspends, and hindering the natural inclination of its gravity or
weight, it mounts on high. In like manner, an insensible mixed body having much
air and fire mixed with its earth sinks downward but slowly, but if there be any
weight which is merely ponderous, it is vehemently carried downwards, unless
some violent obstacle do hinder it; and the more purely ponderous it is, the
more impetuously it is carried of its own nature to its center: wherefore man
consisting of a double nature, to wit, spiritual and corporal or sensible,
although the understanding and will by their natural motion tend toward
Almighty God; yet by reason of the mixture of the sensible part, which for its
natural functions has its sensible organs, it is disturbed with passions, and
is more frequently distracted then otherwise it would naturally be; so that
although the superior and spiritual part cannot be violently forced; yet
either by error, the understanding being ill informed, or by excess of
appetite the will, becoming ill affected, it is drawn to affect those things
which are very inordinate. Wherefore, if we intend to find out that in which
the nature of the last end of man does consist, it is necessary to seek it out
of its motion, out of the vehemence of its love and ardent affections; but our
nature consisting of both the rational and sensible part, we must not consider
the affections of them, who lead their lives like beasts, but of those only
which have reason always for the guide of their actions which are only worthy
indeed of the true name of men: for if by the experiment of a ponderous body I
intend to find out the center of gravity, I must not consider it in the flight
of birds, but by the motion of bodies which are merely ponderous; but I have
formerly proved, that there is no life more purely rational, then that of
Christians, therefore we shall come better to the knowledge of the last end of
man, by the consideration of the love and affection of Christians, which truly
and with all propriety are to be esteemed men, rather then by the inordinate
appetites of others. But all Christians which live uprightly, with a most
vehement affection, with a sweet concord and harmony, do bend their whole
endeavors toward Christ crucified as toward their supreme and last end, for
whose sake they esteem all other things as dregs and corruption, and therefore
he is their last end, the true God, and supreme good of all mankind.

The last end of man is his complete and absolute perfection, and therefore the
nearer he is unto it, the more perfect he is, and the more he increases in
perfection at the nearer distance he is from it, because to grow perfect is
nothing else then to approach unto his last end; but there has never any thing
been found by coming near unto which by the approaches of the understanding and
affection (we speak of them here and not of corporal approaches) humane nature
has so much profited as unto Christ crucified, insomuch that the more nigh it
comes unto him, the more vehemently it affects him, and the more it becomes (as
I have formerly shown) perfect in all morality; whence it plainly appears, that
Christ is the last end of humane life. The desire of the last end is most
natural unto all thins, and therefore every thing immoveably adheres unto its
last end; for the last end in practical things is like the first principles in
things of speculation: Therefore as the first principles are ingrafted in our
nature, so is the desire of our last end, and therefore it persists immovable.
Therefore when a man no way diverted by his vicious appetites, does rationally
so firmly fix his affection upon some one thing so tenaciously, that he
disesteems all others for it, and had rather lose his life then forsake it, it
is a sign that he has truly found out his last end; and hence it is, that
although others have prefixed unto themselves other last ends, yet we have seen
none, or very few, except Christians, who had rather lose their lives then
forsake those ends of theirs; others undergo the extremity of all miseries to
conserve their lives; for a man will give all he has rather then lose his
life: but Christians do not only patiently, willingly and joyfully lose all
they have for Christ, but even they esteem their lives as nothing for his sake;
and certainly if Christ were not the supreme Good, such men of the greatest
wisdom would not lose their lives, being the most precious unto them, for the
defense of the greatest of all errors.

Moreover things which are of the same nature being ordained for the same end,
and in that regard being united, even as all ponderous bodies are in and
tending to their center, it is a most manifest argument seeing that there was
nothing ever found in which men were so firmly united as in Christ crucified,
that he is the last end of man; for those that believe in him are no less
united and linked together, then all the parts of the earth being compacted
into one solid globe are adherent to their center: in the same manner all
Christians which truly seek Christ, come to have but one heart and one soul in
him, nay, the more they profit in their Faith, with greater delight and more
ardent charity do they love one another: if therefore Christ were only a man,
and his Faith contain a clandestine and impious fiction and forgery, it would
not have taken such effect in so many thousands of men of several conditions
and qualities; because those who are only tied together by falsity are easily
dissolved, nor could so many men grounding the union of their friendship on the
false foundation of an error, increase their love as the error grew more
enormious: spiritual delights they are the greater when our soul approaches
nearer to its last end, and then they are most perfect when they more attain
unto the end it self. If man therefore be somewhat delighted when he beholds
his end imperfectly afar off, he will be far more when he shall more
perfectly possess it; but the delight which Christians do enjoy of Christ,
surpasses all the exterior pleasures of the senses or understanding; which
appears out of three things: first, out of the incomparable constancy of
Martyrs, of whom we read innumerable, who with joy and mirth ran to their
torments as to their nuptials, and triumphing in the midst of their sufferings
have sung hymns unto God, as if they had been in some place of pleasure: which
could no way happen; unless by the excess of an immense delight, as if all
their corporal senses were brought afleep, and Christ had defended them from
all grief and terror, which truly is a prerogative not granted to any other
delight: for a grief (as experience teaches) disturbs the whole man, and
expelling all pleasure puts him out of himself. Secondly, out of the infinite
examples of the ancient Monks, who, forsaking the world and wandering in the
deserts and caves as the companions of wild beasts, in abstinence, fasting, and
mortification, being in want of all things, and naked, have nevertheless lived
most joyfully with that unspeakable content which they found in the
contemplation of Divine things. And as yet we see the imitation and prints of
their footsteps in the Religious men, who in great numbers (as I have said) of
their own accords subjecting themselves to a willing servitude and to
perpetual clausures, do most contentedly and joyfully pass their lives under
a most exact obedience, as if they were set at liberty by being subjected under
this yoke of Grace. Thirdly, out of the lives of most wise men, who flourishing
with the erudition of all Sciences, having drunk of the sacred fountain of holy
Scriptures, and tasted the sweetness of Christ, have given over all other
Sciences, being only delighted with his Doctrine, unto which they have stuck
so firmly, as if they could not be drawn from it, esteeming all the wisdom of
Philosophers and eloquence of the Orators as dry apples and unsavory, which I
can testify of very many, such as I have known to have done so; but of these
examples it is manifest, that the delights which proceed out of the Faith and
Contemplation of Christ crucified do far surpass all others: we must therefore
conclude that they proceed from the universal and supreme good, and chiefly
because the more near access we have unto Christ by Faith and Love, the more
are those delights augmented.

And that we may briefly conclude with one argument, joining in one all the
proprieties of the last end; all the individual or singular natures of the
same kind (as I have said) are ordained for the same last end, and all men do
agree in the nature of their last end, though not in the thing in which that
nature of the last end is contained, for this is that which we seek. The bliss
therefore of man consisting in an act of our understanding, we must conclude,
that that thing to which the nature of the last end agrees, is that in which
all the most rational and which are most pure of heart do agree in, and with
all uniformity seek after it, and do immoveably insist upon, and which they
love above themselves, and consequently are most admirably delighted in it, and
deriving from it the integrity of their lives, and the splendor of a
celestial clarity, and transformed with a Divine love, become even one and the
same thing with it, and being in a manner raised above the world, valuing all
terrene things as dirt, they take joy only in those Divine favors, and lastly
enjoy a most blessed quiet and peace of mind. But these things which are the
conditions of the supreme Good were never found in any but in Christ crucified,
and tha as he is true God, and therefore he is the supreme Good.

But why should I insist longer in these things which are of themselves
manifest? For Good of its own nature desiring to communicate it self, the
supreme Good must needs be that which most desires to communicate its virtue;
but there is no communication of any other good found so great and ample as
that which proceeds from Christ Jesus, after whose coming into the world and
the propagation of his Faith, the whole world is purged of a dark and profound
mist of sins and errors, and replenished with all virtue and sanctimony of
life, and so many graces and favors are from thence granted and decreed unto
the faithful, that they are rightly esteemed happy and blessed upon earth; for
if there can be any felicity or bliss upon earth, it is only found in the
Christians, which I have proved in the Epitome of the simplicity of a Christian
life.

The incomparable Clemency and Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ declares the
infinite abundance of his Goodness; because no malice of any heinous sinners
and wickedness are sufficient to make him deny or defer his pardon to those
that are truly repentant, but commonly he does not cease to heap greater graces
and gifts on those who return unto him. And it is a thing most experienced,
that as often as any shall by sin forsake him, that he is straight deprived
of that sweetness and righteousness of life, so that he is drowned in terrene
impurities and corruptions, and that he is tormented and vexed with intolerable
cares; but as soon as he returns to his former state of recreation and quiet, he
is, as it were, cured of the unquenchable thirst of some most malignant
calenture.

CHAP. XVI. The same proved out of the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of Christ
altogether.
TO the end that those things which I have formerly said of the Power, Wisdom
and Goodness of Christ may be more easily understood, let us here by way of
Epilogue, make a recapitulation of them. We affirm that if Christ be not God,
as he declared himself to be, that he was the most arrogant and proud, the most
absurd and foolish of all men; but if he did not make himself God, but it was a
fallacy of his Disciples, and a humane fiction (as some foolish and doting men
do avouch) how could so much Power, Wisdom and Goodness proceed out of the
greatest of all falsities and prestigious impostures? For if he be not God, I
know no other who may any way seem to be so; for if Almighty God do govern and
conserve these inferior things by congruous means, we having proved that there
is no means more perfect for a good and virtuous life then Christ, I do not see
how we may choose, but either we must confess that Christ is the true means of
our bliss warranted by Almighty God unto mankind, or that we deny the divine
Providence and Justice; or that denying there is any God at all, we believe
that all things happen by chance or fate: all which, besides the first which
must necessarily be granted, are most absurd and foolish.

If there be any true Religion in the world, which by Arguments we have
convinced and supposed as granted, who can deny, considering so many, and so
forcible Reasons, that this must needs be the Christian Religion? There being
no other so well grounded in Reason; so that if this be not true, it will force
us to deny all Religion.

Also we know that no other Religion was ever so sharply impugn'd perpetually
in all Ages, as the Christian; for other Religions, or rather fraudulent
Superstitions, in a manner by the same vanity by which they were set afoot,
were destroyed and came to nothing; but the Christian as the most pure gold,
has been refined in perpetual flames of most cruel Persecutions, which could
not have happened, had any other been true, and this false.

It is moreover manifest, that the Christian Religion never suffered or was
persecuted by virtuous and just men, but was always held by them in great
esteem, reverence and veneration, having always had continual and insatiable
War, with flagitious, wicked and sacrilegious Tyrants, and their father the
Devil; and as many as have persecuted it and its Ministers, have always been
(as now-adayes also appears) of a most wicked condition, which never happened
to any other Religion; why therefore should we choose to imitate wicked men,
rather then the virtuous?

Further, there is no other Religion, unto which so many have hitherto been
converted, and do daily come unto it upon this condition, that they know
themselves not to be called to riches, honors or pleasures, (which in their
Baptism they oblige themselves to renounce) but unto contempt, abstinence,
parsimony, contumelies, and (if occasion require it) unto the greatest and last
extremity of all; no man therefore being in his right wits would be induced
unto it by such promises and obligations, as we have seen so many thousands to
be, unless the light of a most evident Verity did even pierce the hearts of
mortals.

The understanding therefore is constrained by these reasons and arguments, to
believe this admirable Faith of Christ to be true; for if one, two or three, or
a few agruments do not force an assent, yet all together if they be rightly
considered, will not have less force then Mathematical Demonstrations, or
then if some of the dead were raised to life for the confirmation of this
Verity.

Wherefore if the Christian Religion be true, all others are to be exploded as
false; seeing the Christian does most constantly avouch, that there is no
salvation out of it; which is no more then reason; because our salvation
consisting in the vision of God, unto which no man can attain without
Celestial and Divine favors, (as I have showed before) no man can obtain it
without Faith, the Scripture affirming, Sine Fide impossible est placere Deo,
That without Faith it is impossible to please God.

Nor is there left any sufficient cause of a just complaint or excuse for those
who are born in strange and remote Countries, which do not admit the Christian
Religion; because if any one led by the light of reason, with a right intention
and pure heart, do convert himself to the universal and common Parent of all
men, and their Creator, who appears plainly in the order and government of his
Creatures, and which affords unto all the things which are necessary for them,
and shall beseech him to show his Verity unto him; he shall not (as I have
touched in the beginning of this Work according to the Christian Truth) be
frustrate of his desire; but shall obtain the Light which is necessary to his
salvation, either by internal inspirations, as did holy Job; or by Angels, as
did Cornelius the Centurion; or as the Eunuch by Philip, that is, by some A
postolicall man.

FINIS.
THE FELICITY OF A Christian Life.

By Hierome Savonarola.

Printed, Anno Dom. 1651.

The Felicity of a CHRISTIAN LIFE.
The I. Conclusion.
THat among all Creatures of this world man only works for some certain end.
That only thing we say works for its end, which designeth unto it self some
particular end, or reason of its working, and for the gaining thereof uses
convenient means. Now this being impossible to be done without discourse of
reason, and that being proper only unto man, it follows that man only can be
said properly to work for some end: And that Bruit Creatures are rather Acted,
that is, carried by a swing of natural propensity, to their several ends,
then that they act or move themselves.

The II. Conclusion.
THat there is some ultimate or last end of humane life. In all things which are
essentially ordinate one to another, we see that the first and principal being
removed, all the rest which were subordinate unto it must fail: So the first
mover or cause of all things being denied, all inferior Agents and second
causes must of necessity cease. Now in all humane Actions there is a certain
order observable, by which one action is subordinate and directed, as it were,
unto another; as for example, in the building of an house, we provide stones
in order to rear the walls, the walls we intend for the house-sake, the house
for our dwelling: But in things of this nature, that which first exciteth the
mind of the Agent, and moves him to work is the end, or aim which he desires
to compass by duemeans; if therefore there were not some ultimate or last end,
beyond which nothing else could be intended or desired, the appetite of man
would never be fixed, but perpetually desiring this thing for that things sake,
and that thing again for some other, and so in infinitum: whereupon it would
also follow, that there could be no Term or period of his Action, which were
absurd. We must therefore of necessity grant some ultimate or last end of the
life of man, I mean which shall be simply and absolutely such, and from which
man (who is truly master of his own Actions) shall always begin to work: and
although it be not necessary, that at all times his mind be actually and
distinctly upon that end, yet that habitually and virtually it should be, as
upon the thing, which does in the first place and more then any thing else move
him to work: for so we see, all men are moved to do what they do, either to
avoid misery, or to procure themselves happiness, for as much as all men have
this general end, as it were, ingrafted into their minds; and the difference
that is among them is not, whither they should all desire to be happy or no,
but in what Thing True happiness does consist.

The III. Conclusion.
That man's happiness consists in the fruition orpossession of his last end.
Happiness is such a perfect good, as does absolutely satisfy and fulfill the
desire of man: for as much as we count him only happy, who both enjoys
whatsoever he desires, and can desire nothing more. As on the other side, every
thing when it attaineth its proper end, is reconed perfect, because it does all
its other things only in order to attain that; when therefore that is
obtained, it has nothing else to desire, it is therefore then perfect: for
that which is not perfect, is still thirsting, still seeking or desiring to be
perfected; But that which is acknowledged to be already perfect, must not in
reason be supposed to desire perfection.

The IV. Conclusion.
Man's happiness consists not in any outward goods. By outward goods, we
understa^d Riches, Honors Dignities, Power, etc. in which we say The happiness
of man consists not. For proof whereof I could allege an infinite number of
Arguments, but the Thing it self being so clear as it is, and acknowledged by
all, I shall insist only upon some few. My first reason is, because happiness
is the supreme or chief good of man, which admits not the least mixture or
participation of evil, no more then the highest degree of heat does any degree
of cold: Blessedness therefore cannot consist in the fruition of such goods,
which (as continual experience tells us) do admit variety of evils, not of
fortune only or chance, but (which is worst of all,) the evils of sin: for so
we see, very wicked men have their share in these goods. Secondly, because
Blessedness is a Self-sufficeing good, such as once being had, no other content
can be wanting; but we see, though a man be never so well provided of these
goods, yet it is possible he may be still in want of others no less necessary;
as a rich man is not always wise, nor a man of Honor healthful. Thirdly,
because Blessedness is such a perfect good Thing, that from it no evil can
proceed, which is not true of Riches, Honors, Power, etc. because by occasion
of them, through the envy indeed and malice of others many mischiefs do arise,
Murders, Parricides, Treasons, and what not? Fourthly, because the principles
which dispose a man unto True happiness are intrinsecall or from within him, it
being the end whereunto he is naturally ordained and fitted; But unto the goods
we speak of, Riches, Honors, etc. a man is rather disposed by causes
extrinsecall and from without him, yea many times, by mere chance, and
therefore they are called commonly Goods of Fortune: it is clear therefore,
that in them Felicity cannot consist.

The V. Conclusion.
That man's happiness consists not in the goods of the Body. By goods of the
body, we mean the life of man, Health, Beauty, Youth, Strength, Courage, and
the like, in all or in any of which, it is manifest, true happiness cannot
consist. Because first, this body is not made for it self, but for the soul;
as the matter is always for the form, and not the form for the matter.
Therefore it is, that all goods belonging to the body, are ordained indeed for
the soul as unto the proper end for which they are made. Besides, should the
happiness of man be placed in such goods as those, this absurdity would
follow, namely that many even Bruit Beasts should participate of happiness
more then man; for certainly as to the fruition of such bodily goods, there be
many beasts which do far excel man: as for example, in length of life the
Elephant, in strength and courage the Lion, the Stag in swiftness, the Eagle in
sharp sightedness, and in perfection and soundness of health almost all of
them; for experience tells us, what a number of helps and how much art is
requisite to support this frail carcass of ours, more then of any other kind
of creatures; Therefore 'its impossible true felicity should be found in it.

The VI. Conclusion.
NEither does it consist in the goods, that is to say, in the pleasures and
satisfactions of the sensitive part of the soul. Every thing the nearer it
approaches to its proper end, the perfecter it grows (for its end is its
perfection) if therefore Blessedness consisted in those sensitive delights, A
man should become so much the more perfect, by how much he lived more
sensually, and gave himself up to all kind of Luxury and voluptuousness; that
is, he should be so much the more a man, by how much he lived more like a
beast: which is very absurd. And so again (as was touched in the precedent
Conclusion) Beasts also would be found capable of happiness, as well as men,
yea rather of a more perfect happiness then man: for as much as they have no
fear of death, no apprehension of future miseries, no knowledge of God, no
fear of Judgment, no Laws, no Shame, no repugnance of flesh and spirit; in
brief they have nothing, which can either abate the sense, or restrain the use
of their present pleasures: if therefore the Felicity of man did consist in the
pleasures of sense, we should all desire to be metamorphiz'd and become Beasts:
why? because Beasts (upon this supposition) are more happy then men. But this
was confessed to be absurd before.

The VII. Conclusion.
THat the happiness of man consists in such goods, as pertain unto the
Intellectual or superior part of the soul. For as the body is ordained for
the soul, so of the soul the vegetative or lowest part is ordained for the
Sensitive, and the Sensitive for the Intellectual. Seeing therefore that the
Intellect or Rational part of the Soul, is (as it were) the end of the Body,
and the thing whereunto both it, and also the inferior parts of the soul be
subordinate and directed: it is manifest, that in the Act or exercise of this
Intellect, and in the goods, that is to say, in the perfections thereto
properly belonging, the final happiness of man does consist. Besides, seeing
that happiness belongs only to a perfect man, and that the perfection of man
as man, consists in such goods as belong either to his understanding or will;
it is hence also manifest, that in such manner of goods as are Intellectual
and rational, his proper happiness consists.

The VIII. Conclusion.
But yet this happiness of man does not consist in any created good, although
intellectual. For, as we said before, Blessedness is such a perfect good, as
does totally satisfy or fulfill the appetite; for otherwise it could not be
the ultimate or last end, supposing there remained any thing else further to be
desired. Now the object of the will, (that is, of the appetite of man as man)
is good in its latitude, or the universal good. For we find, that as the
understanding of man comprehends an infinity of particular verities; that is
to say, it never comprehends actually so many, but it is still apt and
capable to comprehend more successively even in infinitum; so also we find,
that the will of man is as able to desire and effect an infinity of particular
goods; that is to say, that it also never actually desires so many, but it is
still ready to accept and embrace more, whenever offered, and this
successively in infinitum, and that therefore it can never be fully satisfied,
until it attains to some universal or infinite good; which is not to be found
in any created Thing: for the goodness of every Thing created, is at best but
derivative, particular, and finite; therefore in no created good can the
Felicity of man consist.

The IX. Conclusion.
That the happiness of man consists solely in the contemplation and fruition
of God. We said before, that the understanding of man rests not, that is, is
not satisfied in the knowledge of particular verities, nor his will in the
fruition of particular goods. The last end therefore of them both must be Truth
and Goodness universal, or in its full latitude, which God only is:
therefore in the Contemplation and Fruition of God alone the Beatitude of man
consists, Besides, man being what he is, viz. a creature naturally desirous
to know, and that our knowledge of every particular thing seems then to be
complete, when we comprehend its proper and true cause; hence it follows, that
whenever we observe any thing to be, that is to say, any effect; we
instantly, yea naturally desire to know its cause, why, what, or whence it is.
Now all things, beside God, appear unto us, and in truth are, but effects of
some other cause; and therefore, whatsoever a man knows beside God, he knows it
either perfectly or imperfectly: if imperfectly, his desire is never satisfied,
until he attains perfect knowledge thereof (for that is natural, viz. for
every thing that is imperfect to desire perfection) and seeing that Felicity,
as we have said, is the perfection of man, and the full satisfaction of his
Intellectual appetite; it is manifest, that by such imperfect knowledge of any
thing he cannot become happy: But if he knows the thing perfectly, suppose it
be some one singular, or many, yea perhaps all particular things that be, yet
he cannot but apprehend them still as effects, that is, as depending (in their
very beings) upon some other cause. Seeing therefore, as we said, that man
observing the effect, does naturally desire to know the cause; it is manifest,
that this appetite of his cannot be completely satisfied with the knowledge
even of all particular things that be, but still it will be endeavoring and
desiring to see also the cause of them all; and that so much the more
earnestly, by how much it finds the effects themselves to be more excellent; or
that it self apprehends them more perfectly: for so it is always seen, that
every natural motion, the nearer it draws to its period or proper term, the
stronger and stronger it grows. In the sole knowledge therefore and fruition of
God (who is the universal and first cause of all Things) does man's
Blessedness consist: according as S. Augustine has excellently well observed,
Thou have made us O Lord (says he,) for thy self, and our heart is restless
and unquiet, until it finds its repose in Thee.

The X. Conclusion.
That this Beatitude formally, and as it were in actu primo, consists in the
understanding or seeing of God, as he is; but exercitatively, operatively, and
as in actu secundo, in the will, or in that ineffable pleasure and delight
which is enjoyed by the knowledge and contemplation of him. The Act of the will
always presupposes the Act of the understanding, because the object thereof
is always some known or imaginary good. Seeing therefore that Beatitude
formally and in its own nature is nothing else but the attaining of our last
end, as soon as ever a man attains that he is happy. But man attaineth his last
end (which is God) so soon as ever he sees, that is, perfectly knows him.
Therefore in the knowledge, and by the knowledge of his last end, man becomes
essentially happy. But yet because this knowledge or contemplation of the
Divine Majesty is inseparably accompanied with a certain infinite and ineffable
joy or pleasure conceived upon that sight, and by which the sight or
contemplation it self seems to be perfected, therefore we say that in regard of
operation or the exercise of Beatitude, that it is completed in the will,
which with an infinite delight does embrace that good sight, and consent to be
absorpt and drowned in the glorious Abyss thereof to all Eternity. As in like
manner we say of man, that he consists essentially in the union of a rational
Soul with the body, but yet that he is perfected in regard of operations by
such accidents as do either necessarily or contingently follow that union: to
which sense the Philosopher also says, Delight has the same relation to
Felicity, which Beauty has to youth.

The XI. Conclusion
That perfect Blessedness cannot be attained in this life. First, because in
this life we have no immediate knowledge of God, we see him not but by and
through the creatures, and as it were, in such a glass, as the Fantasy or
some inferior faculty of our soul is able to present unto us: which manner of
knowledge being so imperfect, the soul of man finds no satisfaction therein,
that is to say, no Beatitude, no full content. Secondly, because, as Boethius
says, Blessedness is a state consummate, or perfected with a concurrence of
all good; but in this mortal life, there never was seen, (nor ever shall be)
such a general confluence of All Good Things upon any one man, as that nothing
should be wanting either to his body, or to his soul: especially seeing that
Immortality (the Crown of the Bodies perfections) cannot possibly be attained
here, no more then the certain hour of a man's death can be foreseen; and that
knowledge (which is the prerogative royal of the soul) is found but by very
few, and that never absolutely clear in this life, never but darkened and
eclipsed with a multitude of errors. Not to speak of those inferior and less
valuable goods of fortune and the body, health, wealth, etc. the least of which
yet being wanting does infinitely disturb our union with God, and daily, yea
hourly deject us from that state, wherein True Felicity consists.

The XII. Conclusion.
Yet notwithstanding a certain Inchoate Felicity (or as 'twere the First Fruits
of happiness) may be had in this life. In the heart of man we may conceive a
double rest, viz. either of the appetite it self, or of the motions and
stirrings of the appetite. The former, which is indeed a beginning of
happiness, a man may, perhaps perfectly, obtain in this life; for it is
nothing else, but the determining or settling of our desire upon that object,
which is in Truth our last end. It Is true, in a general notion all men do
naturally desire to be happy (because it is natural for every thing to desire
at least that perfection which is proper to his kind,) yet in particular, or in
regard to their endeavors or motions to attain happiness, they do as
generally mistake, few of them knowing where to find it, or in what Thing it
consists: and therefore we see their desires thereof are commonly unequal,
irregular, and restless. But when once a man has found, that his happiness
consists in the Contemplation or knowledge of God, and is resolved to make it
his chief business, study, and care to advance himself therein, his appetite
becomes in that respect satisfied and quiet: But yet again, because this
knowledge of God is not perfect in this life, but rather in continual
advancement toward perfection; therefore we say in that second sense, that the
appetite is not satisfied, that is to say, not the motions and stirrings
thereof, which indeed never cease, but are continually laboring and
endeavoring after greater perfection in that Contemplation; and this so much
the more incessantly and strongly, by how much a man comes nearer to perfect
Beatitude, and receives, as it were beforehand, some glimpses and Irradiations
thereof. And this is that we call Felicity Inchoate or in its First Fruits.

The XIII. Conclusion.
That Christians have this Felicity Inchoate in a greater measure, then the
best of Philosophers. The reason is, because the Contemplation and Fruition of
God, which good Christians have, are in themselves greater and more perfect,
then those which the most excellent Philosophers could ever arrive unto. By
what I have elsewhere said, it is manifest, that a Christians life is not
founded upon any natural principle either within or without man, but in
something supernatural, that is to say, in the Grace of God, by which also he
is elevated unto a participation of the Divine nature. Seeing therefore that
the operation of every thing follows its Essence, (for every thing works,
so far as it can, agreeably to its own nature) by how much the nature or
essence of any thing is more perfect, by so much perfecter also is it in its
operation or working: But Grace is a thing of a much nobler and more perfect
essence then nature; and therefore the operations or effects which proceed from
thence, must needs excel those of nature. And seeing again that by how much
the operation or Action of any Thing is more perfect, by so much a greater and
more perfect delight is conceived thereupon, it must needs follow, that those
spiritual Contentments and Gusts which good Christians have with God, and in
God, do infinitely excel those of philosophers, which at best are but natural,
and such as the principle is from whence they proceed. Besides, seeing that
happiness consisterh in the Contemplation of God, the greater knowledge a man
has of God, the greater, that is, the more perfect is his Contemplation and
Fruition of him: But this is certain that Christians have greater knowledge of
God, then philosophers; as well in regard of the light of Grace, which perfects
that of nature, and reveals unto Christians many excellent mysteries altogether
unknown to philosophers; as also in regard of that Purity of heart, which, as
we have showed elsewhere, true Christians do enjoy in a more excellent measure
then others: The delights therefore which Christians enjoy in their
Contemplation of God are much greater in themselves and more perfect, then
those which the best of philosophers could have. And seeing that this
happiness Inchoate, which we speak of, does consist in that Contemplation and
Fruition of God which is attainable in this life, it follows, that it is more
perfectly attained by Christians then philosophers. Lastly, this happiness
Inchoate is so much greater and more perfect, by how much it comes nearer to
Felicity consummate, or that of the next life: But the Felicity of Christians,
which is here begun, comes much nearer to Felicity Consummate, then that of
philosophers; for as much as no man shall ever actually attain heaven but by
Grace, (which the philosophers neither had nor knew;) it is manifest therefore,
that true Christians are more justly esteemed happy in this world, then
philosophers: and if then they, much more then any other sort of men.

The XIIII Conclusion.
THat the delights which good Christians find in the Contemplation of God, do
surpass all the delights of this world, whither sensitive or intellectual.
Three things commonly concur to the causing of delight, First the object, or
presence of some good; Secondly the subject or Thing whereto that good is
present; Thirdly the union or Conjunction of these Two together, which is
always accompanied with some knowledge, or reflection of the faculty upon its
proper Act; as for example, in delights of the taste, there is required some
pleasant meat perhaps or such like thing, Secondly the organ or subject of taste
rightly disposed, Thirdly union of these, that is, application of meat to the
palate, together with attention of the mind to what is done; for indeed without
this nothing is done: For should the meat be never so delicious in it self, yet
if it were put into the mouth of a man asleep, certainly he would be little
affected with it, for no sensation would be. We are therefore in the first
place to observe, that the Good which delights us, the perfecter it is in it
self, the greater delight it causes: now it is certain, that Intellectual
natures are much more perfect, then things sensitive; and that the first verity
is infinitely more perfect then all the rest: it is therefore most able and fit
to cause the greatest delectations. We are to observe in the second place, that
the faculty likewise, by how much it is more exquisite and perfect, so much the
greater delectation is co^ceived in the work thereof: for the quality of
delight follows immediately that of operation; therefore the more perfect
operation is, the perfecter is the delight; but as we said, the perfecter the
faculty be, the perfecter is also the operation: now of the same faculty, that
is to be accounted the more perfect operation, which does more perfectly
comprehend and reach its object. Seeing therefore the understanding is a more
exquisite faculty then sense, the operation thereof must needs be more perfect
then that of sense, and consequently a greater delight must be had in the Acts
thereof, then in the Acts of sense. But now among all the Acts which the
understanding exercises, incomparably the most perfect is the Contemplation of
the first verity; in that Contemplation therefore the most perfect delight is
found. Thirdly, we are to consider, that the nearer or more intimate the union
of the object and faculty is, the greater also in that respect is the delight;
But the object of the understanding is far more intimately united unto the
faculty Intellective, then the object of fense is to the sense; for always
spiritual things do more strongly and vehemently unite, then corporal, and
especially God, or the first verity, whose union with all things is
inexplicably intimate; therefore of necessity by the union of God unto the
understanding, that is by Contemplation of God the greatest delight is
obtained. We see therefore both in regard of the nature and perfection of the
object it self, as also of the faculty, and union of both, that the delights
which follow the Act of the u^derstanding do infinitely excel those which
follow the operations of sense, and that those which follow upon the
Contemplation of God Almighty are incomparably greatest of all. Now seeing that
God is more perfectly understood by Christians, then by any other sort of men,
yea then by the most excellent philosophers themselves, as before we have
shown; and that the natural light of their understanding is by the light of
grace infinitely perfected, and that the union of God with the soul, and of the
soul with God through the means of Grace is the most admirable of all unions,
it follows, as we said, as well from the nature of the object it self, as of
the faculty and union both, that the delights, which Christians have in the
Contemplation of God, do infinitely surpass the delights of this world not
only sensitive but Intellectual also. Moreover, seeing that in every
particular sort of Things there may be observed some one that is chief,
principal, and most excellent in that kind, and as it were the measure and
rule of the rest, by approximation whereunto the rest are judged to be more or
less perfect in that kind; as for example, in the Classis or praedicament of
hot Things Fire is reconed to be supreme, and as it were the standard of all
other heats, every thing being judged to be so much the hotter, by how much it
comes nearer to the degree of fire: seeing therefore that God Almighty in the
order of blessed and Glorious objects is incomparably supreme and more
excellent then all others; Those Things which approach nearest to the
perfections of God, or are most like him, must needs be not only more perfect
in themselves, but also more capable of the most ravishing contentments: but
it is certain that the u^derstanding of man or his Intellective part, comes
nearer unto a likeness with the divine nature then the sensitive, and
therefore the delights of that must be greater then those of sense; and seeing
that the soul of a Christian, by means of Grace and other supernatural
privileges bestowed on her, comes nearer unto God, then any other which is not
in Grace, as is manifest by what we have elsewhere said, it follows, that the
True Christian does more participate of divine pleasures then any man
whatsoever. But this is to be understood principally of perfect Christians: for
we confess such as be imperfect do meet with many impediments, by which their
Contemplation of Divine Things is obstructed and troubled, and consequently the
delights, which otherwise they might receive, and which perfect men certainly do
receive in such Contemplations, sometimes is utterly lost, always much abated:
yet not withstanding even that very little, which they do receive, through the
fervor of Charity or divine Love, becomes so sweet and pleasant to them, that
for it alone they do absolutely despise all the contentments of this world,
saying with the Prophet Better is one day in thy Courts, then a Thousand
elsewhere. Whence also it follows, that seeing all true Christians more or less
do avoid the pleasures of this world, and with studious affection at least
pretend unto divine Contemplation, yea even when their taste and feelings of God
are but yet imperfect; it follows, I say, that the least delight proceeding in
this manner from God does infinitely surpass the greatest of the world,
according as one servant of God has told us in the name of all the rest: my
soul says he upon a time, refused to be comforted: I did but think upon God;
and I was drowned in delight. And although this may seem incredible to carnal
men, yet we ought not to wonder, for such have not the taste of the spirit. But
be washed, O ye sinners, and make you clean: Away with your evil devises; cease
to do perversely, learn to do well. Come, disprove me if you can: or, if you
cannot; Confess, that the things which we preach unto you are True.

The XV. Conclusion.
THat Christians in the Contemplation of Christ crucified also do find
inestimable delectations. We come to the knowledge of Invisible things in this
life by the means of things visible; because, as philosophy teaches, our
understanding naturally follows the fantasy, that is, apprehends nothing, but
what is prepared, as it were, and offered to her from thence. Now there is no
visible object in the world which can more effectually lead us unto the
knowledge and contemplation of divine things, then the Consideration of Christ
crucified, proceeding from a lively Faith. Because indeed nothing can more
effectually declare the goodness and inestimable charity of God toward man.
For seeing, that to be loved is a thing of it self very agreeable to nature, to
be beloved in this manner of God, that is, unto so high a pitch, that he should
vouchsafe to be crucified himself for us, who can think, but that it is a
pleasure of all pleasures to conceive? Now such a love of God toward us, does
the consideration of Christ crucified present unto our minds, and therefore of
necessity must cause in them ineffable delectations. Besides, hope of Good is a
thing which naturally causes delight, as making in some sort the good we hope
for, present to us: and the greater and more certain the good is which we hope,
so much the greater and more perfect delight is caused: But there can be no
greater good imagined, then that which Christians hope for by the Passion; nor
more certain, for as much as they are assured thereof by God himself, who for
that intent, namely that he might make it sure to them, was Crucified:
Therefore from such hope, so great, so sure, Christians cannot but receive
singular Consolation. Thirdly, Admiration is naturally accompanied with
delight, for as much as he which wonders at any thing is commonly possessed
also with some great desire and hope to know what the matter is, at which he
finds himself to wonder. Now what more admirable, yea astonishing, then that
God Almighty should be made man, and dye upon a Gibbet to save men? Seeing
therefore that Christians in the Contemplation of Christ's Passion do consider
this, and also conceive most firm hope, to attain one day unto an absolute
assurance and sight of so rare a mystery, how can they be otherwise affected
then with excess of delight? Fourthly, seeing God Almighty is so infinitely
perfect and great, it was not possible, that by any one creature he could be
competently expressed, but it seemed necessary to his Divine wisdom to create
an Universe of Creatures, that is, this whole world, in the latitude and
variety whereof the Spirit of man might have scope enough, and find infinite
examples, wherein to contemplate, even unto ravishment, the singularities of
his perfection. And seeing in like manner that the goodness of the same God
our blessed Savior does as infinitely surpass all humane understanding, not
one only, or some few, but a million, a numberless multitude, of divine,
gracious, and stupendous works were requisite by him also to be done; but to
express it in some part, in the meditation of which our souls are fed, yea
glutted as it were, with admiration and content: Amongst which none bearing
more lively or legible Characters of his Love, then that of his Passion; it
follows that in his Passion, and the Contemplation thereof, greatest content
must be found: as experience also proves in an infinite number of Christians,
who by their actions have more then sufficiently shown the sense they have had
of the Cross of our Savior. It were an endless labor to go about to
express them, the infinite variety, the multitude and excess of those joys,
which the servants of God have tasted from time to time, and do daily taste in
this kind: The lives, yea, the deaths of those ancient Christians do abundantly
testify how great they were; who in infinite multitudes of both sexes, and of
all Conditions, men and women, for the name and for the love of this crucified
Jesus, not only patiently endured all sorts of persecutions and affliction,
but even exulted and leapt for joy in the midst of their tortures, dying rather
through the extremity of their delights, then pain. The number of Monks and
other solitary persons is infinite, who in all times for the love of Jesus have
withdrawn themselves from the world, and made choice to live in wildernesses
and caves of the earth, poor, naked, destitute of all things, save the comforts
of divine Love, only to attend unto this Contemplation. Lastly the learnedest
Doctors, and wisest men of the world, how often have they abandoned not only
the pleasures and vanities of the world, (which were scarce worthy of them) but
even their most pleasing and most commendable Studies, yea their own selves
also, for the love and Contemplation of this Jesus?

The XVI Conclusion.
THat the holy Scriptures do exceedingly elevate the mind of good Christians
unto these Contemplations. First, because All Scripture generally does relate
unto Christ crucified, according to that of the Apostle. The end or scope of
the law is Christ. And for as much as writing, in its own nature, is but the
sign of words spoken, as speech is of conceptions or thoughts; because our
thoughts do always proceed from some interior light or Illustration of the
mind, by how much that light is greater and more excellent, so much the greater
also and more perfect must the Conceptions be, and the speech consequently more
powerful, and the writing, wherein that speech is represented more admirable
and profound. Now light supernatural is always greater and more perfect then
natural; And seeing also that there be several degrees in that light, it
cannot be doubted, but the Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists, had the greatest
measures thereof, as being the men whom Almighty God was pleased so singularly
to Illuminate, as that neither in writing nor preaching they could so mistake,
as to deliver falsehood for truth: Therefore also were their meditations, their
speech and all expressions of themselves always profound, powerful, and
serious: He therefore that presumes to understand their writings without
supernatural Illustration, is as wise as he that would have a bird to fly
without wings: of which sort yet there are some in the world, viz. certain
Philosophers, Rhetoricians, Grammarians, Poets of this age, who not knowing or
not considering the profundity of sacred Scriptures, do venture upon them with
the same temerity, as they do upon Tully, Hortensius or some other of their
windy Authors; and perhaps not finding in them those flashes of elegance, or
subtilty, to which themselves are accustomed, presently they fall to slight and
think meanly of them, imagining (weak men) nothing to be so sublime as Plato's
Philosophy, no eloquence comparable to some piece of Cicero. But he which
dwells in heaven, shall (one day) laugh these men to scorn, yea our Lord
shall have them inderifion. For indeed, the natural man perceives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they seem foolishness unto him, neither can
he understand them, because they are spiritually discerned. But the true
Christion, the man that has supernatural light in him, shall discern them:
and if with pure intention and an humble heart he set himself to the reading of
holy Scriptures, meditating or considering well what he reads, and begging the
grace of divine illumination, with constancy and perseverance, from God; This
man, I say, shall doubtless be wonderfully elevated by reading, and fitted for
divine favors, and shall find those endless and immortal pleasures in them,
which do incomparably exceed the greatest of this world. For this is certain,
every Thing is best delighted with that which is connaturall unto it, as
different humors do always affect different recreations, according to that of
the Poet -- -- Trahit sua quemque voluptas.
Every man has his own fancy.
But unto him that is endued with supernatur all light, the most natural, that
is, most agreeable study of all is certainly the study of holy Scriptures,
which proceeded from that same fountain of light. Therefore also in the reading
and contemplation of them the true Christian finds his greatest content.
Besides, every Thing is best pleased in such kind of Action as is most proper
for it self; But there is nothing more proper for a Christian then the
Contemplation of Christ crucified by the study of Scripture: For should he go
about to conceive or meditate of him merely according to natural reason, or
the principles of Philosophy; neglecting Scripture, he would certainly find
less proficiency, and perhaps run himself into some hazard of dangerous
error: for such contemplation were purely natural, imperfect, and by which he
should never attain unto the mysteries of Faith: of which thing we have
examples in our modern Divines, who seeming to give themselves wholly to
Aristotle and the study of Philosophy are become generally less devout, less
Contemplative then the meanest of the people. Besides, Truth which is the
object of understanding, the higher it is the greater delight it causes in the
acquisition; now the verityes of holy Scripture are the most high and
mysterious of all other, because they treat principally of such things as be
undiscernable by natural light. Again in regard of the inconstancy of man's
nature, which is never long delighted with the same thing, but always affects
variety and change of pleasure, the sacred Scriptures do become a most
agreeable exercise to our spirit. For how admirable, how ravishing is that
variety we meet with in them, of Histories, of senses, of Types, of Figures?
and yet a most exquisite harmony between them all. All the parts. All the Books
of the Old and New Testament, exactly consenting in one, and pointing unto the
same general and supreme verity or end, which is the love of God and our
neighbor: of which while they treat sometime historically and plainly,
sometime more mystically and profoundly, they do as it were, present a nose-gay
of celestial and various flowers unto our soul, which continually changing, do
yet most constantly increase spiritual content: We conclude therefore, that in
the reading and meditation of holy Scripture most exquisite delights be found.

The XVII. Conclusion.
THat a good Christian, the more simply, that is to say, sincerely he lives
the greater consolation he has from God, from our Lord Jesus Christ, and from
the study of holy Scriptures. This is true, whither we speak of simplicity only
Interior, or that of the heart; for the understanding or mind of man together
with his affections, the more pure and sincere they be, so much the more do
they render him fit and capable of divine Illustrations: For this simplicity of
heart does indeed require that we be altogether purged from terrene and gross
affections, to the end that a man's spirit might be entirely set upon God, and
by this simplicity or purity, as much as may be made like unto him. It is true
also, in regard of simplicity exterior, or that which consists in the
Actions and conversation of men, as is manifest: For to contemplate well divine
mysteries, it is necessary that the heart of man be in great rest, and very
well composed in it self and therefore we see commonly, that those who desire
to partake of divine Illuminations, do retire themselves, as much as may be,
from the noise and disturbances of the world, as of the Spouse in the Canticles
it is said, I will lead her into the wilderness, says he, that is, into
solitude, and there will I speak to her heart. And in an other place, He shall
sit alone, and keep silence, because, by so doing, he shall be lifted up above
himself. And contrariwise we see, the richer a man is, and more incombred with
worldly affairs, the less is he affected unto contemplation; but where a man's
outward affairs are few or none, there is always less distraction of mind.
Therefore our holy Fathers and predecessors in the Contemplative life, were
always wont to renounce their affairs of the world, and retire themselves into
Solitude, thereby more promptly and readily to attend Divine Meditations. Every
man therefore in his particular degree and quality shall find, the more simply
and uprightly he endeavors to live, the greater Consolations he shall receive
from God and from Christ.

The XVIII. Conclusion.
THat the Christian life is the only Blessed life. Never was there, nor ever
shall be found out any kind of life more happy then that, because none better.
If therefore the life of any men may be accounted happy in this world, it is
certainly that of Christians. For if we observe, it comprehends all those
perfections, wherein the Philosophers anciently placed happinese, and so has
whatsoever they judged good and desirable: as for example, if we place
happiness, as some of them did, in the Contemplation of God and things Divine,
there is none more excellent and perfect then those which the Christian life
affords. If we place it in moral virtue, and in the life active, that is, in
good government of our selves and others, there is no better to be desired by
man, then that which Christian Philosophy prescribes. If we place it in
riches, honors, powers, dignities, or other goods of the body, (though this
may seem hardest) yet the Christian life is not altogether incapable of these,
and has no absolute repugnance to them: for we say, Whatsoever perfection
appears in the effect, is some way or other in the cause; as the Sun, which
causes heat in all inferior bodies, is it self also, at least virtually hot:
it is not indeed necessary, the cause should contain every particular
perfection of the effect formally and in the same manner as the effect does; it
suffices, that it be contained eminently, as we say, or by some more excellent
way, then it is in the effect. So in proportion we also say, that the Christian
life does comprehend, yea afford all those goods which Secular men do so much
desire, though not in such manner as they commonly affect and hunt after them,
but in a better, that is, in a due and congruous subordination of them unto
superior goods. For the Christian life, being as it is a life of wisdom, a
life of most perfect prudence and discretion, when we see that the things which
the world so much admireth, riches, honors, pleasures, etc. are by them ( viz.
good Christians) in a manner neglected, we cannot but conclude that they find
themselves satisfied otherwise; that is, possessed of riches, honors,
pleasures etc. of a more noble and more excellent nature then those be, which
they seem to despise. For having the grace of God, and our Savior Christ
himself dwelling in them by Faith, they conceive themselves thereby in
possession of so great a good, that in comparison thereof, there is little else
worthy of their desires. They have also hereby an assured hope to recover in
the Resurrection, whatsoever Beauty or other ornaments of the body, here they
might seem to want, yea in that degree of excellency and glory, which the heart
of man cannot now conceive, and to enjoy with Christ for ever, that life and
endless felicity, of which the Apostle speaks, Eye has not seen, nor the
ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what
Things God has prepared for them that love him. And hence we observe, that
good Christians be generally of a cheerful and pleasing Conversation, not
seeming either to desire, or to fear any thing overmuch in this world, and to
be as it were, out of the Gunshot of inordinate sorrow; according as it is
written, Nothing shall grieve the Just man of whatsoever happens unto him;
and as it was said of the Apostles of our Savior, They went from the Council
rejoicing, that they were held worthy to suffer reproach for the name of Christ.

The XIX. Conclusion.
THat it is no hard matter to attain Christian life, and therein by Gods holp
to persevere unto the end. The principal thing required thereto is the grace
of God, that grace I mean, which is not only a mere gift of God, or freely
given, but that which makes a man formally gracious with God, or just. This
indeed is only to be had from God, but he, through his Infinite and Immense
Goodness being so ready and inclined to give it unto them that ask, in that
respect there is no difficulty to attain Christian life. For if he spared not
his own son, as the Apostle argues, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him give us, and that easily, all Things? There is also
required some disposition on our part to receive the grace of God, which yet
renders not the attaining of Christian life, nor perseverance therein through
Grace, difficult or hard. For can it be hard for a man to do that which is in
his own power? Can it be hard for a man to do that which natural reason tells
him is best, is for his own good, and in his own election? Let a man therefore
but observe three precepts, and he shall find the attaining and perseverance in
Christian life by Gods grace, easy. The first is, That he have continual
Thoughts and reflections upon the misertes of Humane life, and especially upon
the hour and issues of his death. For seeing that man dies, as all other
creatures do, he ought often thus to think and reason with himself; To what
purpose do I thus labor? What good do all these Riches and Honors do me? I am
sure to dye and leave them all. I am sure to dye, yet the hour and time of my
death is most uncertain. What if I dye to day? as it is possible enough, what
good would it then do me, to have had the whole world at command? Or thus; If
the condition of man and beast be alike (as in death we seem,) truly we men are
a great deal more unhappy then they: for unto bruit beasts Nature it self
provideth a convenient food, convenient clothing, houses, and other
necessaries for their life, which we men have not, but with a great deal of
labor and pains. Beasts are satisfied with that only which is present, never
taking care for the future, as man does, who is never contented with what he
has, but still desiring insatiably more, and vexed with a Million of cares for
that which is to come. Beasts are not subject to half those in firmities of
body which man is, sickness, weakness, weariness, etc. and for those of the
mind, tribulations, anxieties, distresses, which we suffer in infinite variety
every day, they know them not. Beasts are content with a little, their desire
is presently fatisfied with but a small provision; but the desires of man are
without end; his heart is restless, inscrutably perverse and miserable with
all. Lastly, beasts have no Thoughts of any future life, nor of the Immortality
of Soul, about which men are extremely perplexed, almost in continual dread
and apprehensions of going, after all the troubles and toylings of this life,
unto pains eternal. If therefore our soul be not indeed Immortal, there is no
creature so miserable as man: But if it be Immortal, then certainly our final
rest is not here, but must be sought in some other life. And seeing that it
were an absurd thing to imaegine that man, whom both God and nature have made
the most noble and most excellent of all other Creatures, should yet be found
to be of them all the most miserable, we must confess some other happiness
reserved for him, or else deny the providence of God over his works. For seeing
that in the world many Things daily appear new, which were not before, and that
nothing can possibly make it self, or give Being to it self; it cannot be
doubted but that every Thing in the world is made to be, by something else
which was before it; unless we will be such fools, as to say, All things come
to pass by chance, that is by nothing (for chance is nothing but our ignorance
or non-prae^^sion of the true cause) a paradox sufficiently cenfuted by the
very order of the universe, and that wonderful regularity which is observed
yea sensible in all the proceedings of nature. And seeing again, that in causes
subordinate, we may not run from one to an other in infinitum, we must pitch at
last upon some one, which shall be the first and general cause of all; and
This is confessed to be God: whence also we see, that without any discourse of
Argument, but by mere instinct or nature men generally acknowledge God, and
also worship him in some way or other: nor was there ever man found that could
settle in the opinion that There was no God. And that God has providence over
the world, the course of nature, as we said even now, sufficiently shows, and
the Philosophers themselves confess, saying, that the work of nature is the
work of an Intellect which erreth not. And although it has come in dispute
among them, whither God has providence over humane affairs (perhaps in regard
of the great irregularities and deviations which seem to be in them, more then
in other things) yet certainly it cannot be denied by any wise man, but that he
has over them, and over all, and over the least, as much as over the greatest.
Because Providence in every Thing is so much the more perfect and more
excellent, by how much it further extends it self and takes care of more
Things; seeing then that the Providence of God must be acknowledged the most
perfect of all, it must also of necessity extend it self to all Things, it must
leave nothing unprovided for, it must overpasse nothing. We observe also in all
causes a natural and vehement inclination, as it were to govern and perfect
their effects; as for example, in bruit beasts, what an admirable and great
care have they of their young ones? Seeing therefore that whatsoever good is in
the second causes, they have it from the first, to which they do all naturally
desire, so much as may be, to assimilate themselves, it is manifest that the
first and general cause of all things (as it were a Common Parent) must have a
great and exact care over all particular effects, seeing he is the cause of
all. Beside, if God has not providence over humane affairs, what is the
reason? is it because he cannot? or because he knows not how to govern them? or
lastly because he will not? none of these can be imagined of God. For shall we
think of God, that he cannot, or knows not how to execute that, which man
both knows and also is able to do? and if but a good man, who has ability
and skill to order affairs, is also ever willing of his own part to do it,
shall we think of God, who is most able, most skillful and wise, and also
insinitely good, that he should be less willing? Again, if God Almighty had
not care of humane affairs, why has he given man such a natural instinct and
inclination to worship him? God and nature we use to say, do nothing in vain.
We conclude therefore, that it is an argument only of madness or a
distempered mind to say There is no God, or that God is, but has not
providence or care over us men; and that it is the part and duty of a wife man,
not only to know, but continually to consider that there is a Governor over
the world, who has the same particular providence over men, that he has over
other natural Things, that is, to conduct and guide them all by due means unto
their proper and last ends. And because it is his property to dispose All
Things sweetly, he guides every one of them to their ends in such manner as is
most congruous and agreeable to their several natures, and man in particular
Freely according to that liberty of his will, which is natrnall to him. From
whence it is also, that among men, some are good, and some are evil: The good
are they whose life is agreeable to reason, conforming themselves to such
Illuminations and Inspirations as they have from God, in all things studying
and endeavoring to please him: The evil are those who follow not reason, nor
observe any rectitude or regularity of life. If therefore the Divine Majesty
has providence over humane affairs, and be Just, as he is, he must certainly
have determined with himself both to reward the good, and to punish such as be
evil: But this we see not done, at least not exactly, not particularly, in
this life, therefore we must confess some other life to come, wherein the
rewards of the Just and punishments of the wicked shall be more eminently seen.
Which if it be so, how much does it concern us to please God by a good life?
And seeing, as we have elsewhere shown, that there can be no better life, then
the Christian life is, it is to no purpose for us to seek any where else how to
live, or how to please God: for a life so led cannot be without its due reward,
cannot be frustrated of that happiness which is promised to it; if it could,
there were no life sure of happiness: for the life of Christians in many
respects shows that God has peculiar providence over them; and therefore if
their faith were not true, neither could their life so much be governed by it,
nor would God suffer them long in that error, whose Goodness it is to
Illuminate those which are Good and right of heart, and to harden and leave in
blindness only those which are evil. If therefore These Things be so, let us
believe in Christ, and let us live Christianly, for so doing, as is manifest by
what has been said, we cannot perish, but must be happy in this world and in
the next.

After a man has by this first consideration prepared himself, and is resolved
to do what he can to attain Christian life, the second Precept to be given him
is this, vi^. That he seriously consider what that thing is, wherein Christian
life does, as it were essentially consist; which is the grace of God; I mean that
grace, which as we touched before, does justify and make a man good in the
sight of God. For we observe some men as soon as they begin to have a desire of
living Christianly, they presently apply themselves to the Ceremonies of
religion, and performing them exteriourly, they imagine all on the sudden, that
they are become exceeding good Christians with which vanity many deceive
themselves, pretending to be Christians, but falsely, being indeed a foolish,
lukewarm yet very arrogant sort of people. Men indeed looking only on the
outside, praise what they see, but God beholds the heart, and says to these
men, as our Savior said to the Pharisees, ye are they who justify your selves
before men but God knows your hearts; for many times that which is of high
esteem with men is abomination before God. He therefore that desires indeed to
live Christianly, let him endeavor with the utmost of his power to obtain the
grace of God not resting til by some good signs and arguments he can probably
persuade himself that he has obrained it. And because the Grace of God is
given in and by the Holy Sacraments to all those who devoutly and worthily come
unto them, let him prepare himself in the second place to receive the
Sacraments, with the best disposition and diligence he can: In particular, If
he be a believer, but yet not Baptized, let him prepare himself, and come to
the Sacrament of Baptism, with atrue, sincere Faith, and good Intention; If he
be already a Christian, but guilty of sins, let him come with true Contrition,
pure Confession, and perfect Satisfaction, and submit himself to the Sacrament
of Penance, and thereby also devoutly fit himself for the Sacrament of the
Eucharist: and in this course let him persist constantly, until by some good
conjectures he find, that he may have obtained the Grace of God. Now the best
of that sort, especially for beginners, seem to be these, viz. if he find in
himself a great and earnest dislike of his sins past, and of himself for them,
a serious intention never to return to them again, a firm purpose to live
hereafter according to the law of God, and the duties of that state wherein he
is, a delight and taking pleasure in divine matters, and in doing of good
works, a contempt of the world and of all worldly things, lastly a longing
desire of the life to come, with a weariness of this present. He that by such
signs as these shall perceive, that by Gods grace he is become a Christian,
must also know, that in the way of God, not to go forward, is to go backward;
and that he only goes forward, who finds himself to grow daily stronger and
more fervent in the grace of God, and in all virtue: Now this is chiefly
procured by continual Prayers, as we have said elsewhere, which no man can
make rightly, but he that studyeth Simplicity; that is to say, Sincerity or
purity of heart, integrity of conversation, together with neglect or renouncing
of whatsoever is superfluous. He therefore that desires to live Christianly
according to the duty of that State, wherein he intends to fix and settle
himself, must be careful (as we say) to live Simply; that is, Innocently,
Purely, and undissemblingly, and in a word, answerably in all things to what
his profession requires, so as he may be always, as much as possible, intent
upon Divine and Good Things; I mean, upon the Service of God by Prayer,
Meditation, and other Duties of Religion, or upon the Service of his Neighbor,
by works of mercy spiritual, corporal, at home and abroad. But because it is
difficult, yea almost impossible to give instructions here, proper for all
persons, by reason of the different estates and conditions of men, I shall
advise every one, who has desire to live indeed this life of a Christian, to
address himself to some good Ghostly-Father, who by his learning and
experience may be able to direct him; and according to his counsel to govern
himself in his spiritual affairs. But let him take heed, that he fall not into
the hands of those lukewarm and indifferent Confessors, who have indeed some
form or show of piety, but renounce the power thereof. It may be thought
perhaps very hard to escape such persons, who have outwardly pretenses of
sanctity, and God only is the discerner of hearts: Nay whereas it is said, by
their fruits ye shall know them, though they be indeed but a kind of
hypocrites and dissemblers, yet have they some appearance of good works. How
then shall we know them? I say still, it shall not be difficult to know them,
for any man that desires to walk uprightly; seeing it is written; Light is
sprung up even in darkness, to the upright in heart. And in another place,
Your anointing shall teach you all things. And even in natural things we see,
those which have different forms can never absolutely agree, especially if
those forms be contrary: now the form, that is to say, the spirit and
disposition of a true Christian, and of a formalist, are as contrary as can be;
the one, that is to say, the true Christian, looking only at the service of
God; the other, ever to his own interest; therefore it is impossible they should
resemble in all things, and consequently impossible, that the true Christian,
who is himself zealous for God, and of a right intention, should not discern
him who is but lukewarm and an hypocrite; especially after some conversation,
and that the Anointing of the Holy Ghost, as was said, Illuminates him. As soon
therefore as it appears that the Father, whom he has chosen, is one of those
who are not as they should be, let him fly from him as he would fly from a
Serpent; for as Solomon says, He that walks with the wise shall be wise; but
the friend of fools shall become like unto them. But having found a good man
indeed, let him open the very secrets of his heart to him, let him often and
plainly confess his sins, and according to his advise let him frequent the
holy Communion: for as we have shown elsewhere, amongst all the Ceremonies of
Religion, the Sacraments of Penance, and of the Eucharist are most efficacious
both to cause, to augment, and to preserve Grace. And therefore it is the duty
of every good Christian to keep himself diligently in estate, to frequent those
Sacraments with devotion.

After that a man is thus become a Christian, and labors to live Christianly,
the Third precept I am to give him is This, That he consider well, that by many
Tribulations we must enter into the king dome of God. For we say in Christian
Religion. that to live well we must do good and suffer evil, and so persevere
unto death. He therefore that desires to live like a Christian, must prepare
and fit himself for tribulation, according to that of the wise man My son
when thou come to serve God, says he, stand in fear, and prepare thine heart
for Temptation; because adversity foreseen does less trouble us. And that he
may more easily endure that which comes, let him often remember the labors and
passions of our Blessed Savior, and of his Saints, as well of the New as the
Old Testament: let him read frequently the histories and lives of the Saints,
because, as the Apostle says, Whatsoever things are written, for our learning
they are written, that we by Patience and Consolation of the Scriptures might
have Hope: let him often, yea continually if it were possible, have before his
eyes the shortness of this life, and the eternity of that which is to come,
that is to say, the eternity of our glory or pains. For seeing nothing can
hinder, but that this short life of ours must quickly pass away, and that at
the end of this we must of necessity arrive at the other, which never shall
have end, whosoever shall seriously and duly think of this, will surely less
regard the troubles of the world; nay, he will think himself happy, if by them
he can escape those eternal pains of hell, and gain heaven though at last. He
must also remember, that God Almighty has prepared most excellent rewards for
all those who for his Sake, suffer temptations and persecutions here, as it is
written, Eye has not seen nor the ear heard, neither has it entered into the
heart of man what things God has prepared for them that love him. He that
thinks of this, will not certainly much shrink at any temporary tribulations,
but rather be ready to cry out, confessing with the Apostle, that the passions
of this present life are not equal to the Glory which is to come, which shall
be revealed in us by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom with the
Father and the Holy Ghost be ascribed Glory and Dominion through all ages for
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE PROFIT OF BELIEVING, Very useful Both for all those that are not yet
resolved what Religion they ought to embrace: And for them that desire to know
whither their Religion be true or no.

Written by S. Augustine.

LONDON, Printed by ROGER DANIEL In Lovels Court, near Paul's Churchyard. 1651.

The Preface, To the well-disposed READER.
Learned Reader,
I Know thou art not ignorant that of all the affairs and businesses in this
world, there is none of that consequence and importance unto thee, as the
saving of thy soul: and that our Blessed Savior who knew best of all the
mestimable value thereof, and vouchsafed to redeem it at so dear a rate as with
his own precious blood, plainly declared the importance thereof, when he said
in the Gospel, Mat. 16.16. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the world
nnd loose his own soul? Or what shall he give in exchange thereof? Wherefore
let me advise thee to seek out and embrace the true Faith and Religion, for
that without such a Faith (according to the Apostle, Heb. 11.6.) it is
impossible to please God, and without pleasing of him, it is impossible to be
saved. If thou think that thou have found out the truth already, and that
thou do embrace it, then give me leave to tell thee, that the world at this
present abounds with an hundred heresies at least, the embracers whereof shall
not (according to S. Paul's doctrine, Gal. 5.20.) inherit the kingdom of God,
and yet (as the same Apostle does affirm, Ephesians. 4.5.) there is but one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism: so that it is an hundred to one, but that thy Faith
and thy Religion are false, and thy salvation is in danger thereby. Is there
not then great reason that thou should well consider, whither the Faith and
Religion which thou embracest be true or no, when upon this resolution depends
thy fruition of unspeakable bliss, or intolerable suffering of endless pains
for all eternity? How to find out the true Faith and Religion it is a matter of
very great difficulty, not only by reason that there are many faiths and
religions in the world, and of all these there is but one true, and all the
rest be false, but also for that the controversies debated now adays are so
many, and so intricate, that few have leisure to study them, and fewer ability
to conceive and understand them: yet the zeal of learned Writers has not been
wanting to satisfy men herein. But what age since the Apostles days has
brought forth any man so able to perform so great a task, as was that
incomparable Doctor S. Augustine lib. 3. de Eccles. fol. 170. who (as Doctor
Field asserteth) was the greatest and chiefest of the ancient Fathers, and the
most famous of all the Divines which the Church has had since the Apostles
time: and as Doctor Covell affirms in his answer to Master Burges page 3.)
has far excelled all others that have been or are like to be hereafter
(those only excepted that were inspired by the Holy Ghost) both in Divine and
Humane knowledge. What man since the Apostles days, could ever so well discern
true doctrine from false, truth from error, and true faith from heresy, as
could that great S. Augustine who did not only like another David, fight
against the Goliath of one heresy, but like another Joshua fought the battles
of the Lord against all the force and power of heresy in his days, for forty
years together? Wherefore if this great Doctor should have left any advises or
instructions behind him unto any of his dear friends that were then heretics,
whereby he taught them how to find out the true faith and religion, amongst so
many heresies, ought not such instructions to be greatly desired, and if any
such could be found to be highly esteemed, and diligently perused? Surely thou will say, that coming from so great a Doctor, and being so proper and
necessary fot these times, without doubt they ought. Why then Learned Reader,
give me leave to present unto thee a learned Treatise of his, which he sent
unto his dear and learned friend Honoratus, to draw him from the Manichean
heresy to the true Religion; I durst not presume to tender it unto thee in
this poor English habit, were I not confident that thou seek more after the
true Religion and the saving of thy soul, then after vain eloquence, and the
entising words of humane wisdom; 1 Cor. 2.4. but I will assure thee, under
this poor attire thou will find a rich and a learned discourse of great S.
Augustine, not only very profitable for those that are not yet resolved in
point of Religion, but also for them that dear to be satisfied whither the
faith and Religion which they embrace, be true or no. If the style be
displeasing and ungrateful unto thee, know that very many of the African
Fathers have harsh styles, besides consider how hard a matter it is to teach a
native African to speak true English.

In this work, first he shows how the old Testament is to be expounded, and
defends the Authority of it against the Manichees that rejected it. Secondly he
overthrowes that Manichean principle. That nothing is to be believed in point
of Faith which is not first by reason made manifest and evident unto the
Believer. In the third place he advises fervent and frequent prayer, peace and
tranquillity of mind, and a sequestration of affections from terrene things, as
aids necessary for the finding out the truth: then declaring that Christ has
raised a very great and a famous Church consisting of all Nations, which is to
continue very visible and conspicuous even to the worlds end, he exhorts
Honoratus to address himself unto the Pastors and Teachers thereof, and to
learn of them the true faith and Religion.

This way of proceeding to find out the truth, is far more short and easy then
by the examination of all the points of controverted doctrine by their
conformity to the holy Scriptures, for it consists in two points only, first,
in seeking out which of all the Churches is the Church of Christ, and secondly,
whither this Church can err or no.

For the finding out of the Church S. Augustine proposed four marks unto
Honoratus, Unity Universality, Sanctity and Apostolical Succession, the which
are set down very plainly in Scripture.

The Unity of the Church is twofold, in body, and in faith; in regard of the
first our Savior says his Church is one fold and has one shep-heard Joh.
10.16. and the Apostle calls it one body 1 Cor. 12.13. In respect of the
second, S. Paul earnestly exhorted the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10. to speak the
same thing, and that there be no division amongst them: but that they be
perfectly joined together in the same mind and in the same judgment; and he
beseeched the Ephesians to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace, Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5. affirming that there is one body and one
spirit, one hope of their calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; and the
Scripture testifies that in the Apostles days the multitude of Believers were
of one heart and of one soul. Acts 4.32.

The Universality of the Church is also twofold, in time and in place; this
later was foretold by the Prophet Moses relating Gods promise made to Abraham
of an ample posterity, and that all the nations of the earth should be blessed
in his seed: Genesis 22.18. Gal. 3.8. by the Royal Psalmist, declaring that God
the Father would give unto his Son the heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost part of the earth for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. and that he should
have dominion from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth:
Psalm. 72.8. and by the Prophet Isaiah, affirming that all nations shall flow to
the mountain of the Lords house, Isa. 2. v. 2. For the accomplishment of these
Prophecies our Blessed Savior declared, Luke 24. v. 44. that all things must
be fulfilled which were written in the law of Moses, aend in the Prophets, and
in the Psalms, concerning him: and v. 47. that repentance and remission of
sins, should be preached in his name among all uations, beginning at
Jerusalem; and for the performance hereof, he gave a commission unto his
Apostles to teach all nations, Matthew. 28.19. and to preach the Gospel to every
creature, Mar. 19. v. 15.

That the Church of Christ should be universal for time, and continue
perpetually unto the worlds end, it was plainly foretold by the Prophet Isaiah,
who speaking of our B. Savior says, that of the increase of his government
and peace there shall be no end. Upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom
shall he sit to order it, and to establish it with judgment, and with justice
from henceforth even for ever; and that no doubt may be made of the performance
hereof, the Prophet adds, the zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. And
by the Prophet Daniel affirming that in the days of those Kings shall the God
of heaven set up a kingdom which shall not be left to other people, but it
shall break in pieces and consume all those kingdoms, and it shall stand for
ever, Dan. 2.44. All which was confirmed by the Angel Gabriel, saying, The Lord
shall give unto Christ the throne of his Father David and he shall reign over
the house of Jacob, and of his kingdom there shall be no end, Luke 1. ver. 32,
33. For the perpetual settlement and establishing of this Church, Christ said
unto S. Peter: Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it, Matthew. 16.18. Touching the sanctity of the Church
of Christ, God by the Prophet Ezekiel says, I will set my sanctuary in the
midst of them for evermore: and the heathen shall know that I the Lord do
sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore,
Ezekiel. 37. v. 26, 28. and by the Prophet Malachi, Mal. 1.11. From the rising of
the sun, even to the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the
Gentiles: and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a
peace offering. Unto this sanctity our Blessed Savior exhorts us, saying, Let
your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven, Matthew. 5.16. and Mark 7. v. 13, 14. Enter ye in
at the strait gate, for strait is the gate, and narrow the way, which leads
unto life, and few there be that find it. And teaching how to distinguish the
good from the bad, he says, v. 20. By their fruits ye shall know them. As for
Apostolical succession, S. Paul says, Ephesians. 4. v. 11, 12, 13. that Christ
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets: and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come into the unity of
faith, and of the unity of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, that is, (as Doctor Fulk
against the Rhem. Test. in Ephesians. 4. sect. 4. fol. 335. and Mr. Calvin in his
Instit. cap. 8. de fide, sect. 37, 38. page 233. 234. do expound) for ever.

As for the second point, whether the Church of Christ can err or no, S,
Augustine says, that neither the violence of heathens, nor the subtilty of
heretics can overthrow it, which agrees with our Savionrs promise, Matthew.
16.18. that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it; and, to preserve
her from all error and heresy, Christ promised to be always with her even to
the worlds end, Matthew. 28.20. and God made this covenant with her: Isa. 59.21.
My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall
not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the
mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever; by which
words (says Mr. Calvin in Comment. hujus loci) God promises that the Church
shall never be deprived of this inestimable benefit, to be governed by the Holy
Ghost, and to be suported by heavenly doctrine: and to this effect he sent down
the Holy Ghost to teach the Church all truth and to remain with her for ever,
Joh. 16.13. Joh. 14.16. Thus thou see how S. Augustines instructions for
finding out the truth are grounded in Scripture, but more expressly in S.
Paul's doctrine, who tells us, Romans 10.17. that faith comes by hearing, and
hearing is by the word of God; if we ask him how men may come to hear the word
of God, he answers, v. 14, 15. How shall they hear without a preacher? and how
shall they preach unless they be sent? So that faith is bred in men by hearing
and believing the word of God, made known unto them by preachers lawfully sent:
which preachers (as he says to the Ephesians) Ephesians. 4. v. 11, 12, 13. are
always to be found in the Church of Christ, and are placed there, ver. 14.
that from henceforth we be no more children tossed to fro, and carried about
with every wind of doctrine by the sleighs of men and cunning craftiness
whereby they lie in wait to deceive; which is an office that cannot be
performed by men that are frail and subject to error, unles the Lord by his
divine assistance does preserve them from erring. Doctor Field having
considered the facility and solidity of this method, does advise all those to
practice it, that desire to be satisfied in matters of Religion in these terms,
Epist. dedic. of the Church. Seeing the controversies in our time are grown in
number so many and in nature so intricate that few have time and leisure, fewer
strength of understanding to examine them: what remains for men desirous of
satisfaction in things of such consequence, but diligently to search out, which
amongst all the societies of men in this world, is that blessed company of holy
ones, that household of faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church of the living
God, which is the pillar and ground of truth: that so they may embrace her
commuuion, follow her directions, and rest in her judgment? Now that thou
may be the better able to follow this wholesome counsel, let me advise thee
with care and diligence to peruse this ensuing treatise, and that thou may
receive much benefit thereby for thy souls health, thou have already the
prayers of S. Augustine, and thou shall have the hearty wishes and desires of

Thy charitable Welwisher. A. P.

The TABLE.
Chap. I. HOw S. Augustine came to be deceived by the Manichees. Page. 1 Chap.
II. That the Manichees do condemn the old Testament. Page. 11 Chap. III. Of the
four ways of expounding the old Testament. Page. 15 Chap. IV. 3. ways whereby
men fall into error. Page. 31 Chap. V Of the truth of the holy Scripture.
Page. 37 Chap. VI. That the holy Scripture is first to be loved before it can
be learned Page. 42 Chap. VII. That we ought not to judge rashly of the holy
Scriptures: and how, and with what care and diligence the trve religion is to
be sought for. Page. 49 Chap. VIII. Of the way to the instruction of piety: and
of the wonderful pains S. Augustine took to find it out. Page. 63 Chap. IX. Of
Credulity. Page. 68 Chap. X. Why Credulity is the way to Religion Page. 75
Chap. XI. Of understanding, belief, and opinion Page. 83 Chap. XII. That it is
the safest way to believe wise men. Page. 93 Chap. XIII. That Religion takes
her beginning from believing. Page. 98 Chap. XIV. That Christ chiefly exacted
belief Page. 104 Chap. XV. Of the most commodious way to Religion. Page. 114
Chap. XVI. That miracles do procure belief. Page. 117 Chap. XVII. The consent
of nations believingin Christ. Page. 124 Chap. XVIII. The conclusion by way of
exhortation. Page. 129
The Profit of Believing.
CHAP. I. How Saint Augustine came to be deceived by the Manichees.
O Honoratus,
IF any Heretic, and a man believing Heretics did seem unto me to be one and
the same thing; I should think fit to be silent at this present, and to abstain
both from speaking and writing in this cause: But now whereas they do verymuch
differ (For he is an Heretic (according to my opinion) who for some temporal
benefit, and chiefly for glory and his own preferment, either broacheth or
follows false and new Opinions: but a man believing Heretics, is one that is
deluded with a certain imagination of Piety and Truth) I held it to be my duty
to deliver thee my opinion, touching the finding out and embracing the Truth,
with the love whereof we have both (as thou know) been greatly enflamed even
from our youths. Truth is a thing far differing from that which vain men do
conceive, who having too deeply settled their affections upon these bodily and
corporal things, do hold and imagine it to be nothing else, but what they do
perceive and discern by those five most known Messengers of the Body: and they
to sse to and fro and rerevolve in their minds the impressions and images which
they have received from these things; even when they endeavor to disbelieve
their senses: and by a deadly and a most deceitful rule taken from thence,
they think that they do frame a right and perfect judgment of the inefffable
Secrets and Mysteries of Faith. There is nothing more easy (my most dear
friend) then for a man not only to say, but also to think that he has found
out the Truth: but how extreme hard it is to find it out indeed, thou will (as
I hope) acknowledge and confess upon the perusal of these my writings; which
that they may prove beneficial unto thee, or at least not hurtful, and unto
all those into whose hands they may chance to light, I have beseeched the
divine Majesty, and I do beseech him, and I hope it will come to pass; if mine
own conscience can but bear me witness that I came to write them not with a
desire of vain renown or frivolous ostentation, but with a pious and a
serviceable mind. My intent therefore is to prove unto thee, if I can, that it
is sacrilegiously and rashly done of the Manichees, to speak bitter words and
inveigh against those, who following the authority of the Catholic faith, are
fortified and strengthened beforehand by believing, and are prepared to receive
the light of the Divine grace, before they can behold that Verity and Truth
which is seen and beheld with a pure and clean mind. For thou know, O
Honoratus, that we put our selves into the company of such men for no other
cause, but for that they said, that, the terror of authority being set aside,
they would with plain and admirable reasons bring their hearers and followers
unto God, and free them from all error. For what else was it that enforced me
to follow them, and to hearken to them attentively, almost for the space of
nine years, having despised and contemned the religion which by my parents was
ingraffed in me, being a little child, but for that they affirmed that we are
terrified with superstition, and commanded to believe, before any reason is
given us of belief: and that they importune and urge none to believe, until
the truth be first discussed and made manifest unto them; who would not be
allured with these promises? especially the mind of a young man desirous of
truth, a babbler, and one that was puffed up with pride upon disputations had
with some skillful and learned Schoolmen: and such an one they found me then to
be, namely, who despised (my former religion) like old wives tales, and desired
to embrace and with greediness to receive the manifest and sincere Truth which
they promised to teach and deliver. But again, what reason withdrew me and
called me back that I did not wholly adhere unto them, but kept my self in the
degree of Hearers, as they use to call them, and did not forgo the hopes and
affairs which I had in this world; but for that I also noted and observed, that
they were more eloquent and copious in confuting others, then firm and certain
in proving and maintaining their own grounds? But what shall I say of my self,
who was now become a Catholic Christian: who being almost exhausted and greedy
after a very long thirst, was now with an ardent affection returned again to
the breasts of the Church, which I shaked and wrung, much weeping and
lamenting, to the end I might not only draw from thence sufficient comfort for
my misery and affliction, but might also recover my former hope of life and
salvation? What then shall I say of my self? And as for thee, thou did so
vehemently hate and detest them, that I could hardly draw thee by entreaties
and exhortations to hearken unto them and try them: and when thou heardest
them, with what other thing I pray thee were thou taken and delighted (for I
beseech thee, call it to remembrance) but with a certain great presumption and
promise of reasons? But because for a long time they made many large and
vehement discourses touching the errors of unskilful men (which every one
that is but meanly learned can easily do) it was late before I came to the
knowledge thereof. And if they delivered any thing unto us out of their own
men, we thought there was a necessity to receive and embrace it, when as other
things upon which we might rely, occurred not: wherein they dealt with us as
deceitful Fowlers are wont to do, who prick down limetwigs by a waters side,
to the end they may deceive the thirsty Birds: for they stop up, and by some
means or other they cover the other waters that are thereabouts: or they drive
the birds from thence with frights and fears, that not by their own free choice
and election, but merely for necessity and want of water they may fall into
their snares. But why do I not return this answer to my self, that such neat
and pretty similitudes as these, and such like reprehensions may be both most
civilly and most snappishly objected by any enemy or adversary whatsoever,
against all those that deliver any thing by teaching or instruction? But yet
for this cause I thought it necessary to insert some such thing into these my
writings, that I may warn and admonish them thereby to leave off all such
manner of proceedings: to the end that (as a certain man said) the toys of
common places being set aside, one thing may contend and strive with another,
one cause with another, one reason with another: wherefore let them forbear to
say, what they hold in a manner necessary to be spoken, when any one forsakes
them that has long been their hearer, The light is passed through him. For
thou my greatest care (for I am not too solicitous for them) see how vain a
thing this is, and how easy a matter it is for any one to blame and reprehend
it; this therefore I leave to thy wisdom to be discussed. For I am not afraid
lest thou should think that I was deprived of light, when I was entangled
with a worldly life, and had a remote and obscure hope of a beautiful wife, of
the pomp of riches, of the vanity of honors, and of other hurtful and
pernicious pleasures: for I ceased not to desire and hope for all these things
(as thou know right well) when I was their follower and heard them
attentively: nor do I attribute this to their doctrine, for I confess they
diligently warned and admonished me to beware of these things: but to say that
I am now destitute of light, when as I have alienated and withdrawn my self
from all these shadows and semblances of things, and have resolved to content
my self with such food only, as may seem necessary to the health of my body:
and that I was enlightened and shining before, when I was addicted unto those
things and was entangled with them, is the part of a man (to speak in the
mildest manner) who less considerately ponders the things of which he much
desires to talk and discourse. But if you please let us come to the matter.

CHAP. II. That the Manichees do condemn the old Testament.
THou art not ignorant how the Manichees reprehending the Catholic Faith, and
especially renting and tearing in pieces the old Testament, do move and disturb
the unskilful people: who truly know not how those things are to be
understood, and how being taken they may profitably descend and be conveyed
into the veins and marrow of tender souls. And because there occur certain
things in those books which may give some offense to those that are ignorant
and careless of themselves (as the greatest part of the common people is) they
may be plausibly reprehended and blamed, but cannot be plausibly defended by
many, by reason of the mysteries which are contained therein; and those few
that can do it, affect not public and open conflicts whereby to divulge their
fame and renown, and for this cause they are not known at all but unto those
only, who with much care and diligence do seek and enquire after them:
wherefore touching this rashness of the Manichees, in reprehending the Old
Testament and the Catholic Faith, hear I beseech thee, the things which move
and trouble me; the which I desire and hope that thou will receive with such an
hearty mind and good will as by me they are delivered and spoken; for God, unto
whom the secrets of my conscience lie open and are manifest, knows, that I deal
not maliciously in this speech, but as I conceive, it ought to be understood in
proof of the truth, unto which long since I have addicted my self, and that
with an incredible care and solicitude, lest I should err and go astray with
you, which I may easily do; when as to hold the same course with you, and yet
to embrace and keep the right way, it is a matter (not to speak too harshly) of
extreme difficulty. But I presume that even in this hope which I have of your
attaining together with me unto the way of wisdom, he, unto whom I have
consecrated my self, will not leave nor forsake me: when days and nights I
endeavor to behold: and for that I perceive my self to be weak and infirm, by
reason that the eye of my soul is for my sins, and the custom thereof
wounded with the stripes of inveterate opinions, I beg it oftentimes with
weeping and tears, and as it happens unto men's eyes, which after the
sufferance of a long blindness and darkness are hardly open: they have a
great desire to see light, and yet by their twinkling and turning away, they
refuse to behold it, especially if any one should endeavor to expose them to
the light of the Sun: so it falls out with me at the present, for I acknowledge
that there is a certain unspeakable and singular good of the soul, which may be
seen and contemplated with the mind, but I confess with tears in mine eyes and
sighs from my heart that I am not yet fit nor able to behold it: wherefore the
Divine goodness will not forsake me, if I fain nothing, if I speak according
to my duty, if I love the truth, if I affect friendship, and if I take a great
care that thou may not be deceived.

CHAP. III. Of the four ways of expounding the Old Testament.
THose that earnestly desire to know the Old Testament, are to understand that
it is taught and expounded after four manner of ways: according to the
History, according to the Etiologie, according to the Analogy, and according to
the Allegory. Think me not foolish for using Greek names: First, for that I
have so received, and I dare not deliver this otherwise unto thee then as I
have received: Next thou also observest, that we have no usual names for these
things: and if I had framed any by-interpretation, I should be less apt to be
understood: and if I should use any circumlocution, I should be less quick and
less ready in discoursing: this only I entreat and beseech thee to believe,
that howsoever I may err, I do it not out of any arrogance or pride. The
Scripture is treated according to the history when it is declared therein what
is written, or what is done: and what is not done but written only as it were
done. According to the Etiology, when it is showed thereby for what cause any
thing is either done or said. According to the Analogy, when it is demonstrated
that the two Testaments, the Old and the New, are not contrary the one unto the
other. According to the Allegory, when it is read therein that certain things
that are written, ought not to be understood according to the letter, but
according to the figure. All these manner of ways of alleging Scripture, have
been used by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the Apostles. He cited Scripture
according to the History, when, unto those that objected that his Disciples had
plucked the ears of Corn upon the Sabbath day, he answered, Have ye not read
what David did, when he was an hungered, and they that were with him: how he
entered into the house of God and did eat the loaves of Proposition (or
Shewbread) which it was not lawful for him to eat, neither for them that were
with him, but for Priests only? Mat. 12.1, 3, 4. 1 Samuel 21.6. Exodus 29.32. He
alleged Scripture according to the Etiology, when having forbidden the
dismissing of wives for any cause but only fornication, unto the Pharisees,
who told him that Moses had given men leave to dismiss them, having first
given them a bill of divorce, he said: This Moses did for the hardness of your
hearts. Deuteronomy. 24.1. Mat. 19.8. for here a cause was rendered, why that was well
permitted by Moses for a time, to the end that this which Christ commanded
might seem to show and demonstrate other times, but to declare how the divine
Providence has with a certain wonderful disposition ordered and composed the
courses and order of these times, it is a long work. Now touching the Analogy,
whereby appears the accord and consent of both the Testaments, what shall I
say, but that all those have used it, unto whose authority the Manichees do
give place, when as they may consider with themselves how many things they are
wont to say are thrust into the divine Scripture by I know not what corrupters
of the truth? which I always thought to be an extreme weak speech even when I
heard and followed them: neither was this my opinion only, but thine also (for
I well remember it) and it was the opinion of us all who endeavored to be
somewhat more careful and wary in judging, then was the common people and
multitude of believers. And whereas they have expounded and declared unto me
many things that did much move and trouble me (namely those wherein they
boasted and bragged oftentimes, and that more abundantly because more securely,
as not having any adversary to resist and oppose them. I think they have spoken
nothing more impudently or (to speak more mildly) with less circumspection and
more weakness, then that the divine Scriptures are falsified and corrupted:
when as it ought but lately to have been done, and yet they cannot convince it
to be so, by any copies that are now extant: for if they did say, that they did
not think that they ought to receive those Scriptures at all, because they are
written by such Authors as they did not conceive to have written the truth,
their pretense of rejecting them would in some sort be more hidden, and their
error more humane and pardonable: for upon this ground they have rejected the
book which is called the Acts of the Apostles: at which their proceedings, when
I well weigh it and consider it with my self, I cannot sufficiently wonder and
admire; for they wanted not only humane wisdom herein, but even a reasonable
and an indifferent judgment: for that book has so many things, which are like
unto those which they do receive, that it seems to me to be a great folly not
to receive this also, and if any thing displeases them therein, presently to
say it is salfe, and put in: now if they judge such a speech to be impudent (as
indeed it is) why should they conceive those things to deserve any credit and
esteem in S. Paul's Epistles, and the four books of the Gospel, wherein I know
not whether or no, proportionably speaking, there be many more things then
there could be in that book, which they would have men believe, to have been
thrust in by falsifiers and corrupters? But this indeed is my opinion, which I
request thee to weigh and consider with me, with a very clear and peaceable
judgment: for thou art not ignorant how the Manichees endeavoring to bring in
the the person of their author Manicheus into the number of the Apostles, do
say that by him we have received the Holy Ghost, whom our Lord promised to send
to his Disciples: if therefore they should receive those Acts of the Apostles
wherein the coming of the Holy Ghost is evidently declared and set down, Act.
2.2. they could find no ground to say why that was inserted and put in: for
they pretend I know not what corrupters of the divine books to have been before
Manicheus his time: and that they were corrupted by those that desired to
confound the law of the Jews with the Gospel of Christ; but this they cannot
say of the Holy Ghost, unless peradventure they will affirm that the
corrupters could foretell things that were to come, and thereupon did put into
their books that which might be produced against one Manicheus who sometimes
was to come, and who should say and aver that he had sent the Holy Ghost; but
of the Holy Ghost we intend to speak more plainly hereafter; but now let us
return to our former matter; for I think that I have sufficiently demonstrated
and shown, that the historical sense is to be found in the Old Testament, and
the Etiologicall and Analogicall in the New: it remains that I show also the
Allegorical therein. Our Redeemer himself alleges in the Gospel an Allegory
out of the Old Testament, saying: This generation seeks after a sign, and
none shall be given unto it, but the sign of the Prophet Jonas: for as Jonas
was three days and three nights in the Whales belly: so shall the Son of man
be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. Mat. 12.39 40. Jonas
1.17. And what shall I say of the Apostle Paul, who also in his 1 Ep. to the
Corinthians c. 10. to the 12. v. signifies, that the history it self of Exodus
was an Allegory of the Christian people that was to come? Moreover Brethren, I
would not (says he) that ye should be ignorant how that all our Pathers were
under the cloud, Exodus 13.21. Number. 14.14. Deuteronomy. 1.33. Psalm. 78.14. and all
passed through the sea: Exodus 14.22. Josh. 4, 23. Psalm. 78.13. and were all
Baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea: and did all eat the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink: (for they drank
of the spiritual Rock that followed them, and the Rock was Christ) but with
many of them God was not well pleased: Number. 24.28. and 26.65. for they were
overthrown in the wilderness. Now these things were our figures (or examples)
to the intent that we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.
Psalm. 106.14. Neither let us worship Idols, as some of them did, as it is
written, Exodus 32.6. The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play.
Neither let us commit fornication, as some of them did, and there fell in one
day three and twenty thousand men, Number. 25.9. Neither let us tempt Christ, as
some of them tempted him, and were destroyed by serpents. Numb. 21.6. Neither
let us murmr, as some of them murmured, and they perished by the destroyer.
Numb. 14.37. And all these things happened to them in a figure (or for an
example) but they were written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the
world are come. The same Apostle uses also a certain Allegory, which is much
to our purpose, because the Manichees are wont to allege it in their
disputations, and boast of it, when writing to the Galathians he says, Gal.
4.22, 23, 24, 25, 26. For it is written that Abraham had two sons, the one by
a bond-maid, Genesis 16.15. the other by a freewoman. Genesis 21.2. but he that was
by the bond-maid was born according to the flesh; but he that was by the
freewoman was born according to promise: which things are said by an Allegory:
for these are the two Testaments, the one from the mount Sina which gendreth to
bondage, which is Agar (for Sina is a mountain in Arabia adjoining to
Jerusalem that now is) and is in bondage with her children: But Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the mother of us all. Here therefore those too
too wicked men whilst they endeavor to frustrate the Law, do enforce us to
allow and approve of those Scriptures: for they diligently observe that it is
said, that they are in bondage that are under the Law, and they often allege
that last above the rest, Galath. 5.4. Christ is become of no effect unto you
that are justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. We grant all these
things to be true, neither do we say, that that Law is necessary, but only for
^ose unto whom bondage is yet profi^able and expedient; and therefore tha^t it
was fitly and commodiously ordained that such men as could not be reclaimd and
withdrawn from sinning by reason, ought to be constrained by sucha law, namely
by the threats and terrors of those punishments, which even fools themselves
can perceive and apprehend: from which when the grace of Christ does free us,
it does not condemn that Law, but it invites us for the time to come to obey
his charity, and not to serve and be subject to the terror of the Law. For
that is a Grace, that is to say, a Benefit, which they that yet desire to be
under the bonds of the Law, do not understand that the Divine Majesty has
imparted unto them; whom Paul the Apostle does deservedly reprove, as though
they were Infidels, because they did not believe that they are now freed by our
Lord Jesus Christ, from that servitude and bondage whereunto they were subject
for a certain time by Gods most just order and disposing. Hereupon it is that
the same Apostle says. Gal. 3.24. The law was our Pedagogue (or usher) in
Christ, he therefore gave unto men a Pedagogue whom they should fear, who gave
them afterward a master whom they should love: and yet nevertheless in those
precepts and Commandments of the Law, (which it is not lawful for Christians
now to use, such as are either the Sabbath or Circumcision or the Sacrifices,
and whatsoever is of that sort) so great mysteries are contained and
comprehended, that every godly man may understand that there is nothing more
pernicious and hurtful, then that whatsoever is comprised therein should be
understood according to the letter, that is, to the native sense of the words:
and nothing more wholesome and profitable, then to have it expounded according
to the spirit or spiritual sense and understanding: hence it is that the
letter kills, but the spirit quickens or gives life. 2 Cor. 3.6. hence it
is, that in the reading of the Old Testament, the self same veil remains
untaken away, because in Christ it is made void: verse. 14. for not the Old
Testament, but the veil thereof is made void in Christ, to the end that may be
understood and made manifest by him, which without him is hidden and obscure:
and therefore the same Apostle immediately after says: But when thou shall
turn to Christ the veil shall be taken away, verse. 16. but he does not say that
the Law or the Old Testament shall be taken away: they are not therefore taken
away by our Lords grace, as though unprofitable things lay hidden and were
covered there, but rather the veil or cover is taken away, wherewith wholesome
and profitable things were covered and kept close. This is the benefit which
they reap and receive, who with a studious and a devout mind, and not with a
troubled and wicked spirit, do seek after the sense of those Scriptures: and
both the order of things, and the causes of what is said and done, and so great
an accord of the Old Testament with the New, even to the last tittle, and so
great mysteries and secrets of figures are clearly and plainly demonstrated and
shown: that all the things that are found out by interpreting them, may enforce
men to confess and grant that they are miserable and wretched, that will
condemn these things, before they have attained to the knowledge of them.

Touching those words of the Apostle: The letter kills, but the spirit
quickneth, as they are here expounded by S. Augustine, he passes this
judgment, that he did more conveniently in his opinion expound them in his
book De Spiritu and Litera, though this sense is not to be rejected. Lib. 1.
Retract. c. 14.

CHAP. IV. Of three ways whereby men fall into error.
THat for the present the depth and profoundneste of knowledge and science
being set aside, I may so treat with thee, as I think I ought to treat with my
familiar friend, that is, as well as I can, but not so well as I have admired
to see very learned men been able to do: there be three kinds of errout into
which men may fall when they read any thing; I will speak of every one of
them. The first kind is, when that is thought to be true which indeed is false,
and was thought to be so by the Author that wrote it. The second kind not
being of so large an extent, yet no less damageable and hurtful then the
former, is, when that which is false, is thought to be true, and was thought to
be so by the Author that wrote it. The third kind, is, when some truth is
learned out of another man's writing, which the Author himself that wrote it,
understood not: in which kind there is no small profit, yea if thou do
consider it attentively thou shall find that the Reader gains unto himself the
whole profit of the reading. An example of the first kind is this: If any one
should say and believe that Rhadamanthus hears and judges in hell the causes
of the dead, because he read it in Virgils verses; for this man erres two
manner of ways: first, for that he believes that which he ought not to
believe; and secondly, for that the Author which he read, is not thought to
have believed it. An example of the second kind may be this: because Lucretius
writes, that the soul is made of atoms, and that after death it is dissolved
into the same atoms and perishes, if any one should think that this is true,
and that he ought to believe it: for this man is not less unhappy for
persuading himself certainly in so great a matter that to be true, which indeed
is false, for that Lucretius, by whose books he was deceived, was of that
opinion; for what does it avail him to be certain of the Authors opinion, when
as he has made choice of such an author, not by whom, but with whom he might
err and be deceived? An example of the third kind is this: if any one having
read some place in Epicurus his works wherein he praises continency, should
affirm, That he placed the chiefest good and felicity in Virtue; and that
therefore he ought not to be blamed nor reprehended; now though Epicurus
believes that the chiefest happiness of man consists in corporal pleasures,
yet what prejudice does this man receive and sustain by his error, when as he
holds not so filthy and hurtful an opinion, nor for any other cause is he
pleased with Epicurus, but for that he conceives him not to have held so bad an
opinion as ought not indeed to have been held and maintained? this error, is
not only humane and pardonable, but also oftentimes most worthy of a man: for
what if a man should make me this relation touching one of my loving friends,
that my friend when he was come to man's estate, told him in the hearing of
many, that his infancy and childhood had been so pleasing and delightful unto
him, that even he swore he would lead such a life afterward: and that I had
received such certain proofs of the truth of this matter, that I could not
without shame and impudency deny it: should I seem worthy of blame and reproof,
if I should think that when he said this, he meant and intended to signify
thereby, that he took much delight in an innocent life, and a mind alienated
from those appetites and desires wherewith mankind is wont to be involved, and
thereupon my love and affection toward him should be much increafed, although
perhaps the young man having been foolish in his tender age, had greatly
affected a certain liberty in playing and eating and sluggish rest? for suppose
he had died after I had received this relation touching him, and no body could
be found that could tell me what his judgment and opinion was herein: would
any one be so mischievous and wicked as to fall out and be angry with me for
praising his resolution and intention according to the intelligence which had
been delivered and imparted unto me? Yea what if a just valuer and esteemer of
things should perhaps make no difficulty to praise and commend my good will and
opinion, for that I was taken and delighted with innocence, and being a man
would rather frame a good conceit of another man in a doubtful matter, even
when he spoke otherwise then he ought to have done?

CHAP. V, Of the truth of the Holy Scripture.
NOw thou have heard the three kinds of error into which men may fall that
read any thing: hear also so many conditions and differences of the same
Scriptures, for it is necessary that so many do occur; for either some one
has written a profitable work, and another does not rightly and profitably
understand it: or the writer and the reader have both bestowed their labors
unprofitably; or the reader does well and rightly understand, but the Authors
work is useless and unprofitable. Of these three kinds the first I disallow
not, the last I esteem not: for whether can I blame an Author whose work is
not well and rightly understood, if he be no way guilty of that fault, nor can
I be troubled to see an Author read that has not known the truth, when I see
that his readers do receive no hurt nor prejudice thereby: wherefore, there is
one kind that is most approved, and is most purged and cleansed from error,
which is, when not only good works are set forth, but are also well and
rightly understood by their readers; yet notwithstanding that also is divided
into two kinds, and it is not wholly free from error: for it happens
oftentimes that the writer has a good meaning, and the reader has fo too, but
another then he, and oftentimes a better conceit, oftentimes a lower, and yet
one that is commodious and profitable: but when as we attain to the true sense
and meaning of the Author which we read; and the work much conduces to the
leading of a good life, the truth appears abundantly therein, and there is no
gap nor passage that lies open to falsehood and deceit. This kind is very
seldom to be found, when the discourse is about things that are extremely hard
and obscure; neither in my opinion can it be clearly and manifestly known, but
only be believed: for by what proofs or arguments can I so perfectly gather
what the will of a man is, that is absent or dead, that I can swear and take my
oath what it is: when as if he were asked, even being present there might be
many things which he might most officiously conceal and hide, although he were
not a wicked man? but to know the quality of the Author I think it nothing
avails to the knowledge of the matter: yet nevertheless he highly deserves to
be reputed and esteemed to be a good man, who by his books and writings affords
great assistance unto mankind and to posterity. Now I would have the Manichees
to tell me in which kind they place the error (which they conceive) of the
Catholic Church. If in the first it is a grievous fault indeed, but we need
not seek far to know how to defend it; for it is sufficient to deny that we
understand it, as they conceive, when they inveigh against it. If in the
second, it is no less grievous, but the same words will serve to confute it.
If in the third, it is no fault at all. Go to then, and hereafter consider the
Scriptures themselves: for what do they object against the books which are
called the Old Testament? do they say that they are good, but that we do not
well and rightly understand them? but they themselves receive them not. Do they
say that they are neither good, nor rightly understood by us? but this is
sufficiently convinced by the former defense; or will they say, that we rightly
understand them, but that the books be naught? what is this, but to acquit and
absolve their living adversaries, with whom they are in debate, and to accuse
those that are formerly dead, with whom they have no contention nor strife?
Verily I do believe that all the works which those men left to posterity, were
profitably written, and that they were great and very holy men, and that that
Law was made and published by Gods will and command: and although my skill and
knowledge be but very little in books of that kind, yet this I can easily prove
to be true unto one that bears an equal and an impartial, and not an
obstinate and a refractory mind; and I will do it, when thou will afford me an
attentive and a courteous hearing, and mine own occasions will permit. But now
is it not sufficient for me, howsoever that business goes, not to have been
beguiled nor deceived.

CHAP. VI. That the holy Scripture is first to be loved before it can be
learned.
O Honoratus, I call mine own conscience and God, who inhabits pure fouls, to
witness, that I judge and esteem nothing to be more wise, nothing more chaste,
nothing more religious then all those Scriptures be, which under the name of
the Old Testament, are held and embraced by the Catholic Church. I know thou
admirest to hear me talk thus, for I cannot disguise nor dissemble the matter,
we have been exhorted and persuaded to believe far otherwise: but truly, a
rasher act cannot be committed (rashness being a fault unto which we were
addicted being yet but children) then to forsake the judgment of the
Expositours of any kind of books, who profess that they can receive them, and
can teach and deliver them to their disciples: and to require their judgment
and opinion of them, who being constrained, I know not for what cause have
denounced a most sharp and bitter war against their authors and compilers?
and that I may speak of those sciences wherein perhaps a Reader may err
without any heinous crime or offense, who ever thought that the exposition of
the profound and obscure books of Aristotle ought to be received from his
enemy? or who being desirous to learn the Geometry of Archimedes, would take
Epicurus to be his master, against which he disputed very stiffely and eagerly,
and yet (as I conceive) he understood nothing thereof? Are those Scriptures of
the law most plain and easy against which they proceed with violence in vain
and to no purpose, as though they were exposed and lay open to the capacity of
the common people? I think these men are like to that woman which they
themselves do laugh at and deride, who being angry to hear the praises of the
sun, and to have it recommended unto her by a certain Manichean woman to be
worshipped, as she was religiously simple, starts up upon a sudden, and
stamping often upon the place, which the sun with his beams had enlightened
thorough a window, began to cry out, Behold I contemn and tread under foot the
sun and thy God. That this was done altogether foolishly, and like unto a
woman, no man can deny: but do not those men seem to resemble her, who casting
forth violent speeches and curses against the things they understand not,
neither why they were written, nor what manner of things they be (which seem as
though they were low and contemptible, but to them that, understand them they
are subtle and divine) think to receive some benefit thereby, because
unskilful men do countenance and applaud them? believe me whatsoever is
contained in those Scriptures is high and divine: there is truth altogether in
them, and most fit instruction both for the amending and reforming men's minds:
and it is certainly so well digested and ordered, that every one may receive
from thence that which is sufficient for himself, if he comes prepared to take
it with such piety and devotion, as true Religion does require. Should I go
about to prove this unto thee I must allege many reasons, and entertain thee
with a longer discourse: for first I must perfwade thee not to hate the
Authors themselves, and then to love them: and this I must effect by any other
means, rather then by expounding their opinions and their writings: and
therefore if we did hate Virgil, yea if we did not love him upon the
commendation of our Predecessors before we understood him, we should never be
satisfied in those innumerable questions touching him wherewith Grammarians are
wont to be much perplexed and troubled: nor should we give ear to any man that
could resolve those questions to his honor and praise, but we should give
countenance and show favor unto him who by those questions would endeavor to
show that he erred and doted; but now when as many men do labor to expound
them, and that after diverse manners, and every one according to his skill and
ability, they receive the chiefest commendation and applause, by whose
expositions he is found to be a better Poet, and he is conceived and believed
even by those that understand him not, not only to have committed no fault nor
error, but to have said nothing which does not deserve much glory and praise:
and therefore if a Master fails but in a small question, and knows not what to
answer, we are rather angry and offended with him, then we will conceive that
by any fault committed by Maro he is silent and dumb: but if a Master should in
his own defense, affirm that so great an Author has committed a fault, he
would loose so much credit and reputation thereby, that his scholars would
hardly continue with him even though he should hyre them with wages and
rewards. How great a matter were it for us to give so much credit to those
Writers by whose mouths the Holy Ghost has spoken as Antiquity confirmed by a
long continuance does testify and declare? but we forsooth being very wise
young men, and wonderful searchers of reasons, not having so much as perused
those books, nor sought out Masters to expound them unto us, nor somewhat
accused our own slownesse herein, nor held them to have any judgment or
understanding who affirmed that those works had for a long time been read, kept
and expounded thorough the whole world, though that no credit was to be given
unto them, being moved by their words, who were their enemies and offended with
them, by whom we were enforced with a false promise of reason to believe and
embrace unheard of millions of fables and tales.

CHAP. VII. That we ought not to judge rashly of the holy Scriptures: and how
and with what care and diligence the true Religion is to be sought for.
BUt now if I can, I will accomplish that which I have begun, and I will treat
with thee after such a sort, that in the mean time I will not expound the
Catholic Faith, but I will show unto them that have a care of their souls some
hope of divine fruit, and of finding out the Truth, to the end they may search
out the great mysteries and secrets of Faith. He that seeks after the true
Religion, does without doubt either believe already that the Soul is immortal,
unto whom that Religion may be commodious and profitable, or he desires to find
her to be so in the same Religion; and therefore all Religion is for the souls
sake: for the nature of the body howsoever it does put him to no care and
solicitude, especially after death, whose soul has taken a course by which it
may become blessed. Wherefore true Religion if there be any, was either only
one chiefly instituted for the souls sake: and this soul erres and is foolish,
as we see until she gets and possesses wisdom, and that perhaps is the true
Religion, if I seek out and enquire the cause of her erring, I find it to be a
thing which is extremely hidden and obscure. But do I send thee to fables? or
do I enforce thee to believe any thing rashly? I say our soul being entangled
and drowned in error and folly, seeks after the way of venty and truth, if
there be any such to be found, if thou find not thy self thus inclined and
disposed, pardon me, and make me I pray thee, partaker of thy wisdom: but if
thou do, let us, I beseech thee, both together seek out the truth. Imagine
with thy self that no not ce had as yet been given unto us, nor no insinuation
made unto us of any Religion what soever. Behold we undertake a new work, and a
new business. Professors of Religion are I believe to be sought for, if there
be no such thing. Suppose then that we have found men of diverse opinions, and
in that diversity seeking to draw every one unto them; but that in the mean
time, some amongst these do surpass the rest in renown of fame, and in the
possession of almost all people. Whether they embrace the truth or no it is a
great question; but are they not first to be examined and tried, that so long
as we err (for as men we are subject to error) we may seem to err with
mankind it self? but thou will say, Truth is to be found but amongst a few
certain men: if thou know amongst whom it is, why then thou know already
what it is. Did not I say a little before that we would seek after the truth,
as though we were yet ignorant thereof? but if by the force of truth thou do
conjecture that there be but few that embrace it, and yet thou know not who
they be, what if those few do lead and rule the multitude by their authority,
and can dive into the secrets and mysteries of faith, and can make them in a
manner plain and manifest? do we not see how few attain to the height of
eloquence, and yet the schools of Rhetoricians do make a great noise throughout
the whole world, with companies of young men? Do all those that desire to
become good orators, being terrified with the multitude of unskilful men,
think that they ought to addict themselves rather to the study of the orations
of Coccilius and Erucius, then to those of Tullius Cicero? all men affect the
things that are strengthened and confirmed by the authority of their
ancestors. The simple sort of people endeavors to learn those things which a
few learned men have delivered unto them to be learned: but very few there be
that attain unto great eloquence, fewer there be that practice it, but fewest
of all that grow eminent and are famous. What if true Religion be some such
thing? what if a multitude of ignorant people frequents the Churches, it is no
proof nor argument, that therefore none are made perfect by those mysteries?
and yet if so few should study eloquence, as there are few that become
eloquent, our parents would never think it fit to have us recommended unto such
masters. When as therefore the multitude, which abounds with a number of
unskilful people, invites us to these studies, and makes us earnestly to
affect that which few do obtain, why will we not admit that we have the like
cause in Religion, the which peradventure we contemn and despise to the great
peril and hazard of our souls? for if the most true and most sincere worship
of God, though it be but amongst a few, yet it is amongst those with whom the
multitude, though wholly addicted to their appetites and desires, and far
from the purity of knowledge and understanding, does consent and agree, which
without all doubt may come to pass: I ask, what answer are we able to give, if
any one should reprove our rashness and folly, for that having a great care to
find out the true Religion, we do not diligently search it out amongst the
masters and teachers thereof? if I should say the multitude has discouraged
me. Why then has it not disheartened men from the study of the liberal
sciences which hardly yields any profit to this present life? why not from
seeking after money and getting wealth? why not from obtaining dignities and
honors? moreover, why not from recovering and preserving health? finally, why
not from the desire of a blessed and an happy life? in all which affairs though
many men be employed, yet few there be that are eminent and excel. You will
say that the books of the Old Testament seemed to contain absurd things. Who
are they that affirm it? namely enemies, for what cause or reason they did it,
is not now the question; but yet they were enemies, you will say when you read
them you understood so much by your own reading. Is it so indeed? if thou had
no skill in Poetry at all, thou durst not take in hand Terentianus Maurus
without a master; Asper, Cornutus, Donatus, and a multitude of other Authors
are thought requisite for the understanding of any Poet, whose verses deserve
no greater esteem then the approbation and applause of a stage: and thou
without a guide do undertake to read those books, and without a master
dare pass thy judgment upon them, which, howsoever they be, are
notwithstanding by the confession of almost all mankind, published to be holy
and replenished with divine matters: nor if thou find some things therein
which seem unto thee absurd, do thou rather accuse the dullness of thy wit,
and thy mind corrupted with the infection of this world (as the minds of all
fools are) then those books which peradventure by such kind of men cannot be
well conceived and understood. Thou should do well to seek out a man both
pious and learned, or one that is esteemed and reputed so to be, by the
approbation and consent of many; by whose instructions thou might become
better, and more expert and skillful by his learning. Such an one (say thou)
was not easy to be found: it would be some labor and trouble to seek him.
There was none such in the land wherein thou did dwell. If so, what cause
could more profitably enforce thee to travel? if he lay hid in the continent
or firm land, or were not there at all; thou should sail beyond sea: if he
were not there to be found by the shore, thou should make a voyage even unto
those lands, wherein the things which are contained in those books are said and
reported to have been done. O Honoratus have we done any such thing? and yet
when we were but most wretched and silly boys we did at our own pleasure, and
in our own judgment, condemn a Religion, and that perhaps a most holy one (for
I speak, as yet, as though some doubt were to be made thereof) whose fame and
renown has already possessed the whole world. What if the things which seem in
those Scriptures offensive to some that are ignorant and unskilful, be for
this cause so written and set down, that when such things are read as agree not
with the sense of all sorts of men, but much less with theirs that are holy
and wise, we may with more care and diligence seek out a secret and hidden
meaning thereof? do thou not see how men labor to interpret the pastoral
Catamite, upon whom the rough shepherd poured out his affections: and how they
affirm that the boy Alexis (upon whom Plato is also said to have made some
love-verses) signifies I know not what great and mysterious matter, but that it
surpasses the judgment and understanding of unskilful men: when as indeed
that Poet abounding in his inventions may without any detestable crime or
offense be conceived to have published lascivious songs? but were we indeed
hindered and withdrawn from seeking out the true Religion, either by the
publishing of some law against it, or by the power of them that oppose it, or
by the contemptible show and appearance of men dedicated to the service of God,
or by any base or dishonest report; or by the newness of the institution, or
by some hidden profession thereof? No, no, none of these things did withdraw
and hinder us: all laws both divine and humane do permit men to seek out the
Catholic faith, and certainly it is lawful according to humane law to hold
and embrace it, if so long as we err, we be uncertain of the divine law. We
have no enemy that puts any fright or terror into our weakness: although truth
and the salvation of our souls, if it be sought after, where it is lawful to
seek it with most safety; and it cannot be found, ought to be enquired for with
any danger and hazard whatsoever; the degrees of all powers and dignities do
most devoutly impart their service unto this sacred and divine worship: and the
very name of Religion is most honorable, and has a very great esteem and
renown. What hinders us then at last to seek out carefully, and to examine
with a pious and diligent search, whether here be that truth which though few
do know and retain after the sincerest manner, yet the favor and good will of
all nations does conspire therein? All this being so, imagine (as I said) that
we now make our first enquiry what Religion we ought to embrace both for the
cleansing and reforming of our souls. Without doubt we must take our beginning
from the Catholic Church, for there are now more Christians then if the Jews
were joined with the worshippers of idols. And whereas of the same Christians
there be diverse heresies, and all would have themselves thought to be
Catholics, and do call others besides themselves heretics; the Church is one,
as all do grant, greater in multitude, if thou considerest the whole world and
(as those that know do affirm) more sincere in truth then all the rest; but as
for truth it is another question. But that which is sufficient for those that
seek it, is, that the Catholic Church is one upon which other heresies do
impose diverse names, when as every one of them is called by its proper name,
which it dares not deny; whereby we may understand by the judgment of
Arbitratours not hindered by any favor, unto whom the name Catholic, which all
seek after, ought to be attributed. But lest that any one should think that
this thing ought to be debated with much babbling or superfluous discourse,
there is one Church indeed wherein even the humane Laws are after a sort
Christian. Yet I will have no preocupation of judgment to be drawn from hence
but I judge it to be a most fit beginning for the seeking out of the truth. For
there is no fear least the true worship of God relying upon no proper force of
its own, should seem to stand in need to be upheld and supported by them whom
it ought to sustain and support: but certainly it were a perfect happiness, if
the Truth could there be found, where with most fecurity it may be sought and
retained: but if it cannot, it ought to be sought for in another place, what
danger and peril soever be incurred.

CHAP. VIII. Of the way to the instruction of piety, and of the wonderful
paint Saint Augustine took to find it out.
HAving thus resolved and determined these things, which in my opinion are so
right and just, that I ought to prevail in that cause with thee, whosoever were
against it: I will recount unto thee as well as I can, what course I took to
find out the true Religion, when as I sought it with such a mind and resolution
as I have now declared that it ought to be sought for. When I was departed from
thee beyond the Sea, now staggering and doubting what I ought to embrace and
what to reject (which doubting daily increased in me from the time that I gave
ear unto that man, whose coming unto us, was as thou know) promised as from
heaven, for the resolving of all the difficulties wherewith we were troubled,
and I knew him to be a man like other men, but only that he was eloquent, I
held a great debate and deliberation with my self being now in Italy, not
whether I should continue in that sect into which I was sorry and grieved that
I had fallen, but by what means I might find out the truth, for the love whereof
thou can bear me witness, how I sighed and groaned. I was often of an
opinion that it could not be found out, and the great waves of my thoughts and
cogitations moved me to assent to the Academicks. Oftentimes again when I
considered as well as I could, that the mind of man is endued with such
vivacity and natural strength, with such wisdom and sharpness of wit, and
with such quickness of judgment and understanding, I did not think that Truth
could lie hidden and be concealed, but only that the manner of Seeking it was
hidden and unknown, and that that manner was to be received from some Divine
Authority, it remained that I should enquire what that Authority was, when as
in so great Dissensions and diversity of Opinions every one did promise that he
would Teach and deliver it. Whereupon there occurred unto me an intricate Wood
or Labyrinth into which it was very tedious and irksome to enter; and my mind
remaining restless amongst these things, was tossed to and fro with a great
desire of finding out the truth: yet nevertheless by little and little I brake
off from their company more and more whom I had already purposed to forsake,
and there was nothing now remaining in so great perils and dangers, but that
with tears and pitiful words, I should beseech the Divine Providence to
assist and help me; and this I did deliver gently and carefully, and now I was
almost shaken by some disputations had with the Bishop of Millan S. Ambrose, l.
5. conf. c. 14. so that not without some hope I desired to enquire many things
touching the Old Testament, which (as thou know) being discommended and
dispraised unto us we abhorred and detested. And I had resolved to remain so
long a Catechumen in the Church unto which I was delivered by my parents,
until I could find out that which I desired, or could persuade my self that it
ought not to be sought for. Wherefore if there had been any one then, that
could have taught me, he might have found me a most apt scholar and very
docible. After this manner and with the like care and anxiety of thy soul thou
see that thou have been long troubled and afflicted, and if thou seem to
thy self to have been already sufficiently tossed, and would make an end of
these labors and pains: Follow the way of the Catholic Discipline, which has
proceeded from Christ himself by his Apostles even unto us, and from hence
shall descend and be conveyed to posterity.

CHAP. IX. Of Credulity.
THou say my advice is foolish and ridiculous, seeing that all men do make
it their profession to embrace and deliver Catholic doctrine. That all
Heretics do profess this I cannot deny, but after such a manner, that unto
those which they entice and allure unto them, they promise to give a reason for
the most hidden and most obscure things: and chiefly for this cause they blame
and reprehend the Catholic Church, because those that approach and come unto
her are commanded to believe: but they glory and boast that they impose not
upon their followers the yoke of Faith and Believing, but open unto them the
fountain it self of teaching and instruction. What (say thou) could be
uttered or spoken more redounding to their praise and commendation? It is not
so. This they promise having no power nor ability to perform it, but that by
the name and pretense of reason they may win and allure much company unto
them; for the soul of man naturally rejoices at the promise of reason, and not
having regard to her own forces and weakness, by a desire she has to eat the
meats of those that are in health (which are not prudently given to the infirm)
she hastily falls upon the poison of the deceivers. But as for true Religion it
can by no means be well and rightly received without some weighty command and
force of authority, unless those things be first believed, which every one may
afterward attain unto, and learn if he carries himself well, and be thought
worthy of it. Perhaps thou requirest some reason hereof, whereby thou may be
induced and persuaded to believe that thou ought not sooner to be taught by
reason, then by Faith and Belief. Which I can easily give unto thee, if thou will accept and receive it from me with an equal and impartial mind. But that
it may commodiously be done, I would have thee as it were answer to such
questions as I shall propose unto thee. And first of all I would have thee to
tell me: why do thou conceive that we ought not to Believe? Because (say
thou) credulity it self, from whence men are called credulous, seems unto me to
be a certain vice, else it would not be a custom to object this name by way of
reproach. For if a suspicious man be culpable and faulty, because he suspects
things not certainly known: much more does a credulous man deserve to be
blamed, who differs herein from a suspicious man, that he that is suspicious
makes some doubt in unknown things, but he that is credulous makes none at
all. In the mean time I admit of this opinion and this distinction; but thou
know also that we do not say a man is curious but by way of taunt and
reproach, but when we call a man studious, we speak it in his praise and
commendation: wherefore if you please, mark what difference you conceive to be
between these two. Thou answerest, that although both be moved with a great
desire of knowing, yet in this they differ, that the curious man enquires after
the things that belong not unto him, but the studious on the contrary after his
own affairs. But we grant that a wife and children and their welfare do belong
unto a man, and therefore if any one being gone a far off out of his native
soil should make a diligent enquiry of those that come from his parts, how his
wife and children do, he has certainly a great desire to know it, and yet we
call not this a studious man, although he be desirous to know, and even those
things which do chiefly belong and appertain unto him. Wherefore now thou
understandest that that definition of a studious man is herein defective and
imperfect: that every studious man desires to know the things that belong unto
him, but that every man that has such a desire ought not to be called a
studious man; but he who exceedingly seeks after the things which belong to
excellent breeding, and to the adorning of the mind, we rightly call (in
Latin) a Student, that is, a desirous man, especially if we add what he
desires to hear. For we call one also studious of his friends, that loves his
friends only: yet nevertheless we think him not worthy of the common name of
studious men without any addition. But one that desires to know how his friends
do. I would not call him studious or desirous of hearing, unless having a good
fame and credit he should often desire to hear the same thing, but if he should
but once desire to hear it, I would call him a Student or desiring man. Now
reflect upon a curious man, and tell me whether if any one should willingly
hear a short tale not conducing at all unto his profit, that is, of things not
belonging unto him, and this not with great eagerness and often, but very
seldom and very modestly, either in some banquet, or in some meeting or
assembly, would thou think him to be a curious man? I conceive not, but
truly he that has a care of that thing which he would willingly hear might
seem indeed to be so. Wherefore the definition also of a curious man ought to
be corrected by the same Rule as is that of a studious man. And therefore
consider also, whither the things formerly spoken ought to be amended. For why
is he not unworthy of the name of a suspicious man, who sometimes suspecteth
something, and he of a credulous man that sometimes believes something?
Wherefore as there is a very great difference between one that is desirous of
any thing, and one that is altogether studious, and again between one that has
a care of a thing, and one that is curious: so is there between a believing man
and a credulous man.

CHAP. X. Why credulity is the way to Religion.
BUt thou will say, Now see whither we ought to believe in Religion. For
neither if we grant it to be one thing to believe, another to be credulous,
does it follow, that it is no fault to believe in matters of Religion: for what
if it be a fault both to believe and to be credulous, as it is both to be drunk
and to be a drunkard? whosoever thinks this to be certainly true, can in my
opinion have no friend at all. For if it be a thing unreasonable to believe any
thing, either he commits a foul fault that gives credit to his friend; or if he
believes him not, I see not how he can call himself a friend, or the other.
Here peradventure thou will say, I grant that something ought sometimes to be
believed: now declare how in Religion it is not a thing unreasonable to believe
any thing before we know it, or understand it. I will if I can. Wherefore I ask
thee, which do thou conceive to be the greater fault, to instruct an
unworthy person in Religion, or to believe that which is said by the
instructours and teachers thereof? if thou understandest not whom I call an
unworthy person: such an one I mean as comes to receive and embrace Religion
with a feigned and dissembling heart. Thou grantest, as I conceive, that it is
a thing more worthy of blame to expound to such an one the holy mysteries of
faith, then to give credit to religious men, affirming something of Religion it
self. Neither would it become thee to give another answer. Wherefore now
imagine with thy self, that the man were present who is to instruct thee in
point of Religion: how will thou make him believe that thou come with a true
and an unfeigned mind, and that thou usest no deceit nor dissimulation in this
business? thou will say that upon thy good conscience thou feignest nothing,
assuring it with all the words thou can use, but yet with words. For being a
man thou caust not so open the corners and secrets of thy mind to another man,
that he may know thee inwardly. And if he shall say: Behold I do believe thee:
but is it not more fit that thou also should give credit unto me, seeing that
if I hold and embrace any truth, thou art to receive the benefit thereof, and I
to impart it? What answer shall we give, but that he ought to be believed? but
say thou, Had it not been better to allege reason unto me, that I might
follow it without any rashness whithersoever it should lead me? Perhaps it had
been: but seeing that it is so great a matter for thee to know God by reason,
do thou think that all men are capable of understanding the reasons whereby
the mind of man is led to the knowledge of divine things or the greater part of
them, or but a few? I think, thou say but a few. Do thou believe that thou
art in that number? Thou say, It is not my part to answer to that question.
Thou think then that it is his part also to believe thee in this matter:
which he does indeed. Only let me put thee in mind, that he has already twice
given credit unto thee, speaking uncertain things: and that thou would not
so much as once believe him, when he religiously warned and admonished thee.
But suppose this to be so, and that thou come with a sincere mind to embrace
Religion, and that being one of those few men, thou can understand the
reasons by which the divine power is certainly known, do thou think that
Religion is to be denied to other men, that have not so great wits and
judgments as thou have? or do thou conceive that by little and little they
ought to be led by certain degrees to those chiefest secrets? thou plainly
see what course of proceeding is the more religious. For thou can not think
that any man ought by any means to be forsaken or rejected in the desire and
affection of so great a matter. But art not thou of opinion, that unless a man
first believes, that he shall attain unto that which he intended, and bears an
humble and a suppliant mind, and being obedient to certain great and necessary
precepts, be very well purged and made clean by a certain course of life, he
cannot otherwise obtain those things that are purely true? indeed thou think
so. If then they, who by certain reason can most easily conceive the divine
mysteries, (one of which sort I believe thee to be) should proceed in this way,
wherein those walk that first do believe, would they receive any hurt thereby?
I think not. But yet thou say, what necessity is there of delay? because,
although by their proceedings they shall not prejudice themselves at all, yet
they will endamage others by their example. For there is hardly any one, that
has so high a conceit of himself as he can have; and he that thinks too humbly
of himself, ought to be raised up, and he that thinks too high, ought to be
repressed, that neither the one may be overcome by despair, nor the other cast
down headlong by boldness and presumption. Which is easily brought to pass,
if even those that are able to fly, should a little be enforced to go, lest
any should be dangerously invited thereunto, and thereby also a sufficient care
may be had of others. This is the Providence of true Religion: this God himself
has appointed and commanded: this has been delivered by our Predecessors of
happy memory, this has been observed even until our days; to go about to
overthrow this order, is nothing else but to seek out a sacrilegious way to
true Religion. Which whosoever do, cannot attain unto that which they intend;
though that be granted them which they desire. For howsoever they surpass and
excel in wit, unless the divine Majesty does aid and assist them, they creep
upon the ground. Which assistance he then affords when they that tend and walk
toward him, have a care to proceed according to the course of humane society.
Then which degree and step toward heaven nothing can be found more firm and
stable. Verily, such is the force and efficacy of this reason, that I cannot
resist it, for how can I say, that nothing ought to be believed unless it be
known? besides all friendship is taken away unless something may be believed
which cannot be demonstrated and proved by certain reason: and oftentimes
without offense credit may be given to such stewards as are servants to Lords.
But in matters of Religion what can be done that is more unreasonable and
unjust, then that Gods Prelates should believe us, when we promise that we come
to embrace Religion with an unfeigned mind; and we refuse to give credit unto
them, when they teach and instruct us? Finally, what way can be more wholesome
and profitable, then by believing those things which God has appointed as
preparatives for the cultivating and adoring the mind to be first disposed, and
made fit to understand and receive the truth? or if thou be already
sufficiently disposed thereunto, rather to go a little about, where thou may
walk with the greatest safety, then both to be the Author of danger to thy
self, and an example of temerity, and rashness unto others.

CHAP. XI. Of Understanding Belief and Opinion.
WE have showed already how without offense we may follow those that command
us to believe: it remains that we consider for what cause they are not to be
followed that promise to conduct and lead us by reason. Some are of opinion
that they can hearken and give ear to these promisers of reason, not only
without any blame or dispraise; but also with some commendation and praise; but
it is not so, for there be two sorts of persons that deserve praise in point of
Religion: the one which has already found out the true Religion, which we
ought to judge most happy and blessed: the other which with the greatest care,
and after the rightest manner, does seek after it: the first sort is now in
possession of it, the second is in the way, by which notwithstanding most
certainly they will arrive at it. There be three other kinds of men which are
indeed to be misliked and detested. The first is, of those that are opinative,
that is, who think they know that which they know not. The second is, of those
who truly do perceive their own ignorance, but do not so seek that they may
find. The third is of those that neither think they know, nor have any will or
desire to seek. There are also three things in the minds of men, near as it
were the one unto the other, most worthy to be distinguished, to understand, to
believe, and to think. Of which, if they be considered by themselves, the first
is always without offense, the second sometimes faulty, the third never
without a fault; and this we ought to reserve to the same beatitude and
felicity. For in this life how much soever a man knows, his knowledge does not
as yet make him most blessed, for that there be incomparably more things
whereof he is ignorant. For to understand great and worthy, and divine things
it is a most blessed thing. But it is not hurt full to understand superfluous
things, but perhaps it was prejudicial to learn them, when as they took up the
time of necessary things. Also it is not a miserable thing to understand
hurtful things, but to do or suffer them. For if any one understands how his
enemy may be slain without endangering himself, he becomes not guilty by
understanding it, if he desires it not: yea if he be free from such a desire,
who is more innocent and guiltless then he? In believing a man is then to
blame, when either he believes some unworthy thing of God, or gives too facile
and easy credit unto the things reported of man. But in other things, if a man
believes any thing, he commits no fault by believing, though he understnnds
that he knows not the thing which he believes. For I believe that in times
past, most wicked conspiratours were put to death by the power and authority of
Cicero: but this I do not ogely not know, but also I know assuredly that I can
by no means attain unto the knowledge thereof, To be opinative or to be led by
opinion, is for two causes an unseemly thing: First, because he cannot learn a
thing, if it be to be learned, that has persuaded himself that he knows it
already. And secondly, for that rashness is of it self a sign or token of an
ill disposed mind. For although any one thinks that he knows that which I said
touching Cicero (as there is nothing that can hinder him from learning it) yet
because he can have no certain knowledge of it, and for that he understands
not, That there is a great difference, whither any thing be comprehended by
certain reason of mind, which we say is to understand, or whither it be
committed to common fame or writing, to be profitably believed by posterity, he
erres indeed; and there is no error but has its foulness and deformity.
Wherefore that we understand we attribute it to reason: that we believe, to
authority; and that we are opinative, to error and mistaking: but every one
that understands does also believe: and so does every one that is opinative:
but not every one that believes, understands: and no man understands that is
opinative. If therefore these three kinds be referred to those five sorts of
men whereof we made mention a little before, to wit, to the two approved kinds
which we put in the first place, and to the other three vicious kinds; we find
that the first kind (which is those that are happy) does believe truth it self:
and that the second kind (which is those that are desirous and lovers of truth)
does believe authority: in both which kinds the believers deserve praise. But
in the first of the vicious kinds (that is of those that think they know that
which they know not) there is indeed a faulty credulity. The other two
disallowed kinds (that is, both those that seek after truth with a despair of
finding it out, and they that seek not after it) do believe nothing; and this
is only in things belonging to some doctrine or discipline, for how a man can
believe nothing in the other actions of his life I understand not. Albeit even
amongst those that affirm that in their actions they follow probable opinions,
some there be that will seem rather not able to know any thing, then to believe
nothing. For who does not believe that which he does approve? Or how is that
which they follow profitable, if it be not approved? Wherefore there may be two
kinds of those that oppose the truth: the one that opposes knowledge only,
and not faith: the other that condemns both the one and the other. But
whither any can be found that use such proceedings in humane affairs, I am
wholly ignorant. These things are spoken that we may understand, that believing
the things which we do not as yet fully know nor understand, we are vindicated
and defended from the rashness and temerity of opinative men. As for them that
say that we ought to believe nothing, but that which we know, they have only
regard to the name of opinion, which I confess is but base and ignominious:
but if any one will consider attentively, that there is a very great difference
between these two things, whither a man thinks that he knows a thing, or
whither being moved by some authority, he believes that which he understands
that he knows not, he shall certainly shun and avoid the crime both of error,
inhumanity and pride.

Observation.
S. Augustine in his first book of Retractations and fourteenth Chapter, would
have those words. (The one which has already found out the true Religion which
we ought to judge most happy and most blessed) so to be understood, that they
are most blessed not in this life, but in that which we hope for, and unto
which we go by the way of Faith, for (says he) they are to be ^onceived to
have found out that which is to be sought for, who are there already, whither
we by seeking and believing, that is by embracing the way of Faith do desire to
arrive.

And again he affirms that those words: To understand great and worthy and
divine things, it is a most blessed thing, ought to be referred to eternal
beatitude.

And upon these words: (There is a great difference whither any thing be
comprehended by certain reason of mind, which we say, is to understand: or
whither it be committed to common fame, or writing to be profitably believed by
posterity;) and upon these: (That we understand we attribute it to reason: that
we believe to authority) he makes this explication: This is not so to be
understood that in common discourse we should be afraid to say we know that
which we believe by credible witnesses, for when we speak properly, we are
only said to know that which we comprehend by firm reason of mind. But when we
speak with words more fit to be commonly used, as the Scripture also speaks,
we make no doubt to say, that we know both that which we perceive by our
corporal senses, and which we believe upon the report of credible witnesses,
but yet so that we understand what difference there is between the one and the
other.

CHAP. XII. That it is the safest way to Believe Wise men.
IF that which is not known ought not to be believed, I ask then how can
children obey parents and embrace them with mutual love and affection, whom
they may believe not to be their parents; for that who is their father, it
cannot be known by reason, but it is believed upon the word and authority of
the Mother: and as for the Mother, she often is not believed, but Midwives,
Nurses and Servants: For if her child may be stolen from her and another put in
the place, cannot she deceive being deceived? and yet notwithstanding we
believe, and that without any doubt and staggering at all, that which we
confess we cannot know: and unless this were so, who sees not but that Piety
the most holy tie and bond of mankind would be violated and defiled by a most
proud wickedness and offense? For who, though he be a mad man, can think him
worthy of blame, who does perform his obliged duties unto those whom he
believes to be his parents, although indeed they were not? On the contrary, who
will not think fit to have him cast out of the society of men, who will not
love those which perhaps are his true parents, for fear lest he should love
those that are false ones? Many arguments may be brought to show that nothing
at all remains safe and secure in humane society, if once we are resolved to
believe nothing which we cannot know nor understand. But now hear that whereby
I am confident I shall at the present more easily draw and persuade thee, that
seeing the question is concerning Religion, that is about the worship of God,
and the knowledge of Divine things) those are less to be followed, and
hearkened unto, who most readily promising reason, do forbid and prohibit us to
believe. No man doubts, but that all men are either fools or wise men; I call
not those wisemen here, that are prudent, ingenious, and witty, but those that
are endued with as firm and certain a knowledge both of Divine and Humane
things as man is capable to receive, and do lead their lives and frame their
manners conformable thereunto: but as for others, how learned or unlearned
soever they be, or whither they deserve to be praised or dispraised for the
manner of their lives, I repute and account them in the number of fools: which
being so, what man, though but of a slender understanding does not plainly see,
that it is more wholesome and profitable for fools to obey the precepts and
commands of wise men, then to frame and order their lives according to their
own judgments and fancies? For every thing that is done, if it be not rightly
done, it is a fault: nor can any thing be by any means rightly done, which does
not flow and proceed from right reason; now right reason is virtue it self; But
amongst what sorts of men is virtue to be found, but in the mind of a wise man?
wherefore the wiseman only offends not; but every fool offends, unless it be
in those actions wherein he does obey a wise man; for such actions do proceed
from right reason, nor is the fool to be accounred Master (as I may say) of his
own actions, he being as it were but the instrument or servant of the wise man.
Wherefore if it be better for all men not to offend then to offend: verily all
fools would live better if they could be servants to wise men. And if this
without doubt be fit and expedient in things of less moment, as in buying or
tilling a field, in marrying a wife, in the education and breeding of children,
and finally in the managing of private affairs: much more is it expedient in
matters of Religion. For Humane things are both more easy to be known then
Divine: and in all things that are more holy and more excellent, we sin so
much the more grievously and dangerously, by how much we owe unto them a
greater honor, reverence and respect. Wherefore thou see that from hence
forth there remains nothing more for us to do, so long as we are fools, but, if
we desire to lead a good and a religious life, to seek out wise and prudent
men, that by obeying of them we may not so much feel the dominion of folly,
whilst it is in us, and at the length we may become wise men our selves.

An Observation.
S. Augustine in his first book of Retractions, and fourteenth chapter
advertiseth that his division of men into wise men and fools, is to be
understood of men after they come to the use of reason, whereby they are
distinguished from beasts, as we say all men desire to be blessed, wherein
little children cannot be included for they cannot yet defire it.

CHAP. XIII. That Religion takes her beginning from Believing.
HEre again arises a question of great difficulty: for how shall we that are
fools be able to find out a wise man, seeing that diverse do indifferently
challenge that name unto themselves, although almost none dare presume to do it
openly, when as they do so disagree amongst themselves about those things, in
the knowledge whereof wisdom does consist, that it is necessary to think that
either none of them are wise men, or that there is but one certain wiseman. But
when a fool enquires who that is, truly I fee not by what means he can be
plainly discerned and perceived: for a man cannot know any thing by any signs
whatsoever, unless he knows the thing it self, whereof these be the signs; but
a fool knows not wisdom. For wisdom is not like gold and silver and such like
things, which thou may both know when thou see, and yet not enjoy and
possess them: he that wants wisdom cannot see nor behold it with the eye of
his mind: for all the things which we perceive with our corporal senses, are
outwardly proposed and presented unto us; and therefore we may behold strange
and external things with our eyes, albeit we have not any of the things, nor
any thing of that kind: but that which is perceived by the understanding, is
inwardly in the mind, and it is nothing else to have it, but to see and behold
it. But a fool wants wisdom, and therefore knows it not, for he cannot see it
with his eyes; for he cannot see it and not have it: and he cannot have it and
still continue and remain a fool: wherefore he knows it not, and whilst he
knows it not, he cannot know it in another place: and therefore no man so long
as he remains a fool, can by most certain knowledge find out a wise man, by
obeying of whose precepts and commands he may be freed from so great an evil as
folly is. Now it is God only that can give satisfaction to this mighty
difficulty, and afford remedy for this great evil; and because our question is
about Religion, unless we both believe that there is a God, and that he gives
assistance to humane minds, we ought not indeed to inquire and seek for true
Religion. For what do we desire to find out at length by so great an endeavor?
What wish we to attain unto? Whither do we long to arrive? Is it unto that
thing which we believe not to have a being, nor to belong and appertain unto
us? Nothing is more perverse then such a mind. When thou durst not beg a favor
of me, or with impudence durst crave one do thou come to demand how Religion
may be found out, when thou think not that there is a God. and that we care
not whither there be any or no? What if it be so great a matter, that unless
it be diligently sought for, and with all might and power it cannot be found
out? What if the extreme difficulty of finding out the meaning and
understanding of that which shall be found out does vex and trouble the mind of
the seeker? For what is more pleasant and familiar to our eyes, then this light
is? and yet after long obscurity and darkness they cannot endure it. What is
more fit and commodious for a body that is consumed and exhausted with
sickness, then meat and drink? Yet we see that those that are upon recovery
are restramed and kept back that they may not presume to feed so plentifully as
well men do, lest by a full diet they should return to their former disease. I
speak of those that are recovering their health: but what do we not enforce the
sick men themselves to eat something? which is so great a trouble unto them,
that certainly they would not obey us, did they not believe that they shall
escape that sickness thereby. When therefore will thou settle thy self to a
most painful and laborious search? When will thou adventure to take so great
care and labor upon thee, as this business does deserve, when as thou do
not believe that there is any such thing as that which thou seek? Wherefore
it was rightly instituted and ordained by the majesty of Catholic discipline,
that before all things they should be induced and persuaded to believe, that
come to receive and embrace Religion.

CHAP. XIV. That Christ himself chiefly exacted belief.
SEeing my discourse is concerning those that desire to be called Christians. I
pray tell me what reason can that heretic allege unto me? What can he say to
draw me from Believing, as from a rash and inconsiderate thing? If he commands
me to believe nothing, then do I not believe that there is any true Religion in
the world: and because I do not believe that there is any such thing, I do not
seek after it. But he (as I conceive) will show it to the seeker; For so it is
written: He that seeks shall find. Wherefore I would not come to him that
forbids me to believe, unless I believed something. Is there any greater
madness, then that I should displease them only with a belief which is
supported by no knowledge, and yet that belief alone has brought me to the
self same man? What shall I say, but that all Heretics do exhort us to believe
Christ? Can they be more opposite and contrary to themselves? Wherein they are
to be pressed two manner of ways. First they are to be asked, where is the
reason which they promised, where the reprehension and blaming of rashness,
where the presumption of science and knowledge? for if it be an absurd thing to
believe anyone without reason, why do thou expect, why do thou go about to
have me believe any one without reason, that I may more easily be led by thy
reason? Will thy reason build any thing that is firm and stable upon the
foundation of temerity and rashness? I speak according to them whom we
discontent and displease by believing. For to believe before reason, when thou
art not yet fit to conceive and understand it, and by faith it self to prepare
the mind to receive the seeds of verity and truth, I judge it to be not only a
most wholesome and profitable thing, but also so necessary, that those that have
sick and feeble minds cannot recover their healths without it: which because
they conceive to be a ridiculous thing and full of rashness, it is impudently
done of them to persuade and exhort us to believe Christ. Moreover, I confess
that I have already believed Christ, and have persuaded my self, that that is
true which he has said, although this my belief be supported by no reason.
This is the first lesson O heretic which thou will teach me; but because I
have not seen Christ himself, how he vouchsafed to appear amongst men, who is
publicly reported to have been seen even by the eyes of common people, give me
leave a little to consider with my self upon whose words I have believed, that
there was a Christ, that being already guarded and fortified by such a faith, I
may give ear and hearken unto thee; I perceive that I believed and gave credit
unto none, but to a settled and confirmed opinion, and to a most renowned fame
and report of people and nations: these people also I see in all places to be
in possession of the secrets and mysteries of the Catholic Church. Why shall
not I then chiefly enquire of them diligently what Christ has commanded, by
whose authority being moved, I have already believed that Christ has commanded
some profitable thing? Will thou better expound unto me what Christ has said?
whom I would not think to have been, or now to be, if thou did recommend it
unto me to be believed. This therefore (as I said) have I believed upon a
famous report of men, confirmed with consent and antiquity: but you who are
both so few, and so turbulent, and so new, it is certain you can produce and
bring forth nothing which may deserve credit and belief. And therefore what a
madness is this in thee (to say) Believe them (the known multitude of
Christendom) that we ought to believe Christ, but learn of us (Manicheans)
what Christ has said: Why so I beseech thee? Verily, if that known multitude
should fail, and could teach me nothing: I should much more easily persuade my
self, that I ought not to believe Christ at all, then that I ought to believe
any thing concerning him of any others, but of those by whose means I first
believed him. O mighty confidence, or rather folly! I will (say thou) teach
thee what Christ has commanded, in whom thou art already persuaded to believe.
What if I did not believe in him at all, could thou teach me any thing
concerning him? But (say thou) it behooves thee to believe. What, upon your
warrant and recommendation? No (say thou) for we do by reason lead those
which do already believe in Christ. Why then shall I believe in him? Because it
is a grounded report, was it grounded upon you, or upon others? Upon others
say thou. Shall I believe them first, and be afterward taught and instructed
by thee? Peradventure I ought to do so, were I not above all things admonished
by them not to come at all unto thee: for they say that you hold pernicious
doctrines. Thou will answer, they lie. How then may I believe them, concerning
Christ whom they have not seen: if I may not believe them concerning thee whom
they will not see? Here say thou, Believe the Scriptures. But all Scripture,
if being new and unheard of, it be alleged or commended but by a few, and has
no reason to confirm it, receives no credit nor authority at all, but those
that allege it: wherefore if you that are so few and unknown commend those
Scriptures unto me, I refuse to believe them: besides also you proceed against
your promise, rather by commanding belief, then giving any reason thereof. Here
again (for the authority of Scriptures) thou will call me back to the known
multitude of Christendom, and to common report. Restrain at length thy
obstinacy, and I know not what unruly appetite of worldly fame: and rather
admonish me to seek out the chief rulers of this known multitude, and to
enquire for them diligently and painfully, that rather I may learn something of
them touching these Scriptures: who if they were not I should not know whither
any thing ought to be learnt at all or no. As for thee, return into thy corner
and lurking-hole, and delude us no more under a show and pretense of truth,
which thou endeavourest to take away from them, unto whom thou grantefl
authority and credit: and if they also deny, that we ought not to believe
Christ, unless an undoubted reason can be rendered thereof, they are not
Christians. For certain Pagans do allege that against us, foolishly indeed,
but yet not contrary nor repugnant to themselves. But who can endure that those
men should profess that they belong to Christ, who strongly affirm that
nothing ought to be believed, unless most evident reason can be given even
unto fools, concerning God and divine matters? But we see that Christ himself
(as that history teaches which they also believe) desired nothing more
principally, nor more carnestly, then that he might be credited and believed:
when as they with whom he was to treat about those affairs were not yet fit to
learn and conceive the divine mysteries. For to what other purpose did he work
so great and so many miracles, he himself also affirming that they were done
for no other end, but that men might give credit and belief unto him? He led
the simple sort of people by belief: you lead them by reason: he cried out that
he might be believed, you cry out against it: he commended those that did
believe, you blame and reprehend them. But unless he had turned water into
wine, to omit his other miracles, could men have been brought to follow him, if
he had done no such things, but only taught and instructed them? Or is that
word of his not to be regarded: 1 John 14.1. Believe God and believe me: Or is
he to be blamed for rashness in belief, who would not have Christ come into
his house, because he believed that by his command only his sick son could
be cured? Mat. 8.8. He therefore bringing a medicine which was to cure the most
corrupt manners, did by miracles win authority, by authority deserved belief,
by belief drew together a multitude by a multitude obtained antiquity by
antiquity strengthened and confirmed Religion: which not only the most foolish
novelty of heretics endeavoring by deceits, but neither the ancient error of
the Gentlies being violently bent against it, could in any part abolish or
destroy.

CHAP. XV. Of the most cemmodious way to Religion.
Wherefore albeit I am not able to teach thee, yet do I not cease to warn and
admonish thee, that (because many men will seem to be wise, and it is not easy
to discern whither they be fools or no) thou beseechest the divine Majesty with
very much earnestness, and fervent desires, with sighs and sobs, or also (if
it be possible) with weeping and tears, to free and deliver thee from the evil
of error, if thou desire to lead a blessed and an happy life. Which may more
easily be brought to pass, if thou will willingly obey his commands which he
has been pleased to have confirmed and strengthened by so great an authority
of the Catholic Church. For seeing that a wise man is by his mind so united
unto God that nothing is interposed and set between them, which may divide and
separate them, (for God is truth, and no man is to be accounted a wise man that
does not attain to the knowledge of truth) we cannot deny but that the wisdom
of man is interposed as a certain medium between his folly and the most sincere
truth of the Divine Majesty. For a wise man according to the ability which he
has received, does imitate God: and a fool has nothing nearer unto him which
he may profitably imitate and follow, then a wise man: when because (as I said)
it is not easy to understand by reason, it was necessary that certain miracles
should be proposed and set before men's eyes (which fools do use much more
commodiously then their understandings) to the end that the life and manners of
men moved with authority, might first be purged and made clean, and so they
might be enabled to understand reason. And therefore when as man was to be
imitated, and yet no confidence to be placed in him: how could the Divine
Majesty show greater signs of his favor and liberality, then that the sincere,
eternal, and unchangeable wisdom of God, unto whom it behooves us to cleave
and adhere should vouchsafe to take humane nature upon him? who did not only
do those things, which might serve to invite us to follow God: but did also
endure and suffer those things, whereby we were discouraged from following of
him. For whereas no man can obtain the most certain and chiefest good, unless
he does fully and perfectly love it, (which by no means will be brought to
pass so long as men fear the miseries of the body, and the things that are
subject to fortune and chance) he by his wonderful birth and admirable works
has purchased for us love and charity: and has excluded terror and fear by
his death and resurrection. And finally he has showed himself to be such an
one in all other things (too long to be here expressed and set down) that we
may know and perceive hereby how far the divine clemency can reach and be
extended, and how far man's infirmity can be elevated and extolled.

CHAP. XVI. That Miracles do procure Belief.
THis, believe it, is a most wholesome authority: this at the first is a
withdrawing of our minds from an earthly habitation: this is a conversion from
the love of this world to the true God. It is only authority which moves
fools to make haste unto wisdom. So long as we cannot understand sincere
things, it is indeed a miserable thing to be deceived by authority: but truly
it is more miserable, not to be moved thereby. For if the Divine Providence
does not rule and govern humane affairs, we ought not to busy and trouble our
selves about Religion: but if even the frame and species of all things, which
we must believe proceeds and flows from some fountain of the truest beauty,
does as it were publicly and privately exhort all the more noble and braver
spirits both to seek God, in I know not what inward conscience and to serve
him: we ought not to despair, but that the same God has constituted and
ordained some authority, upon which if we lean and rely as upon a sure step, we
may be elevated and lifted up unto him. This authority, (reason being set
aside, which to understand to be true and sincere, it is a very hard matter for
fools to do, as I have often said) does move and excite us two manner of ways:
partly by miracles, and partly by the great number and multitude of followers.
It is certain that a wise man needs none of these things, but now we are
discoursing how we may become wise men, that is, how we may cleave and adhere
unto the truth: which is a thing that doubtless cannot be done with a foul and
impure mind: the uncleanness whereof, is (to expound it briefly) the love of
all things whatsoever besides it self and God: from which filth by how much any
one is more purged and cleansed, by so much the more easily does he behold the
truth. And therefore to desire to see the truth that thou may cleanse the
mind, when therefore it ought to be cleansed, that thou may see the truth,
is certainly a perverse and a preposterous thing. Wherefore to a man that is
not able to behold the truth that he may be made fit to see it, and may suffer
himself to be purged and cleansed, authority is at hand, which without doubt
receives her strength and vigor partly by miracles, and partly by the number
and multitude of followers, as I said a little before. A miracle I call any
hard or unwonted thing whatsoever, which appears above the expectation and
power of the wonderer. In which kind nothing is more fit for the common people,
and for men that are absolutely sottish and foolish, then that which is applied
and proposed to the senses. But these again are divided into two sorts: for
some there be that only move men to wonder and admiration: and others which
besides do win and purchase great favor and good will. For if any one should
see a man fly, he would only wonder at it, because it is a thing which besides
the beholding of it, yields to the spectatour no commodity nor profit. But if
any one being afflicted with a grievous and desperate sickness, shall so soon
as the disease is commanded to depart, recover his health, he shall overcome
the wonder of the cure by the charity of the curer. Such things were done as
many as were sufficient, when God appeared to men in the shape of a true man:
The sick were cured, Mat. 9.6, 13, 15, 16. Mat. 9.7, 22. Mar. 3.5, 10. Joh.
4.53. the leaprous were cleansed; Mat. 8.3. Mar. 4, 2. Luke 5.3. and 7.22.
going was restored to the lame, Mat. 11.5. sight to the blind, and hearing to
the deaf, Luke 18.42. Joh, 9.7. The men of that time saw water turned into
wine, Joh. 2.9. five thousand people filled with five loaves of bread, Mat.
14.20, 21. men walking upon the sea, Mat. 14.25. Joh. 6.19. and 21.7. and the
dead rising from death to life, Luke 7.15. and 8.55. So some miracles were done
for the cure of the body by a more manifest benefit, and some for the cure of
the soul by a more hidden sign, but they were all for the help of mankind by
the testimony of the Divine Majesty: thus did the Divine Majesty then draw unto
it the straying souls of mortal men. Why (say thou) are not these things
done now? Because they would not move unless they were wonderful, and if they
were common and usual they were not wonderful. For bring unto me a man when
he first sees the courses of day and night, and the most constant order of
celestial things, the 4. changes of the year, the falling and returning of
the leeves unto the trees, the infinite virtue of seeds, the beauty of light,
the varieties of colors, sounds, smells and tastes, and if we can but speak
with him, we shall find him wholly astonished, and quite overcome with the
sight of these miracles: and yet we despise and we make and account of al these
things, not because they are easily known (for what is more obscure then the
causes of them?) but for that we are accustomed frequently to see them, those
things are therefore most fitly done, that a multitude of believers being
gathered together and propagated by them profitable authority might be
converted into customs themselves.

An observation.
S. Augustine in his first book of his Retractations and 14. Chapter alleges
these words: (why say thou) are not these things done now? because they would
not move, unless they were wonderful, and if they were common and usual,
they were not wonderful) and expounds them thus: This I said because not so
great nor all miracles are done now, but not that none are also now done.

CHAP. XVII. The Cousent of Nations believing in Christ.
ALl customs have such virtue power to winn the love and affection of men,
that we sooner can condemn and detest even the things that are naught and
wicked in them then forsake or change them: and this for the most part comes to
pass, when as our unlawful appetites and deseres have gotten a dominion and
predominancy over us: do not thou think that great care has been taken
about the affairs of mankind, and that they are put into a good state and
condition, that not only diverse most learned men do argue and contend, that
nothing that is earthly, nothing that is fiery finally, nothing that is
perceptible by the corporal senses ought to be worshipped and adored for God,
but that he is to be prayed unto, entreated and supplicated only by the
understanding or intellectual power: but also that the unskilful multitude of
both sexes does in so many and so diverse nations both believe it and publish
it? that there is continency and forbearance of meats, even to the most
slender diet of bread and water, and fastings, not for one day only, but also
continued for diverse days together; that there is chastity even to the
contempt of marriage and issue: that there is patience even to the contemning
of crosses and flames: that there is liberality even to the distribution of
patrimonies to the poor: and finally, so great a disesteeme and contempt of
all things that are in this world, that even death it self is wished and
desired. Few there are that do these things, fewer that do them well and
prudently: yet the people do approve them, hearken unto them, and like them:
yea they love and affect them; and not without some progress of their minds
toward God, and certain sparks of piety and virtue, they blame and reprehend
their own weakness and imbecility that they cannot do these things. This
the divine Providence has brought to pass by the predictions of the Prophets,
by the humanity and doctrine of Christ, by the voyages of the Apostles, by the
contumelies, crosses, blood and death of Martyrs, by the laudable and excellent
lives of Saints, and by miracles done at convenient times in all these things
worthy of so great matters and virtues. When as therefore we see so great help
and affistance from God, and so great fruit and entrease thereby, shall we make
any doubt or question at all of retyring into the besome of that Church, which
even to the confession and acknowledgement of mankind from the Sea Apostolic
by succession of Bishops, has obtained the sovereignty and principal
authority, heretics in vain barking round about it, and being condemned partly
by the judgment of the people themselves, partly by the gravity of Councels,
partly also by the majesty and splendor of miracles? Unto which not to grant
the chief place and pre-eminence, is either indeed an extreme impiety, or a
very rash and a dangerous arrogance, for if there be no certain way for the
minds of men to wisdom and salvation, but when faith prepares and disposes
them to reason; what is it else to be ungraetfull unto the divine Majesty for
his aid and assistance, but to have a will to resist an authority which was
gained and purchased with such labor and pains? And if every art and trade,
though but base and easy, requires a teacher or master that it may be learned
and understood: what greater expression can there be of rash arrogance and
pride, then both to have no mind to learn the books of the divine mysteries
from their interpreters, and yet to have a mind to condemn the unknown.

CHAP. XVIII. The Conclusion by way of exhortation,
Wherefore if either reason or our discourse has any ways moved thee: and if
thou have a true care of thy self (as I believe thou have) I would have thee to
hearken and give ear unto me, and with a pious faith, a cheerful hope, and
sincere charity to address thy self to good Masters of Catholic Christianity:
and to pray unto God without ceasing and intermission: by whose only goodness
we were made and created, by whose justice we are punished and chastized, and
by whose clemency we are freed and redeemd, by which means thou shall neither
want the instructions and disputations of most learned men, and those that are
truly Christian, nor books, nor clear and quiet thoughts, whereby thou may
easily find that which thou seek. And as for those verbal and wretched men
(for how can I speak more mildly of them) forsake them altogether: who found
out nothing but mischief and evil, whilst they seek to much for the ground
thereof. In which question they stir up oftentimes their hearers to enquire
and search, but they teach them those things when they are stirred up, that it
were better for them always to sleep, then to watch and take great pains after
that manner, for they drive them out of a lethargy or drowsy evil and make
them frantike: between which discases, whereas both are most commonly mortal:
yet nevertheless there is this difference, that those that are sick of a
lethargy do die without troubling or molesting others: but the frautike man is
dreadful and terrible unto many, and unto those especially that seek to assist
him. For neither is God the author of evil, nor has it ever repented him to
have made any thing, nor is he troubled with a storm of any commotion or
stirring of the mind, nor is a particle or piece of earth his kingdom: he
neither approves nor commands any heinous crimes or offenses, he never lies.
For these and such like things did move and trouble us, when they did strongly
oppose them and inveigh against them, and fained this to be the doctrine of the
old Testament which is a most absolute falsehood and untruth. Wherefore I grant
that they do rightly blame and reprehend those things. What then have I
learned? what think thou, but that when they reprove those things, the
Catholic doctrine is not reprehended? so that the truth which I learned
amongst them, I hold and reteyne: and that which I conceived to be false and
untrue, I refuse and reject but the Catholic Church has also taught me many
other things, whereunto those men being pale and without blood in their bodies,
both gross and heavy in their understandings cannot aspire, namely that God
has no body, that no part of him can be perceived by corporal eyes, that
nothing of his substance and his nature is any ways vioable or changeable, or
compounded or framed, which things if thou grauntest me to be true (as we
ought not to frame any other conceit of the divine Majesty) all their subtle
devises and shifts are subverted and overthrnown. But how it can be, that God
has neither caused nor done any evil, and that there neither is, nor ever
has been any nature and substance, which he has not either produced or made,
and yet that he frees and delivers us from evil, is a thing approved upon so
necessary reasons and grounds, that no doubt at all can be made thereof:
especially by thee and such as thou art, if so be that to their good wits they
join piety, and a certain peace and tranquillity of a mind, without which
nothing at all of so great matters can be conceived and understood, and here is
no report of great and large promises made to no purpose, and of I know not
what Persian fable, a tale more fit to be told to Children then to ingenious
and witty men, and as for truth it is a far other thing then the Manichees do
foolishly imagine and conceive, but because I have made a far longer
discourse then I thought to have done, let me here end this book: wherein I
would have thee to remember that I have not yet begun to refute the Manichees,
and impugn those toys: nor to have expounded any great matter of the
Catholic doctrine, but that my only intent was to have rooted out of thee if I
could, the false opinion of true Christians which has been maliciously or
unskilfully insinuated unto us, and to stir thee up to the learning of
certain great and divine things. Wherefore I will put a period to this work:
and if it makes thy mind more quiet and contented I shall peradventure be more
ready to serve thee in other things.

FINIS.
Saint Austins Care for the Dead.

OR HIS BOOK De Cura pro Mortuis.

Translated into English.

The second Edition, Revised and Corrected.

PRINTED Anno Dom. MDCLI.

Aurelius Augustine TO Paulin Bishop, Concerning Care for the Dead,
CHAP. I.
I Have been a long time your debtour, venerable Brother and fellow Bishop
Paulinus, The memory of the saints is the place where their body or relics are
kept.
for the Letters you sent me by the servants of our most religious sister
Flora, wherein you propounded a question, viz. Whither it profits any one after
his decease, to have his body buried at the memory of some Saint. For this, it
seems, the above mentioned widow had enquired of you, concerning her son
deceased in those parts to whom you had returned answer to her comfort;
signifying withal, that the thing was accomplished, which with such maternall
and pious affection she desired; namely, to have the corpse of the faithful
youth Cynegius departed, put in the Church of the most blessed Confessor
Faelix: by occasion whereof it came to pass, that you writ also at the same
time to me by the same messengers, intimating the question abovesaid, and
demanding my opinion therein, yet in such manner, as you do not altogether
conceal your own. For you say, the desire of those faithful religious minds,
which procure such things to be done for them, seem not to you to be altogether
vain; and that the custom of the Catholic Church, Note this The custom of
the Church to pray for the dead.
which is to pray for the dead, cannot be to no purpose: so as, that even
thence we ought to conjecture, that it is of some avail for a man after his
death, if by his faithful friends living such a place be provided for the
interment of his body, as may procure him the assistance or patronage of some
Saint. But you say withal, Patronage of Saints useful for the dead.
that although this be so, yet you see not sufficiently how the opinion can be
reconciled to that of the Apostle, who says, We shall all stand at Christ's
Tribunal, that every one may receive according to what he has done in his
body whither it be good or evil. For say you, without all doubt this sentence
of the Apostle does tell us, that That which shall profit us after death, must
be done before, viz. in our life, therefore not then to be done, when every one
is to receive for what he has done already.

But the difficulty is resolved thus; namely, that it is procured by the manner
of life which we lead here in the body, that such Things as these should do us
good after we are departed: and so it holds true still, that according to
things done in the body men receive, Saint August. in his Enchiridion ad
Laurentium chap. 110. asserts these threefold sorts of Christians, whereof the
middle sort is only capable of help after this life, which clearly concludes
Purgatory.
yea when they receive benefit by what is done for them religiously after their
decease. For it must be confessed, there are some sorts of men, to whom the doing
of such Things as these would be of no advantage at all, to wit, either those
who have lived so ill, that they deserve not to be helped by them, or those who
have lived so well, they need not. It is therefore by the manner of life which
every one leads in this body, that the things religiously done for them after
the body, do either profit or not profit at all. For certainly, if no merit be
acquired in this life, by which such Things may be rendered profitable to a man
after his death; Note, The Church used then an office of the dead.
it were then, that is to say, after he is dead, in vain to seek it. So we see,
neither the office of the Church, nor our own care of our deceased friends is
idle or vain; and yet that it is true, that every one receives according to
those Things which he has done in the body, whither it be good or evil, our
Lord himself rendering unto every one according to his works. For as we say, it
is procured by the life a man leads in the body, that what is thus done for
him, should profit him after his body is dead. And to have said only thus much
might I conceive, be a sufficient answer to your demand: but by reason of some
other Things, which seem to me not unworthy our consideration, I shall crave
your attention yet a little further.

We read in the Book of Macchabees, Macchabees alleged for Scripture.
That sacrifice was offered for the dead. And though it were not found at all
in any place of the ancient Scripture, yet the Authority of the universal
Church, which is clear for this custom, is not lightly to be regarded;
Universal custom of praying for the dead. Mass for the dead.
where in the prayers which the Priest makes unto our Lord God, standing at
his Altar, recommendation of the dead has its due place.

CHAP. II.
WE must therefore somewhat more diligently enquire into the point propounded,
viz. Whither the place of burial may be any advantage to a deceased soul? And
first, we shall not so much look upon the common opinion, as examine according
to the sacred Scriptures of our religion, whither indeed it adds any thing to
the misery and affliction of men's souls after this life, if their bodies be not
buried at all. Out of all doubt, that which Virgil some where says is of
little truth, Aeneid, 6
that the souls of unburied people are forbidden the passage of the Infernal
River, as if forsooth They might not cross that silent stream of horrid
Phlegethon,
Till Superstition had composed the Urns of every one.


For what Christian heart can be moved with such fictions? seeing our Lord
Jesus, that Christians might die securely under their hands, who for some time
were to have power over their bodies, assures them that not an hair of their
head should perish; and therefore exhorts them not to fear those who after they
have killed the body have no more to do. Upon which subject in my first book of
the City of God, I suppose I may have spoken sufficiently to stop their mouths,
who charged the Christians with the calamities of those times, especially that
which Rome suffered by those barbarous people, yea objected that Christ either
could not, or would not help his own; to whom when as I replied, that the souls
of the faithful people were at that time largely rewarded by Christ for their
sufferings, they objected again, or rather reproached me with the dishonor of
their unburied bodies: whereupon I was forced to enlarge my self somewhat upon
that subject, concerning the burial of men, which I will here set down in the
words I then used. Neither indeed was it possible, they should all be buried in
such a ruin of Carcases. Nor will a pious man who believes that saying of our
Savior much fear this, nor think that beasts, which by chance devour their
bodies, can at all prejudice their Resurrection, being assured, that not an
hair of their head shall perish. For he who is Truth it self would never have
said, Fear not them which kill the body, but cannot kill the soul, if it could
be any prejudice to the future life of the Saints, that which their enemies do
to their bodies here. Unless peradventure a man will be so absurd, as to
contend, that we ought not before our death to fear them which kill the body,
viz. least they should kill it, but yet that we ought to fear, least after
death they should not suffer that body to be buried, which they have already
killed. For then certainly it were not true which Christ says, They which kill
the body, have no more to do, if so be they could do any thing more toward the
dead carcass, that were to be regarded. But God forbid, that any thing should
be false which the Truth has spoken. For we say, they which kill, do something
while they kill the body, because in the body there is sense and some feeling,
while it is to be killed: but that afterward they have no more to do, because
in a body already killed there is no sense at all. Wherefore many bodies of
good Christians have happened to want burial, but none of them could be ever
excluded from heaven and earth both, which he totally fills with his
presence, who best knows, how and whence to restore again that which he once
made. It is said indeed in the Psalms, They exposed the Bodies of thy servants
for meat to the fouls of the air, Psalm. 78.
and the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts of the land, they poured out their
blood like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none that would bury
them. But this was spoken rather to aggravate the cruelty of those who did such
things, then to intimate any unhappiness in them which suffered: For although
such things at these may seem hard, yea horrible in the eyes of men, yet
precious doubtless in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

And therefore all these particulars, that is to say, provision of a Funeral,
the quality of Sepulture, the pomp and magnificence of Exequies may seem rather
to be, as it were, comforts of the living, then any helps for the dead. For
certainly if a stately Burial could of it self any thing advantage a wicked
man, to be poorly buried, or not buried at all would be some prejudice to a
good; which we know to be false, for doubtless that rich glutton in the
Gospel, Luc. 16.
who was clothed in purple and fared so deliciously every day, when he died,
had a very sumptuous Funeral made him by his kindred and servants; but yet far
more glorious in the sight of God was that given unto the poor beggar by the
hands of Angels, who carried him out not unto any Tomb of Marble, but (to the
place where he desired to be) into the bosom of Abraham. It Is true, those
against whom we have undertaken to defend the City of God, laugh at these
things, nevertheless even their own Philosophers oftentimes have seemed to
make as little account of the rites of Sepulture; and whole Armies of men, when
they come into the field with resolution to die for their temporal countries,
of all things mind least where their bodies fall, or what beasts shall devour
them; yea the Poets themselves not without applause have been heard to say,
Heaven covers him who has no Cofin: Lucan.
how much less ought they then to insult over Christans concerning their
bodies lying unburied, to whom they cannot but know, restoration of their
flesh and of all the members of their body is promised, by him who is
sufficiently able to do it, yea and shall be in a moment perfectly made good
unto them, whether from the earth, or from those remotest receptacles of other
elements, into which the substance of their bodies by never so many changes,
and changes upon changes may be retired.

CHAP. III.
WHich yet we speak not to the intent the bodies of men, especially those of
the Faithful and Just, should be neglected after death, and thrown out of
sight as some other common carcases, for as much as the Holy Ghost has been
pleased to use them in their times as his own organs or instruments unto all
good works. For if but a ring, vestment, or some other thing belonging to our
Father be very dear unto us, and so much the more, by how much our natural
affection was greater and more lively toward him; in no sort certainly may the
bodies of men be despised, which we carry about us much more intrinsecally and
nearly united then any vestment whatsoever: for our bodies pertain not unto
matter of ornament or any extrinsecall help, but to the very substance of our
nature. Whence it is also, that the Funerals of just men in old time, were
performed with a great deal of piety and care; their Exequies solemnly
celebrated, and the places of their burial with much diligence provided, yea
themselves in their life time, Genesis 23.47.49.50
would frequently give command concerning the burying and removing of their
bodies after their death, as there was cause. Tob. 2.12
And Tobias is commended by no less Testimony then of an Angel, to have
merited with God, for that he was diligent to bury the dead. Yea our Lord
himself, (although he were to rise again within three days after his Passion)
yet commended the care the good woman had of his burial, and commanded that
the good work she had done in providing such precious ointments to imbalm his
body; should be preached, to her praise all the world over: and there is
honorable mention made in the Gospel of those who took down the body of our
Lord from the Cross, and gave it Burial. All which Authorities yet are not to
teach us, that there is any sense in dead bodies, but only, seeing that such
offices of piety are pleasing to God, they signify unto us, that even the dead
bodies do pertain unto the divine Providence, and this the rather to confirm
our Faith in the Resurrection. And hence also we may learn not unprofitably,
how great reward there may be for such Alms as we give unto living people, when
even that which is bestowed upon the dead and livelesse members is not lost
with God. There are indeed some other particulars, which the Holy Patriarchs
who speak them, would have to be understood concerning the burial and
translating of their bodies after death, as spoken by a prophetical spirit,
but this is no place to treat of them, seeing that which we have delivered
already may suffice. For if those things which are necessary to the sustenance
of the living, and cannot be wanted but with great difficulty, as victuals,
apparel etc. yet do never (when they are wanted) violate or overthrow the
virtue of patience in good people, nor extirpate piety quite out of the mind,
but rather exercise and revive it; much less doubtless can those things, which
are usually expended in Funerals and Exequies upon deceased persons, (when
they happen to be wanting) make those persons miserable, who are already settled
and at rest in those secret Tabernacles of the just. And therefore when it so
fell out in the devastation of that great City and of the adjacent Towns, that
the bodies of good christians had not Burial, we may not presently charge
either the living with any crime thereabout, who could not help it, nor yet the
dead with any great misfortune, who were as little sensible of it. This is my
opinion concerning the matter of Sepulture in general, which I have therefore
translated into this book out of that other of the City of God, in regard it
was something more easy for me to repeat it in this, then to deliver it in a
new manner.

CHAP. IIII.
NOw if this be so, surely also the provision of place for the burial of bodies
at the monuments of Saints must have something in it; it must be at least an
argument of some good humane affection toward our friends, whose funerals we
celebrate: and if it be some kind of Religion to bury them at all, certainly to
have care in what place we bury them cannot but be of like merit. But yet, when
such comforts as these are procured by the living, (by which indeed their pious
affection toward their deceased friend is sufficiently declared to survive) yet
I say, I perceive not, for my part, any advantage coming thereby unto the dead,
unless it be in this only respect, namely, that when men remember where the
bodies of their deceased friends are placed, they may in their prayers
recommend them unto God more effectually by the intercession of those Saints
unto whose patronage they may seem by the place of their Burial, Patronage of
Saints profitable when desired.
to be received; which yet also they might, if they pleased, very well do,
supposing they were not interred in such places. Neither are those more eminent
Sepulchers of the dead called Memories or Monuments for any other reason, then
because they do as it were, renew or preserve the remembrance of such persons,
as are by death withdrawn from the common conversation of men, and so hinder,
that they perish not altogether as much in the minds of their friends, as they
seem lost to their eye. For the very name of memory imports this clearly, and a
Monument is so called, because it admonishes, or, as it were, prompteth the
mind to something, which is fit to be thought on. For which reason also, the
same thing which we call a Memory or Monument, the Greeks call (...), from (...),
which in their language is as much as remembrance with us. Whenever therefore
the mind of a man remembers where the body of some dear friend is buried, if
the place which comes to mind be also venerable and renowned for the name of
some Martyr, instantly without more ado the good affection of him that
remembers this, Souls recomme^ed unto the Mar. tyrs.
in his prayers recommendeth the soul it loved unto the same Martyr: which
affection yet, when it is exhibited by faithful and dear friends unto people
departed, they themselves before their departure merited, that it should be
availeable to them: And therefore where necessity suffers not either that
bodies be buried at all, or not in such places as these, Prayer for the souls
departed.
yet prayer for the souls departed is never pretermitted, which the Church of
God, as it were, ingageth her self to perform, at least under a general
Commemoration, without particular mention of names, in behalf of all those who
are departed in the Christian Catholic Communion, to the intent that by the
care of one pious and Common Mother unto all, supply may be made of such good
offices, wherein possibly our friends, kindred, Children or parents may be
defective toward us. So that indeed, in case these supplications we speak of
(which are usually done in right faith and piety for the dead) should be
wanting, or not made at all, I for my part suppose, it would not much profit a
man's soul, to have his body buried in a holy place.

CHAP. V.
Wherefore (to return to our purpose) when as this faithful Mother desired to
have the body of her faithful Child put in the Church of a Martyr, this desire
of hers was a kind of prayer, for as much as she believed his soul might
receive help by the merits of the Martyr. Souls receiving help by the merits of
the Martyrs. S. Aug. assures us that prayer for the dead is very profitable;
though he was not certain whither the burial in any particular place be so
available, yet he much encline^h to that also, and proves it very strongly.
And this was that which profited if any thing did profit at all. So when the
Mother afterward remembers the same sepulcher, and in her prayers more and
more instantly recommends her Son, it is not the place of the dead body, but
the Mothers lively affection, (perhaps excited and quickened by the memory of
the place) which succors the soul of the deceased. For doubtless it does not
unprofitably concern the religious mind of one that prays to consider at
once, both who is recommended, and to whom he is recommended. Even as we see
men that pray, do commonly so dispose the members of their body, as usually is
most proper and effectual for suppliants to do, as when they bend their knees,
when they spread their hands, when they prostrate their bodies on the ground,
or do any other visible action of that nature; although, I say, their invisible
will and hearts intention be known well enough unto God, who needs none of
these signs to make him see what is in the heart of man yet certainly the man
who prays, does move himself to pray, to lament, to grieve by such motions
and postures as those, much more humbly, much more fervently and devoutly then
otherwise he would. Yea, and how it comes to pass I know not, seeing these
motions of the body are not made but by some precedent motion of the mind, yet
certain it is, that by these external actions visibly done, that other
invisible motion which caused them, is reciprocally increased, and by this
means that affection of mind which preceded those Actions as the cause of them,
is it self also increased, because they are done: and yet notwithstanding, when
it happens that a man is held in such sort, or perhaps tied by constraint, that
he cannot so dispose his corporal members as willingly he would, his interior
man cease not therefore to pray, nor yet to prostrate himself before Almighty
God in the more secret Cabinet of a contrite heart.

In like manner truly it much imports, where a man can place the dead body of
him, for whose soul he intends to supplicate almighty God; Observe this, that
it much imports even wherthe body is interred.
because both his precedent affection did choose an holy place, and also having
put the body there, the remembrance of the same place revives and increases
that affection which preceded it. But nevertheless a religious friend being
determined to give burial to him whom he loves, although he cannot perhaps
obtain to bury him where he would, yet let him not by any means forbear
necessary prayers in his recommendation: for whatsoever becomes of the dead
body, Rest of the souls to be procured even after death.
the Rest of his soul must be procured: which soul of his, when it left the
body, carried its sense along with it, by which is distinguished in what
condition every one is after death, whither good or evil. Nor does the spirit
of man after departure expect, that its life should be any way relieved now by
that flesh, to which it self, when time was, afforded life; which life at the
hour of death it carried away with it self, and shall restore again, when it
returns. For this is certain, the flesh procures not the merit of Resurrection
to the spirit but the spirit to the flesh, whither it revives unto pain or
glory.

CHAP. VI.
WE read in the Chronicles of the Church, which Eusebius wrote in Greek, and
after him Ruffinus translated into Latin, that the bodies of some Martyrs in
France were thrown unto dogs, and that what the dogs left of them together with
their very bones was afterward consumed with fire, and the ashes cast into the
river Rhosne; so that not the least part of them could remain for memory. Which
we cannot imagine was permitted by the Divine Providence for any other reason
then to teach Christians, that by them, who for the honor and Confession of
Christ do despise their own lives, the want of burial after death is least of
all to be regarded. For out of all doubt this thing, which was executed with so
great cruelty upon the Martyrs bodies, would never have been suffered by God,
if the victorious Souls themselves could thereby have been hindered of their
Crowns and rest. Hence therefore it is clearly manifest, that our Lord saying
Fear not those who kill the body, and have no more to do, meant not, that men
should act nothing upon the bodies of his servants deceased, as well as living,
but that whatsoever they should be suffered to do, nothing should be done, that
might disturb their happiness, nothing that should affect them with any sense
of grief, nothing that should hinder the perfect resurrection and restoration
of their bodies in due time.

CHAP. VII.
ALL which notwithstanding, by reason of that natural and inbred affection
which is in men, in respect whereof it is said that no man ever hated his own
flesh, if they perceive that any thing be likely after their death to be
wanting unto their bodies, which the solemnity of funeral would require at
least according to the custom of the country and place where they live, we
see, they cannot forbear to be sad like men, and sollicitous for that provision
touching their bodies before death, of which, when they are once dead, they
shall not be sensible at all. Yea so far does this extend, that in the book of
Kings we read, how God Almighty himself by one Prophet threatens another, who
had transgressed his command, that his body should not be buried in the
Sepulcher of his Fathers. The words of Scripture are these. Thus says our
Lord, 3 Reg. 13.21.
Forasmuch as thou have disobeyed the mouth of our Lord, and have not kept the
Commandment which our Lord thy God commanded thee, but came back, and have
eaten bread, and drank water, in the place in which our Lord commanded thee not
to eat bread, nor drink water, thy carcass shall not be brought into the
sepulcher of thy Fathers. Which punishment, if we consider it according to the
Gospel, where (as has been often said) we are taught not to fear, after our
departure, any thing that may be done to our dead members, it will scarce seem
to be any punishment at all: but if we reflect upon that humane affection,
which all men naturally bear to their own flesh, a man can hardly choose but be
contristated, even while he lives, for that, which when he is dead, he shall
not feel. In this respect therefore it was a punishment unto the Prophet, that
he could not forbear to grieve at present, for that which should afterward
befall his body, though when it should indeed befall, he were sure enough to
have no sense of it. For the will of our Lord doubtless was to chastise his
servant thus far only, who had transgressed his command, not so much by any
particular pravity of his own will, as through the fallacy of another who
deceived him, and made him think he had obeyed the command of God, when he did
not. And it were very hard to think otherwise, as that his body being killed by
the tearings of that beast, his soul should also be plucked away at the same
time to the torments of hell. No, we see the Lion which killed him became
instantly his Guardian, and defended his body from the ravening of other
beasts, yea the very Ass on which he rode, remained untouched, seeming to
assist as it were, with an undaunted presence, at the Funerals of his Master;
which certainly was not without miracle, and an evident sign that the man of
God in that case was corrected only unto a temporal death, and not at all
punished afterward: not much unlike to that passage of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
11.31.
where having commemorated the infirmities, yea deaths of many of the people,
for some particular offenses among them, he concludes at last thus, If we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged by our Lord, but when we are judged,
we are chastized by our Lord, lest we should be condemned with the world. And
truly he who had deceived this Prophet, buried him afterward in his own
monument with sufficient honor, yea and took order beside, that himself might
be afterward buried as near as might be unto his corpse, hoping, (as we may
probably suppose) that by this means his own bones might be spared, when the
time should come, according to the prophecy of this very man of God, that the
good King Josias should cause the bones of many dead people to be disinterred,
and those idolatrous altars which had been built unto strange Gods, in and
about Jerusalem, to be defiled therewith. For so indeed it came to pass: The
Monument wherein this Prophet was buried, who foretold those things three
hundred years before, and the Sepulcher of him who deceived him, were spared.
And so we see, out of that natural affection by which every man loves his own
flesh, 4 Reg. 23.12.
this Prophet was careful to provide for the temporal security of his body
even after death, who yet by a lie (so much as in him lay) cared not to hazard
his soul for ever. In this respect therefore, that every one naturally loves
his own flesh, it was some kind of punishment for the one to know, that he
should not come to be buried in the Sepulcher of his fathers; and in the other
(if that had been all) a providence not unworthy of commendation, viz. to lay
his bones in a Sepulcher, which he was sure none would violate.

CHAP. VIII.
THe Martyrs indeed, while they fought for the truth, vanquished this
affection; and it was no marvel they should: for they who could not be
overcome with any torments they suffered alive, it had been very strange,
should they have shrunk at any thing which was to follow after death, whereof
they should have no sense. Doubtless God Almighty, who suffered not the Lion
so much as to touch the Prophet after he was dead, but as it were commanded him
to guard that body which he had slain, could as easily, if he had so pleased,
have kept off those dogs from the bodies of his servants, he could have
terrified by a hundred ways the cruel minds of those people, that they should
not have dared either to burn their bodies, or to throw about their ashes. But
this was a trial of those Saints not fit to be wanting to the rest of their
sufferings, that the fortitude of their Confession, which was already well seen
in not yielding to any tortures to save their life, might yet be consummated as
it were, and perfected in this, that for Christ's sake they regarded as little
the honor of Sepulture, remaining through their Faith in the Resurrection, as
secure of their bodies, as they were of their souls. And for this reason also
it was fit that such things should be permitted to be done, that the Martyrs
themselves by such glorious combats should become fervent witnesses of that
Truth, which from our Savior they had learned, namely, That they which thus
cruelly tyrannized over their bodies, after death had no more to do; seeing
that whatsoever they should attempt upon the bodies once dead would be nothing:
nothing I say, either in respect of the soul, which only has sense, and was
already departed; or in respect of God the Creator, whose providence is such,
as nothing can be lost which he has made. And yet notwithstanding, while these
Martyrs themselves with infinite courage suffered such things, not caring (for
the love of Christ) what became of their bodies dead or alive; their
fellow-brethren, the rest of the Christians had great sorrow at the same time,
were much afflicted, that by reason hereof and of the extreme vigilance of
their persecutours, they could not perform the honors of their funerals, no
not so much as to procure privately the least Relick of them, Christians in old
times used diligence to get any small relics of Saints.
as the same history shows. So as, when no evil at all touched them who were
killed, either that their bodies were torn in pieces, or their bones burnt, or
their ashes cast abroad, yet in the living we see, there was much sorrow and
affliction, because they were not able to do that for their friends, which this
natural affection seemed to require: that is, there was in them a great deal
of fense for that, of which the dead had no sense, and much compassion, as I
may so say, where indeed was no Passion at all.

CHAP. IX.
According unto which kind of miserable compassion, as it may be called, we
read, those men were highly commended by King David, who had buried, that is,
2 Reg 2.5.
showed such pity unto the dry bones of Saul and Jonathan. But can any pity be
shown to them who have no sense of misery? Or shall we say, that this agrees
with the opinion of Virgil, that deceased people cannot pass that river of
Hell, cannot come at the Elysian fields, nor be at rest, till their bodies be
buried? God forbid that Christianity should admit such a Paradox. If that were
true, millions of Martyrs were in a miserable case, whose bodies were never
buried, yea and the Truth it self had much deceived them, saying, Fear not them
who kill the body, and afterward have no more to do, if they could do them so
great mischief yet after death, as to hinder their pass unto their desired
rest. But seeing this is so undoubtedly false, and that for certain the want of
buryall hurts faithful souls no more, then it does advantage an infidel to
be buried sumptuously, what may the reason then be, that the good and religious
King David should so highly commend them, who buried Saul and his son?
Certainly it was nothing but this, viz. the good affection, with which their
hearts were touched, who buried them, and that it seemed to be affliction to
them, that such calamity should befall the bodies of others, as out of that
natural love which all men bear to themselves, they would never wish to their
own; and that they were content, yea studious, while they lived, and knew what
they did, to exhibit those good offices to others, though unsensible of them,
which they would be glad should be performed to themselves afterward, when they
also should be past all sense.

CHAP. X.
BUt there are certain visions recounted, which may seem to move no
inconsiderable doubt in this point. For they say, that fundry deceased persons
have been known to appear unto the living, not only in their sleep, but
otherwise, and to tell their friends, who were otherwise ignorant of it, in
what places their bodies lay unburied, seeming to desire, that those duties
which were wanting might be performed toward them. Now if we should say that
these things were false, we might be thought to use more boldness then became
us, both in regard of the writings of some faithful Christians who report it,
as also in regard of the testimony and sensible experience of those to whom
such visions have happened. We shall answer therefore, that it follows not,
that the dead have any sense at all of what is done to their bodies, because
they seem to speak, to declare or desire such and such things of men in their
sleep. For even the living many times appear unto the living while they sleep,
when themselves know not that they do appear, and afterward hear men relate
with great confidence the things which they dreamed, affirming that such and
such things they saw them, that is to say, their friends that should appear to
them, do or speak in their sleep. If therefore, for instance sake, it be
possible for a man to see me in his sleep, telling him, that some such thing is
done, or shall be done, my self in the mean time not knowing nor perceiving any
such thing, yea so little regarding what he dreams, that I neither know nor
care, whither such a person sleeps when I wake, or waketh when I sleep, or
whither it happens not, that we sleep or wake both of us at that same time,
when he supposes he sees me in his sleep: if I say, this be possible, what
wonder is it if the dead, without any real sense or knowledge of such things
themselves, should also be seen of the living, yea and tell them something,
which when they wake they may find to be true. I rather think indeed that all
this is done by the ministry of some Angels, whither by divine permission
only or command, that they signify such things unto men by way of vision,
touching the burying of those bodies, whose spirits at that time know not any
thing what becomes of their bodies. For this doubtless is not altogether
unprofitably done, whither we regard the comfort of the living to whom those
dead people belong, whose Ghosts do seem thus to appear, or the office of
burial it self, which is matter of so commendable charity even to mankind in
general, that although the dead receive no particular comfort thereby, yet it
cannot be wholly neglected without offense of Religion; sometimes indeed men
are much misled by fallacious and imaginary visions, but they are most commonly
such, as deserve justly to be so deluded: as for example, when any one sees in
his dreams such things as Aeneas is reported to have met with in his imaginary
travels through hell, and that the Ghost of some unburied person should appear
to him, begging the same things of him, which Palinurus is fabled to have done
of Aeneas, that is to say, the interring of his corpse, and that when he awakes
he should indeed find the body in such a place as was told him in his dream; if
because he finds thus much of his dream to be true, he should fall to think,
that therefore men's bodies are buried, that the souls thereby may pass unto
those places of rest, to which otherwise by the law of Hell they could not
pass, who doubts but that this man should grossly deceive himself, and deviate
from the Truth?

CHAP. XI.
YEt such is the general infirmity of men that when at any time they happen to
have a vision in their sleep of any dead person, presently they imagine the
very soul of such a man appears to them; when as at the same time, if they
happen to dream of one, or see one that is alive, they never take it either for
body or soul, but as it is indeed, for a mere similitude of such a man
appearing to them; as if perchance it were not altogether as possible, for the
similitudes of souls, as well as of bodies, (in the absence of the souls
themselves and without their knowledge thereof) to be presented to men in their
dreams.

This, which I am about to tell, when I was at Millain, I heard reported for
certain. A certain debt was demanded of one by virtue of a writing under his
deceased fathers hand, which debt had been discharged by the Father living, his
son not knowing thereof, nor yet how to make it appear that it was
discharged: he was therefore much troubled and perplexed at it, wondering why
his Father at his death, and at the making of his Testament should not acquaint
him with that debt. Being thus in perplexity, his Father in his sleep appears
to him, and tells him where he should find the discharge of that debt recorded;
which the son accordingly seeking found and produced, and thereby not only
voided the Action of debt, which was unjustly brought against him, but also
recovered the writing it self, which his Father when he paid the money, did not
remember to take out: In this case therefore it cannot but seem, that the soul
of the Father had a care of his son, by coming to him and telling him matter
of importance, which himself knew not of, and thereby delivering him from a
great deal of trouble. But at the same time that I heard this, namely while I
stayed at Millain, there happened at Carthage something which makes me doubt:
it was this. Eulogius the Rhetorician there, one who had been formerly my
scholar in that Art, (as himself told me the story afterward, when I was come
again into Africa) was reading to his Scholars Tullies books of Rhetoric, and
perusing the lesson or place which he was to expound publicly the next day in
the Schools, he met with one obscure passage in it, which he could not possibly
understand, and was therefore very much perplexed about it, yea could take no
rest all that night, till, as he said, I my self appeared to him and told him
the meaning of it: yet certainly not I my self, but some image or similitude of
me; for I knew nothing of the business, I was far from him on the other side
of the sea, busied about other affairs, had no thoughts, no care, not so much
as dreamed, what my Scholar might be doing. Now how these things come to pass,
I confess I know not, yet which way soever they do, why may we not think, that
the appearances of the dead and living both, are, as it were, much one and the
same, effected in one and the same manner, and by one and the same means, that
is, neither the living nor the dead knowing at all, when themselves or their
similitudes do so appear.

CHAP. XII.
NOt unlike unto dreams are the visions which some have both living and waking,
namely those who are troubled in their mind, frantic or distempered people;
for such many times we observe talking to themselves as unto companions,
sometimes with such as are absent, as if they were present, and with the dead
as if they were alive, and this by reason of the Idea's or forms of such
persons or things as by accident get into their fancy. But even as the living
themselves, in such cases, know not that they seem to appear and speak unto
such persons, who through distemper of mind do conceive themselves to fee and
hear them; (for in reality sure they are neither present with them, nor talking
to them, but only the poor men have such phantasms in their head which trouble
them,) so also is it, when they imagine themselves to talk or converse with any
that be dead; for the dead come not at them, nor do they know whither such
people think of them yea or no.

And like unto this is also an other case of some people, who seem, as it were,
to be abstracted from themselves, and more deprived of their bodily senses,
then they should be, if they only slept, yet in the mean time entertained with
strange visions. For unto such also appear the similitudes of living and dead
men: and when they come again to their senses, if they report that they saw any
of the dead, men are apt to believe that in their ecstasies they were really
with those dead, not considering how at the same time, upon their report, they
also saw others which were alive, and far enough distant from them, and no way
thinking of them, as I shall show you by one notable example. A certain
ordinary person of Tully's incorporation, which is nigh unto Hippo, one Curina
by name, a poor Officer in that place, and scarce got into the rank of a
Duumvir, and an absolute rustic beside, fell sick, had his senses quite taken
from him, and lay for some days in a manner dead, yet some little breath
remaining in him, which could hardly be perceived by laying ones finger to his
nosthrills, yet it served for some slender token of life, so as he was not
buried as one absolutely dead; he stirred not one member of his body, received
no kind of sustenance all that while, perceived no body, either by sight or any
other sense, what pain soever they labored to put him to; yet in his vision he
saw many things, which at length after many days awaking he reported. And
first of all upon the very opening of his eyes, Let some body, quoth he, go to
Curina the Smiths house and see what is to do there; whither when the messenger
came, that Curina, viz. the Smith, was found to be dead, in that very moment
when this other returned to his senses, seeming, as it were, to be restored
from death to life. Then he told those who stood about him, that Curina the
Smith was commanded to appear at the very time, that himself was discharged,
and that when he was dismissed, in the place from whence he came, he heard it
said, that not Curina the Officer, but Curina the Smith was the man commanded
to be brought unto those places of the dead. In this ecstasy therefore of his,
as in a vision, he may seem to have conversed with the dead, yea to have seen
them treated, as doubtless they are, according to their several merits. And
truly perhaps I should have thought my self, he had conversed with the very
souls of the dead, if he had not also seen in that vision sundry which are yet
alive, namely, some Churchmen of his own Country, by the Priest whereof he was
told, that at Hippo he should be baptized by me, which accordingly, he said,
was done. Wherefore in that vision, it is clear, he saw both a Priest, certain
of the Clergy, my self; none of us all as yet dead, as well as he saw those
that were dead. Why then might he not see us all both dead and living, after
one manner, that is, not present but absent, not knowing, but ignorant of what
he saw, in a word, not in our persons, but in our similitudes, even as he did
the places also? For he saw the Field where the Priest was, he saw not only the
Clarks, but the whole City of Hippo it self, where he was Baptized; in which
places yet certainly he was not, for he knew nothing of what was done at Hippo
all that time, which he would have done doubtless, if indeed he had been
there. All this therefore was but by the way of vision, wherein things pass
not always in themselves or in verity of their substance, but are represented
in Image or Similitude only. Lastly, after many other things which he saw, he
told how he was taken up into Paradise, and that it was said to him, when he
was dismissed and ready to return to his friends, Go, Be Baptized, if ever you
will live in this place of the Blessed; and when they told him further, that he
must be Baptized by me, he answered, it was done already, but he who communed
with him replied, Go, says he, and be Baptized indeed, for all this thou have
seen but in vision. After this, the man recovered and came to Hippo. Easter
approaching he delivered in his name among the rest of the Competents, unknown
to me, and not much caring, as it seems, to tell his Vision, either to my self
or any about me. But Baptized he was, and when the Holy Days were over, he
went home again to his own, and a year or two it was, before I understood any
of these particulars, which I first learned from a friend of mine and his,
sitting at table together and discoursing of such matters. Thereupon I became
my self inquisitive concerning the business, and caused him to make relation
of the whole matter to my self in presence of many honest men, his fellow
Citizens, who themselves testified the strange sickness which he had, and that
for the space of many days he lay as one dead, and what happened to that other
Curina the Smith; and when he repeated all things, as I have related, his
neighbors that stood by, remembered and testified that they had heard the same
things from him before. Wherefore, as he saw his own Baptizing, and me, and the
City of Hippo, the Church and the Font, not in the things themselves, or their
very substance, but by certain similitudes, so also did he see many other
persons alive, which neither knew nor had thought of him.

CHAP. XIII.
Why then might he not see those deceased persons (which he saw) not in their
own persons or substances, but in representation only, they themselves neither
seeing nor conversing with him? Why shall we not say, that such things as these
may be the operations of some Angels by order of the divine providence, Angels
appear to the living.
who is pleased to use both the good and bad (yet both well) according to the
unsearchable depth of his Judgments, whither men's minds be thereby instructed
or deceived, whither they be comforted or troubled, according as every one is
capable of punishment or favor from him whose Mercy and Judgment both his
Church worthily celebrateth? But let every man judge of this as he thinks best.
Certainly, if the souls of the dead could be so present in the affairs of the
living, and converse with us, as they seem to do sometimes in our sleep; not to
speak of others, my own dear Mother would not forbear me one night, who while
she lived, followed me both by Sea and Land to enjoy my company: for God
forbid, that by being Blessed her self, she should be now less tenderhearted
toward me, that she should not, when any thing afflicts my heart, comfort her
son as she used to do, whom, when time was, she loved with most singular
affection, and could never endure to see him grieved. But surely that is most
true, which the Psalmist says, Psalm. 26.10.
namely That my Father and Mother have forsaken me, yet our Lord has taken me
up. If then (as the Scripture says) our Fathers have forsaken us, how are they
present with our affairs? how know they our cares? And if our Fathers
themselves are not present, do not know our affairs, what are those other dead,
which should know them? Isaias the Prophet says, Isa. 63.16.
Thou art our Father, because Abraham is ignorant of us and Israel knows us
not. If such great Patriarch's were ignorant of what was done touching the
people of their own posterity, yea to whom for their faith in God that people
and posterity were especially promised, who can think that the dead generally
do mix themselves or meddle one way or other in the affairs of the living? in
what sense can we say, it was happy for them who dyed before such or such evils
happened, if even after death they were to be sensible of the calamityes of the
times? or shall we peradventure say, that the error is on our part, who will
needs suppose them to be at rest, whom yet the restless or calamitous life's of
others here do indeed continually disquiet? But if so, what then would be the
meaning, what special favor in that promise which God Almighty made unto the
good King Josias, namely that he should die before, that he should not live to
see the evils which were threatened unto that place and people? The words of
God are these. Thus says our Lord the God of Israel, my words which thou have
heard, and did tremble before my face when thou heardest what I speak against
this place and against the Inhabitants thereof, that it should be forsaken, and
become a Curse, and have rent thy clothes and wept before me; I also have
heard, says our Lord, it shall not be: Behold I will gather thee unto thy
Fathers, and thou shall be placed in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all
the evils which I will bring upon this place and the Inhabitants thereof. This
good King was terrifyed with the threatenings of God Allmighty, had wept and
tore his garments, and is therefore as to his own person, secured against all
those calamityes which were to come, by the promise of a timely death before
they came, and that he should so rest in peace, that none of all those evils
should touch him. Therefore certain it is, that the Spirits of men departed are
there, where they neither know nor feel the accidents of this life. How then do
they visit their own sepulchers? how can they know whither their bodies be
buried or unburyed? how can we make them partake of the miseryes of the living?
Seeing if they be bad, they have enough to suffer of their own: if otherwise,
they rest in peace, (as the good King Josias was to do) having no sense of
evil at all, either in the way of passion or compassion, but as absolutely
free and discharged of whatsoever concerns this world.

CHAP. XIV.
BUt perhaps some will say, if the dead have no care for the living, why did
that rich Glutton in the Gospel, Luc. 16.
being himself in hell, pray Father Abraham to send Lazarus unto his five
Brethren yet living in the world, and to deal with them, so as they might not
come to that place of torment? But must we needs think that because Dives said
thus, that therefore he did know at that time what his Brethren did, or how
their state was? no verily, but we may think his care of the living (though he
knew not particularly what they did) was such, as our care for the dead is, who
know not certainly either what they do, or where they are and yet we have some
kind of care of them; for if we had not, certainly we should never pray for
them. Neither did Abraham send Lazarus unto them, but replied, they have Moses
and the Prophets, whom they ought to follow, to the end they came not into
those places of torment. And if you object, how could Abraham himself know that
they had Moses and the Prophets, if the dead know nothing of the affairs of
the world after death (for Moses and the Prophets were all after Abraham:) and
how could he know that by observing the precepts of Moses and the Prophets men
might escape hell, yea how could he know that this Dives had lived all his life
long in riot and pleasures, and poor Lazarus in pains? for so he tells him
plainly, Son remember that thou did receive good things in thy life, and
Lazarus likewise evil: if I say you conclude, that therefore Abraham, though
dead, must needs know many things done among the living; I shall answer he did
certainly know them, yet not then when they were a doing, or perhaps but newly
done in the world, but afterward, as he might by sundry ways, and
particularly the state of Dives and Lazarus he knew, not when Dives and Lazarus
lived in the world, but afterward when they were both dead, he might learn it
of Lazarus; least otherwise that which the Prophet says might seem not to hold
true, viz. that Abraham knows us not.

CHAP. XV.
THerefore indeed it must be confessed that the dead know not what is done
here; He declares how many ways the dead may come to know what is done in this
world, and what things they know.
but this to be understood only while it is, as it were, a doing here, or but
newly done, for afterward, as I said, they may understand it, namely by those
who dying depart from hence unto them; but yet not all things whatsoever, but
those only which they are permitted to disclose, yea which they are permitted
to remember, and may be necessary for others to know. The dead also may
understand some thing from those Angels, whose office is to attend the affairs
of this world, according as he sees good and expedient for them to know, to
whom all things are subject. For unless there were some Angels, which
conversed both with the dead and the living, our Lord Jesus would not have
said, it came to pass that the beggar dyed and was carried of the Angels into
Abraham's bosom. Therefore they could be now here, now there, seeing as God
would have it, they were used to carry him from hence unto the place of his
rest. The souls of the dead also may know some things by divine Revelation,
either of such things as be necessary for them to know, or at least not
necessary to be unknown, and this not only of things past or present, but of
those also which are to come, even as in times past not all men in general
were made acquainted with the Secrets of God, but only Prophets and such other
holy men while they lived, and they not every one of them knowing all things,
but every one some, according as the Divine Providence was pleased to reveal.
And that some of the dead also may be sent unto the living, the Scripture it
self does testify, (as contrarily S. Paul from among the Living was rapt up
into Paradise) for so we read, the Prophet Samuel after he was dead, appeared
unto King Saul yet living, and foretold him things to come. It Is true, there
are some that say, it was not Samuel himself that appeared, who could not, they
think, have been so feecht up with magical charms, but rather some evil
Spirit ready and apt for such business borrowed his shape. But the book we call
Ecclesiasticus, written as it is commonly said by Jesus the Son of Sirach, but
for resemblance of style and eloquence not unlike to be Solomon's own work, in
the praises of holy men says of Samuel, that being dead he Prophesied: But if
again you extenuate the authority of this book with the Jews (because they say
it is not in their Canon) yet at least concerning Moses no doubt can be made,
Deuteronomy. 34.5.
but that in Deuteronomy he is related to be both dead and buried, and yet in
the Gospel to have appeared unto the living, together with Elias, who as yet
is not dead.

CHAP. XVI.
HEnce also we answer an other question, viz, what may be said of the Martyrs,
who by the favors which are granted unto such as pray unto them do declare
themselves both to understand and to have care of our affairs, 7 favors
obtained by prayer to Saints.
if the dead know not at all what the living do? for it is certain, and we know
it by report of witnesses beyond exception, that when the City of Nola was
besiedged by the Barbarians, the Blessed Confessor Felix, Saints appear
miraculously sometimes when invocated.
not only by the effects of his particular favors, but even personally and in
plain view did appear unto many good people inhabiting that City, whom he had
formerly dearly loved. But it must be said, that such things as those happen
miraculously, and are far different from the usual course, which God has
appointed unto the nature of all sorts of things. For because our Lord turned
once water into wine, we must not therefore forget what the nature of water is
and what its proper virtue in the order of elements is, not because Lazarus
rose again from death, that therefore every man that dies may rise again when
he will, or that a dead man is raised by no greater power, then another is
awakened out of sleep. For to speak according to the limits and condition of
man's nature in it self is one thing, and to speak according as God is pleased
to demonstrate his divine power in it is another: and the things which come to
pass naturally and as it were by constant course are of one sort, and those
which are done miraculously by God are of an other; yet is God always
assistant unto nature, without whom it could not be, and in miracles themselves
nature is not absolutely excluded, because at least in her though not by her
they are wrought. We must not therefore imagine, that the dead do ordinarily
and of course mix themselves in the affairs of the living, because the Martyrs
do sometimes show themselves present, How miracles are wrought by praying to
Saints.
for the curing or help of some particular persons: But rather we are to know,
it is by divine power of privilege and dispensation that the Martyrs
themselves are present with us at any time, because the dead generally and by
any virtue of their own nature cannot be so. Although I confess to determine
in what particular manner the Martyrs do help them, Here he inquires the manner
how miracles are obtained by praying to Saints.
who for certain are helped by the Martyrs, is a matter far above my capacity:
that is to say, whither the Martyrs be present in their own persons at the same
time in so diverse and far distant places as their Memories are, or that they
otherwise happen to show themselves: or whither that God Almighty, the Martyrs
abiding always in that place which is appointed for their merits, far remote
from the conversation of men, yet praying generally for the necessities of
those who pray unto them, in the same manner as we pray for the dead (to whom
we are never present, nor know where they be, or what they do) or I say,
whither that God Almighty himself, who is every where present, though not as
joined to us, nor as divided from us, hearing the prayers which the Martyrs
make, does by the ministry of Angels, which he sends abroad into all places,
exhibit such comforts unto people against the miseries of this life, as he
sees to be most expedient, who by his wonderful power and goodness gives
testimony unto the merits of his Martyrs both where, Merits of the Martyrs
acknowledged by S. Austin.
and when, and how he pleases, but chiefly at their memories, as knowing this
in his divine wisdom, The Memory and mediation of Saints expedient for
confirmation of faith.
to be most expedient for the Confirmation and Exaltation of the Faith of
Christ, for which the Martyrs suffered. This I say is a thing much higher then
I can reach unto, more abstruse and difficult then I can search out; and
therefore which of the two it be, or whither perhaps both of the^ may not be
true, viz. that sometimes by the very presence of the Martyrs themselves, and
sometimes again by Angels personating the Martyrs these things may be done, I
dare not determine: I desire rather to learn such things of those who know
them; For some there are surely who do know them, as there be some others also
perhaps, who think they do, but do not. For doubtless such things as these are
the Free Gifts of God, who liberally bestows them as he pleases, some to
one, some to another, according to that of the Apostle saying The manifestation
of the spirit is given to every one for their profit. 1 Cor. 12.7, etc.
To one says he, is given by the spirit the word of wisdom: and to another
the word of knowledge according to the same spirit. To an other faith in the
same spirit: to another the grace of doing cures in one spirit: to an other
working of miracles; to an other kinds of tongues; to an other prophecy; to an
other discerning of spirits; to an other interpretation of tongues. And all
these works one and the same spirit, dividing to every one according as he
will. Of all which spiritual Gifts reconed up by the Apostle, he that has the
discerning of spirits, he only is the man who knows the things we speak of,
as they ought to be known.

CHAP. XVII.
ANd such most probably was that Holy Person John the Monk, whom the good
Emperor Theodosius the Elder was pleased to consult concerning the event of
the civil war: for this man had also the gift of Prophecy; as I doubt not
concerning those gifts but as every one might have any one in particular and
alone, so, How S. Aug. reverenced monks.
as it pleased God, some one had many; as this John for example, of whom it is
recounted, that a certain woman very devout and religious, being as it were
passionately desirous to see him, and laboring by her husband to procure it
some way or other with the Holy man, it not being his manner to admit the
conversation of women upon any terms, he refused, but yet Go, says he, tell
your wife she shall see me at night, but it shall be in her sleep; and so she
did. The good man appeared to her, and instructed her in all the duties of a
faithful wife, as she her self, as soon as she did awake, told her husband,
describing the man of God to him, in such form and shape as he knew him to
have. This truly I have heard reported by one, who had it from the parties
themselves, The manner how apparitions are made
a grave and honorable personage, and worthy, I think, of all credit. But as
to the matter, if I my self had ever seen that Saintly Monk, (as report of him,
that he was a man of most sweet conversation, and wont most patiently to hear
what men propounded to him, and most wisely to give answer) I would have
enquired of him something pertaining to this question, that is, Whither
himself, or (which is all one) his spirit in the figure of his body did indeed
come unto that woman in her sleep, in such manner as we men dream of our selves
in the shape of our bodies; or else that himself being otherwise busied, or
sleeping, yea perhaps dreaming too, this vision happened to the woman by an
Angel or by some other means, and that he by the spirit of prophecy knowing
beforehand when such a vision should be vouchsafed unto her, was pleased by a
kind of promise thereof, to gratify the desires of that good woman. For if
himself in person were present at the time of that vision, certainly it was by
special, nay by wonderful grace and privilege, that he so was, not by
nature, or any proper faculty of his own. And whither the woman saw him
personally and really present or no yet surely something of like nature it was,
to that we read of in the Acts of the Apostles concerning Saul, Act. 9.11.
of whom our Lord Jesus speaking to Ananias tells him, that Saul had seen
Ananias coming to him; etc. when as Ananias himself as yet knew not Saul, nor
any thing of the business. Yea and which way soever of these that man of God
should have answered me, I would yet have proceeded further with him concerning
the Martyrs, and asked him, in what manner it is that they are present, either
in men's sleep or otherwise, to such persons as have the favor to see them
sometimes, viz. when and how they please, and chiefly how they are present,
when devils in men's bodies do cry out, confessing that they are tormented by
them, and do beseech the Martyrs to spare them; Why God Almighty dispenses his
favors at the memory and intercession of Martyrs.
or whether such things be done indeed and immediately by Angelical powers
only, yet in the honor and commendation of Martyrs, as God is pleased to
command, for the good of us men, the Martyrs themselves in the mean time
remaining in perfect rest, attending wholly unto an other and much better
vision, wherein though separated from us, yet their charities cease not to pray
for us.

For of a truth at the Martyrs S: Devils tormented by the relics of Martyrs.
Gervasius and Protasius in Millain, the devils did expressly and by name
confess (besides sundry persons that were deceased) Saint Ambrose Bishop of
the place, who was then alive, Saints living absent torment devils in possessed
bodies.
and entreated that he would spare them, yet was he at that time busied
elsewhere about other matters and knew nothing of that which passed. Now
supposing these things to be done, sometimes as I have said, by the Martyrs
themselves present, and sometimes by the presence of Angels, by what signs they
may be discerned or distinguished the one from the other, none I suppose, can
certainly know or determine, but he only who has the proper gift thereof,
which gift is distributed unto every one who has it, by the Spirit of God,
according as himself pleases. That holy man John, A wonderful humility in S.
Aug. mixed with great Christian piety.
it is very like would have satisfied me in all these points; at least thus far,
that either by his teaching me I should have learnt, and perceived the things I
heard to be true, or else not being able to perceive them my self, I should yet
believe them upon his credit, who did both know them, and affirm them to be so.
Nay, if perchance he should answer me out of holy Scripture, and say Enquire
not of things too high for thee, Ecclus. 3
search not after things that be too hard, but what our Lord has commanded
thee, think on that always, yet even this also I should take in good part. For
surely, there being many things so obscure and intricate, that we can hardly
expect to attain them perfectly in this life, it should be no small advantage,
but to know clearly and certainly that they are not to be enquired further
after: as when a man studies hard to learn a thing, which he supposes perhaps
will be much for his profit, yet I think it does him no harm, when an other man
rightly informs him, how to do as well without it.

CHAP. XVIII.
TO conclude therefore, things standing thus as has been said, we are not to
imagine that any thing we do for the dead does profit them, save that only
which we beg for them of Almighty God, by the sacrifices which we make to him
on their behalf, Mass, Alms, and Prayer profitable for the dead accord. to S.
Austin.
that is to say, by the Holy Sacrifice of the Altar, by Alms, or by our own
prayers: yea even these advantage not all for whom they are made, but such
only, Prayers and Masses for the dead profit only such who died in Gods Grace.
whose former life has deserved that such good offices should profit them
after death. But because we our selves discern not certainly among the dead,
who are such, and who are not such, it is thought more expedient to do these
things in general for all the faithful departed, A pious and prudent
discourse.
to the intent that none be omitted to whom such favors may of right belong.
For it is much better, if it so fall out, that some thing superfluous be done
in regard of those who receive neither good nor harm by them, then that any
thing necessary should be wanting to those who have need. Howbeit every man
performs these things with more diligence and devotion for his particular
friends then otherwise; as expecting the same measure of Charity afterward
from his own. But as to this matter of Funeral and all that solemnity which we
use about interring the body, whatsoever is spent or done that way it is no
succor or salvation to the soul, but an office of pure humanity agreeable unto
and issuing from that affection, whereby all men naturally love their own
flesh, The final resolution of the question, that it is good carefully to bury
the dead and also to bury them in places consecrate to Martyrs, and when their
relics are the reason of it.
yea and think it reasonable, that in some cases a man should have care of his
neighbors body, as well as of his own, and in this case especially, when the
spirit is gone to whom it did belong, when time was, to uphold and govern it.
And truly if they who believe not the resurrection of the flesh, do yet
perform such things to their dead, how much more ought we to do so who believe
not only that the dead body shall rise again and live for ever, but that the
performance of such good offices toward them is it self in some sort a
testimony of that Faith. But that we bury them at the Memories of the Martyrs,
as I have said before, in this respect only it seems to me to advantage the
dead, namely that thereby the affection of his friends praying for him, and
commending him to the Patronage of these martyrs, may be increased.

Thus have you my answer, framed as well as I could, unto such points as you
thought expedient to enquire of me: if it seems overlong, I desire you would
pardon me, and impute it to the delight and affection I have to hold discourse
with you. As for the book it self, I entreat your venerable Charity would let
me know by your letters ere long what you think of it. I believe, it will be
much more welcome for the bearer's sake, viz. our Brother and fellow-Priest
Candidianus, whom for the report your letters gave of him, I received with all
affection, and dismissed again as much against my will: For verily he much
comforted us with his presence in Christ's Charity; and to speak but the truth,
I complied with your desires much upon his instance. For indeed your letters
found me so distracted with other cares, that you may attribute not a little to
his daily soliciting and minding me thereof, if you receive any competent
answer to your question.

Deo Gratias.


