A WONDER of WONDERS: OR, A Metamorphosis of Fair FACES voluntarily transformed
into foul VISAGES.

Or, an Invective against Black-spotted Faces: By a Well-willer to modest
Matrons and Virgins, MISO-SPILUS, i. Qui maculas odit.

(...). Euripid.


Published by R. SMITH, Gent.

Non est ornamentum corporis quod corpus fucata specie adumbrat, sed quod suo
exornat munere; quodque non in voluptatis lenocini^, sed in virtutis and
doctrinae consistit obsequio.

H. Farnesius, de sui cognitione, Quaest. 13. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for
Richard Royston, Bookseller in Ivy-lane. 1662.

To the young Ladies and Gentlewomen of the Society of Black-spotted Faces,
newly taken into the Fellowship of the Company of Painter-Stainers, Miso-Spilus
wishes more Wisdom and less Wilfulness.
Ladies and Gentlewomen,
IT was an old custom of Writers to dedicate their Works newly set forth to
such persons as were likely to approve of the same: but, contrary to this rule,
I have dedicated this Tract to you, from whom I expect no approbation nor
acceptance of my pains; for I conceive that the subject of the Discourse will
not please your fancies, it being averse to your manners and conditions, which
being faulty and blameworthy (in my opinion) cannot endure reprehension: but
how can I forbear you, who having naturally comely, yea angelical complexions,
which God has given you, yet not content therewith, out of your own fantastic
humors, make your selves resemble infernal Demons, and impudently presume to
amend and correct Gods work which he thought most fit for you, by your
black-spotting your otherwise fair and well-favoured Visages with ugly black
spots and loathsome patches or plasters (most proper to cover sores and scabs,
for which purpose they are useful) pretending thereby against common sense and
reason to reduce your complexions to a better luster then God gave them: But
see your error; Whereas you suppose that by applying such spots and patches
to your faces ye beautify and adorn them, ye indeed make them visibly deformed
and abominable in the eyes of all beholders, especially of the more judicious
people, and therewithal also you bring your good name and reputations, yea
your Religion also (if you have any) into suspicion; levity breeding jealousy;
your defect of wisdom also herein is not inconsiderable.

The use of painting and adulterating of women's faces is no new thing (and how
much the older and more common, so much the worse.) It has been observed in
former times by most of the religious and learned holy Fathers of the Primitive
Church, and by other learned and judicious Doctors and Clerks of later days
(against whom no just exception can be taken) that to the scandal and reproach
of Christians such painting and tincturing has been publicly practiced by
women (especially by such who were esteemed to have been lewd and of no good
name or report) and condemned not only as a foolish and ridiculous custom,
but likewise as scandalous, impious and profane, not alone for the adulterating
and counterfeiting of Gods Image in their visages, but principally for the
Pride, Lasciviousness, impudence, and other Vices, which usually accompany it.
All which I have essayed to make apparent unto you in this short Discourse, for
no advantage to my self, but only for your own good, for your own fames and
reputations. And think not your selves exempted from the censure pronounced
against painted Faces, pretending a difference between painting and spotting,
which I leave to the judgment of your own Company of Painter-Stainers, best
skilled therein, to determine; for it will appear that ye are likewise
concerned and included intentionally therein, your conditions being both alike
in most things concerning this dissembling Art.

If you are offended that here and there I brand you with some unp easing names
and epithetes, inferior (as you may take it) to your qualities; know ye, that
they are no other then such as are suitable and agreeable to some of your
conditions, wherein giving you but your own I do you no wrong; for if you think
it not much, to your own shame, to speckle your fair faces with foul spots, you
may, as they say, Lege talionis, by the same Law allow me to speckle your foul
manners with like marks; neither can ye justly deem me a rayler (as perhaps
some of you may) for telling you your faults so plainly: but you being
conscious to your selves, that my aim herein in rebuking you is only to reform
your defects where need is, may rather more truly say of him that does the
like, Non est rix uor, potius probitatis amator:
He a rayler cannot be, that lover is of honesty.


But, Ladies, I would not have you think that in this Discourse I do include
the Ladies of Honor, or of Noble rank, in taxing them with those crimes I
charge you withal, for that I see no cause to censure them as Delinquents, who
by their noble birth and breeding are not of so degenerous a spirit as to
undervalue their worths, in dishonouring themselves by the foolish and
fantastic use and application of such ignoble arts and fashions as do please
you, wherewith if I should have blemished them, I should have us justly defamed
them; not knowing any one of them guilty thereof.

Neither does my pen reflect upon any barbarous Nations that are not
Christians, who hold themselves not tied to Christian Principles; nor yet upon
the Spanish, Italian, or any other Foreign Christian Nation; no not upon the
Venetian Curtizans (the most impudent Harlots of all other, as I am informed)
for I have heard, that among these Nations by long custom (the foster-mother
of Vices) the art or craft of painting or tincturing of women's faces is
ordinarily used, without any sense of evil in it; for, peradventure, they
having never heard it censured as a crime, nor having ever been taught or
instructed otherwise, might see nothing in it blamewo thy, and so by long
continuance may ignorantly take up and practice that fashion with impunity (it
being either not for bidden or connived thereat) so that they may think it no
offense to use that for which they were never reprehended, and being not
prohibited might be accounted lawful; howsoever the example of these strangers
(being all out of our lash) cannot patronze your actions.

And whereas I have in this Tract produced principally the testimonies of the
ancient Fathers of the Church to prove the unlawfulness of this use of
painting of women's faces; perhaps you give no credit to such testimonies,
because, as some of you say, those old Fathers always poring on their books,
had no experience or knowledge of these youthful delights, and so not competent
judges, and thereupon ye presume to prefer your own erroneous opinions before
their sound and solid reasons: If so, then the question will be, whether ye
(filly and ignorant creatures in comparison to them) in your own case, or those
religious and learned men, so well experienced in religious affairs by their
studies of long continuance (your reasons being weighed in an equal balance)
ought rather to be credited; surely either ye or they must be fools, in not
discerning the true state of the Question. Now which of you are most likely to
apprehend the truth, I leave to any reasonable men to judge, yea to your
selves, if ye were not partial.

Lastly, if ye wonder why I style this Discourse A VVonder of Wonders, you may
take notice, that it is a wonder that any creature should presume to correct
the work of his Creator; but that any Christian should delight to deform the
lively Image of his Creator written in his forehead, as you do (being an
offense coming near to the nature of High Treason) it may properly be styled A
VVonder of Wonders.

To conclude, Albeit Ladies I have justly blamed you for your defects, yet will
I not wholly justify my self from all blame neither, for I acknowledge my
weakness herein, that I have not sufficiently painted our your weakness
according to your defects, for want of experience in that Art wherein you are
so well versed; and likewise if the pious and prudent Fathers of the Church
have played the fools in their zealous reprehensions of your fooleries, I cannot
deny but that I also following their footsteps have also eried with them: But
had rather insipere cum sapied ibus, then sapere cum insipientibus; and such is
my case, wherein I rest, and so rest,

Your Friend, if you please, MISO. SPILUS.

Some witty Poems made by some witty and worthy persons in derision and
deserved infamy of Black-spotted Faces.
On Painted and Black-spotted Faces.
Fantastic Mad-dames, that are not content
With Gods design, but think to ornament
Your selves with borrowed Foils of Patch and Paint,
(Whereby you show more of the Witch then Saint)
Striving to charm fond wantons with your looks,
To hang their fancies on their sable-hooks;
You much mistake, for your py'd hew affrights
More honest eyes then amorous Gulls invites.
Those characters but speak your Face a Spell,
A Conjurers book, that summons Sprights from Hell:
Your Paint resembles you to Posts and Signs,
Under such Visors Thieves obscure their crimes:
The Breast shop-windows open, and patcht skin,
Are Signs hung out to sell the Wares within.
Your spots are Pluto's marks, who much do please
To send such tokens to his friends as these;
But none of the good Shepherds ear-mark this,
This Spot (says he) none of my childrens is:
If you be Sheep at all, these speckling tricks,
Like Jacobs Ews, show where you love to mix.
And yet the figures emblematick are,
Which our She-wantons so delight to wear;
The Coach and Horses, with the hurrying wheels,
Show both their giddy brains and gadding heels;
The Cross and Croslets in your face combined,
Demonstrate the cross humors of their mind;
The bias of the Bowls does let us see,
They Will play a Rubbers, and the Mistress be;
The Rings do in them the Black Art display,
That Spirits in their Circles raise and lay:
But oh, the sable Stars that you descry
Benights their day, and speaks their darkened sky;
The several Moons that in their faces range,
Eclipse fond Proteus in his various change;
The long Slash and the short, report the skars
Their skirmishes have gained in Cupid's wars.
For those that into Patches clip the Crown,
It Is time to take such Pride and Treason down.
Thus by their patching and their dawbing task
They make the dancing world an Anti-mask;
While their Religion suiting well their Face
Is made up of a patched and painted grace;
While nick-nam'd confidence all check controuls,
Shows spotted faces have but spotted souls.
These Arts, how dare they Paul and Peter name,
When both so sharply reprehend the same?
How can they blush like a converted Saint,
Through such a cloud of gross immodest Paint?
How can they weep for sin, while they so fear
A spot should be washed off with every tear?
And happy were they, if it so might prove,
That Magdalen's great grief might gain such love,
Yet thus much of Repentance they begin,
That in their foreheads you may read their Sin;
Which oh that real sorrow might so blot,
That both parts be presented without spot.
E. S.
Others on the same.
YOu party-colored faces, not content
With Nature's Skin, nor Dresse's ornament,
But borrowed tinctures crave, your fancy's such,
What, can no Paintings please you but the smutch
Of Vulcan's Forge, or steam of Stygian Lake?
Such colors Beauty lends not; (you mistake)
Much less does Virtue, here is the snowy white
Of Innocence, black its opposite.
The Maidens blush shows Grace, but sable spot
Bewrayes proud shameless vice that blushes not;
The white and red did Eve in Eden wear,
But now (God's Image lost) black Fiends appear:
Complexion speaks you Mungrels, and your Blood
Part Europe, part America, mixed brood;
From Britains and from Negroes sprung, your cheeks
Display both colors, each their own there seeks.
Some plasters draw corruptions to an head,
But these yet more corrupt infections spread:
Some Plasters heal, but these abominations
But scar your honors, wound your reputations.
To see your clothes so patched (which yet at best
But Silkworms web) how would your scorns detest?
And can you view your Glasses, and not shame
To patch those faces God himself did frame?
His work seems to distaste you (your Creation)
Take heed yours tempt him not with alteration:
How dare you supplicate the Throne of Grace
To blot your sins, yet still show blotted face?
You wear Death's badge, each patch but mourning weed,
Foretelling in its room the worm shall feed;
Then ere that time surprise, discard the Spot,
Lest he that made you say, I know you not.
Let tears succeed them, and repent this sin,
Heaven's gates may open, you spotless enter in.
E. Westyield.
Others on the same.
YOu dawbed Ladies, if you needs must show
Your nakedness, I pray why spotted so?
Has Beauty, think you, luster from those Spots?
Is paper whiter when it stands in blots?
What, have you cut your Masks up into Sippets,
Like wanton girls, to make you Spots and Tippets?
Pride is a Plague, sure these are the Sores,
I will write LORD HAVE MERCY on your doors.
Devils are black, who doubts it? yet some write
That there are Devils likewise that are white.
Well, I have found a third sort, which are neither,
They be py'd Devils, black and white togther.
A VVonder of Wonders: OR, A strange Metamorphosis of Fair Faces, voluntarily
deformed, to make them seem more amiable.
IT is an old saying, and (as we find by sad experience) not more old then
true, Consuetude peccandi tollit sensum peccati, The Custom of Sinning takes
away the Sense of Sin: Which bad Custom is in nothing more verified then by
the frequent use and constant practice in these our days of some, yea of too
many of the weaker sort of the Female Sex, both young and old, principally of
the vulgar and ignoble rank, in their Painting and usual Tincturing of their
Faces with adulterate and counterfeit Colors; who disliking their own Natural
complexions, which the wise God has given them, thinking that they are not so
wellfavoured as they desire to be, pretend by such Fucus to make themselves
seem more fair and comely then ever God made them; preserring herein their own
artificial Craft and Invention before the Sincere and incorrupt Workmanship of
their Creator. And yet they are persuaded, that they are not blameworthy
herein, for that (as they conceive) such counterfeit Colors do make them more
lovely and amiable, and consequently more respected of all sorts of people with
whom they may converse: For Beauty it self (say they, excluding Pride) is
commendable, and as the gift of God ought not to be defamed; and therefore,
such Tincture as may set forth such Beauty (where it is wanting) without Pride
or other ill concommitants may be excusable, and more especially in them whose
complexions are foul or otherwise faulty, then in such as are otherwise fair,
comely and well-favoured; so that, say they, our use of Painting our Faces in
such case (if not approved) is yet more tolerable, then in those whose favors
and complexions are naturally comely and amicable. But although this Pride and
folly (from whence this bad Custom of Painting Faces proceeds) be coudemned
by the Holy Fathers of the Primitive Church, and by other sober and learned
Writers severally, as an impudent and wicked practice, offensive to God and
man; yet such is their Impudence or Ignorance, as that they prefer their own
private opinion; in such cases before all the solid and invincible Reasons and
Arguments of those pious and learned men to the contrary; and so confident and
resolute are they in the lawfulness (as they suppose) of their actions, and so
far from listening to, or entertaining any good Counsel or Instruction of wise
and sober men that crosses their humors, as that they will rather presume to
teach their Teachers, and censure them of Ignorance, then submit unto their
advice; even like unto some Subjects, who censure the Laws under which they
live, if they be not according to their minds, as unjust Laws: And albeit they
cannot but perceive, that their counterfeit Painting and adulterate Complexions
be unpleasing to all good people; yet such is their Impudence, as that they are
not ashamed thereof, and to blush thereat is in vain; for that Symptom of
Modesty being hidden by their Paiuting is invisible. But leaving these painted
Chamaeleons to themselves, I shall proceed with another sort of disfigured
Faces of a later growth, who differ only in their colors, and in their kinds
of Fucus, and in the application of them to their Faces; in all other respects,
like Samson's Foxes, they agree together, and at these later ones, as the most
foolish and pernicious, the main scope of this my discourse does principally
aim: To begin with them therefore, listen to the Miracle.

THERE is now of late in this brazen-faced Age of ours, started up a foolish
fantastical Generation of young Lasses (yea of some old Crones also) who having
good complexions of their own, out of an Apish humor of following all Fashions
(though never so ridiculous) without regard of their own Credit, or of the good
Advice or Counsel of the most sober and discreet sort of people, under pretense
of making themselves more lovely then God has made them, foolishly blemish and
deform their otherwise comely visages, with uncomely and loathsome Black Spots
and Patches; the ugly looks whereof although they cannot choose but perceive,
yet so blind and stupid and so obstinate are they, as that nevertheless they
account them and so term them Beauty Spots; And whereas we might suppose, that
common sense, when they behold with their eye in a looking-glass the loath
somness of such black Spots and Patches, might move them to abhor and detest
them, and to be ashamed to use them, they are so far from acknowleding their
Error, as they impudently maintain it, and tell them that reprove them, and
who wonder at their folly, that they are in an Error who make this a Wonder,
which, say they, is none at all; confidently affirming, that this their Device
(or rather Vice) is not only Blameless, but Commendable.

These pretty Things think themselves witty in the use of this new Art of
Spotting and Patching fair Faces, which, say they (to their own shame be it
spoken) is a rare Invention of their own, unheard of andunknown in former Ages,
hereby confuting the opinion of those who hold, That nothing is now done, which
was not done before, and that whatsoever is now done, is but actum agere, To do
that which is already done: But we, say they, to our eternal fame (or infamy
rather) have disproved that false Tenet, having found out of our selves (such
is their supposed ingenuity) a way to set forth and illustrate the favors and
complexions of Ladies and Gentlewomen (though otherwise comely and beautiful)
by Patching only and speckling their Faces, with Black Spots and Patches,
seeming perhaps at first strange, as all new fashions are, but afterward
admirable; in such a manner as never yet was known (no nor could ever enter
into the heart of any wise man to conceive.) Which worthy and laudable
Invention, say they, we are now ready and able to justify: For where, we pray
you, say they, is the blame? Is it in the Color, Deformity, or Unlawfulness of
it? But no fault can be found with the color it self that we use, which is
Black; for that color is without offense usually worn by the better sort and
degrees of men, by Divines, Physicians, Lawyers, chief Magistrates and
Citizens, (though not in their Faces) in their usual garments; it is their
ordinary habit, and by all sorts of people likewise, of any quality, in their
Mourning weeds; and if that color be tolerable in them (as it cannot be denied
to be) why not likewise in us, the use thereof and our intent therein being not
through pride or wantonness to make our faces seem the more fair and beautiful,
to allure and deceive the beholders, but only (as we conccive) to set a more
luster and grace upon them; for our visages being of themselves fair and white,
and not wholly hidden or covered by the Spots or black Patches we affix on
them, by applying those black colors, and intermixing them with our fair
skins, we make them the more lovely and commendable; for the old Maxim is,
Contraria inter se posita magis illucescunt, Contraries placed near one to
another do the more illustrate themselves; which indeed may be granted to be
true in this sense, Black Spots in white Faces make their ugliness more appear.
Again, say they, this kind of painting or spotting of our Skins is no novell
custom, for that many hundred years past, before Christian Religion was
professed in these our Native Countries, the ancient Britains and Picts, men
and women, who here inhabited, used this Art of Painting and Spotting their
outward skins, and thought it no blemish or disgrace to their persons; and
therefore, say they, we do no more herein then what we derive by ancient custom
from our Ancestors: But herein I must tell these Historians, they are deceived
in their application of the Painting and Tincture used by these warlike Nations
of old, unto their now painting and spotting of their Faces; for the ancient
Histories will tell them, that the use which those Heathen Britains and Picts
(of whom Julius Caesar among others makes mention) made of such painting and
figuring of their Bodies, was not out of any Pride or Wantonness to allure
others to love or admire them, as these our Mag-pies now do, but rather to make
them look more terrible in the Wars, as Caesar conceived; For the custom of
the old Britains and Picts in those times was (as Tacitus and venerable Bede
observe) that they made no difference of sex for the Sovereign command, yea and
they used to war under the conduct of women; and this we may find to be so by
the example of Buiduica Queen of the Iceni, a noble British Lady of those
times, who like another Penthesilea furens, dreaded not to encounter the
valiant Romans with an Army of 230000. Britains, having before slain of the
Romans 70000. in the City of Verulam: And these undaunted Viragoes are usually
pictured as well as the men in their warlike habits, who also used to paint
themselves with the heads of Tigers, Griffins, and such other fierce Beasts, as
the men did, to strike a terror also into their enemies, for to make
themselves seem fair had been rather to encourage then affright them; The
Virgins also did only paint themselves, not for terror, but for pleasure,
with green herbs and pleasant flowers to adorn them, not with black Spots to
deform them. Again, say they, this use or art of Spotting and Patching of Faces
is not generally taken up by all sorts of women only, (and so is no Epidemical
disease) but is reserved only for the better sort, as of Ladies and
Gentlewomen, for distinction sake; for we hold it unfitting, say they, that
ever Kitchin-stuff wench, or the like, should presume to use such Fucus and
Tincture as others of greater rank andquality appropriate to themselves; for if
such mean people might be tolerated to use such fashions as their betters use,
there would then be no difference between any degrees of persons whatsoever:
But this argument is frivolous to excuse themselves, and blown off with this
other Maxim, Omne animi vitium tanto conspectius in se crimen habet, quanto
major qui peccat, habetur, The greater that the person be, His fault more
clearly we may see: But if this fashion of spotting and patching be comely (and
not too costly) why is it more tolerable in a Gentlewoman then in a
Kitchinstuff wench? I see no reason; But albeit that this kind of
black-spotting and patching of Faces he not commendable, yet we must grant,
that in some sort it may prove availeable and advantageous unto them, namely,
that when they have a desire to go unto any Brothel-houses, or other infamous
places, these Anticks may with these disguised Faces and disfigured favors
more freely and securely prostitute themselves and take their pleasure, unknown
and undiscovered, desiring perhaps that their Names and Qualities might for
their reputation (though it be little) be concealed. And this privilege also
they may peradventure say, jestingly, that they may enjoy hereafter, to wit,
that when their appearance shall be, after their life ended in another world,
before their black Prince (being conscious to themselves that he is to be their
Sovereign, whom they have chiefly obeyed in this world) they may be taken for
his Natural children, they so much resembling him in their black hue; and
thereby to their comfort may be the more favored, as the Devils darlings; If
that be their expectation and reward in earnest or in jest (and such it may be
in good earnest, they having little or no Religion) I say no more; but let
them, as they like it, enjoy it; I will not envy them this privilege, this
happiness.

They may perhaps say also to me, Now, Sir, you take your self by the nose;
Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
For why do you condemn us so much for spotting our faces with black, when as
you your self in this your own writing, spot your white paper with black spots
or letters? and why may not we in like manner spot our white faces with black
spots? If it be ugly in us, then by the same reason your writing is also ugly.
To this I answer; the application makes the difference, for, If your spots to
no worse use then ours were applied,
I know not why by any man your spots should be denied:


Moreover, say they, This spotting of Faces which you thus censure, is not
justified by our selves alone, but we can produce the approbation thereof by
great Scholars and learned Clerks: For instance, Lessius, a learned Jesuit,
thus writes thereof, Lessius de justitia and jure, l. 4. c. 4.
Si Maritus jubeat, ut uxor inter alias magis decora appareat, sine peccato
utatur, If the husband, says he, commands his wife to appear among other wives
more comely, this painting of the Face (for that he speaks of) may be used
without sin; And Pet. Alagora compend. Manual. Navar. c. 23. Number. 2?
Petrus Alagora says also, Fingere majorem pulchritudinem ornatu and fuco,
licet sit mendacium operis, non est peccatum mortale, To counterfeit a greater
Beauty in adorning and painting the Face, although it be a dissembling work,
yet it is no mortal sin. So these Jesuits. But these testimonies will not
justify their doings; for if the action be unlawful, howsoever it may be
countenanced in some sort by the approbation of some learned men, it cannot be
therefore absolutely justified; especially when as others more learned then
they shall be found to be of another opinion; and therefore I think, that if
they desire the state of the Question to be decided by indifferent Judges, they
should make choice of such, against whom no just exceptions can be taken, who
without partiality have delivered their opinions in this case, such as are the
ancient Orthodox Fathers of the Primitive Church, and other learned Divines,
and sound Expositors of the Sacred Scriptures, whose testimonies in this behalf
I shall afterward produce: I say their solid judgments and determinations are
rather to be relied upon then the private opinions of some few others, who may
perhaps not rightly apprehend the true state of the Case, and therein be
deceived: But they perhaps will say, that these testimonies of the ancient
Fathers and other learned Writers against painted Faces concern their spotted
Faces not at all, for that the dislike which those learned men had of painted
Faces was, for that by painting their Faces all over they did not only totally
transfigure and hide their true Natural complexions, but by the ruddy and
beautiful colors and tinctures did allure and entice young men to lewdness,
pretending those counterfeit Faces to be their Natural complexions; but we, say
they, who mark our Faces with black Spots and Patches, have no such intent to
deceive or allure any young Gallants to lewdness or dishonesty, for that our
faces and complexions are not in such manner covered or hid with our Spots and
Patches, but that our Natural complexions may easily be discerned; and
therefore those testimonies are unjustly produced against us: And if we should
admit, say they, that we were also concerned therein, yet their testimonies, as
we conceive, are not so much to be credited in this case; for that those good
old Fathers were unacquainted with the nature and condition of these youthful
delights, and therefore might therein be deceived; and therefore, say they,
those testimonies are misapplied to us, and as unvalid, not to be much
regarded: Hereunto I answer, Those testimonies of those Orthodox Fathers, and
other pious and learned men before all edged, against painting the Faces and
counterfeiting the Complexions of Ladies and other Gentlewomen in their times,
are and may be also properly applied to the spotting and patching of Faces used
by the like Ladies and Gentlewomen now in our days, though such spotting and
patching be not named, which was then unknown, as being not then used, yet by
inference these are as much concerned therein as the other; for if we consider
what was the principal cause that moved them then to distaste such painting and
tincture of Faces as they write against, we shall find it chiefly to be, the
counterfeiting, altering and disfiguring of their own Natural favors with
such adulterate tinctures, and their folly and lasciviousness, lewdness and
dishonesty many times accompanying the same: If so, does not then spotting and
patching of Faces now used concur with such painting of Faces in the same
respects? Are not their complexions quite altered from what they were before?
are not these as foolish, proud, lascivious, and ofttimes lewd and dishonest as
the others? It cannot be denied; yea this spotted Generation deserves more to
be blarned and censured then those of the painted sort, for that those that
painted themselves, having for the most part hard favors, aimed chiefly to
correct their deformities, in setting themselves out in such lovely and
beautiful colors; but these spotted Ladies having usually fair and comely
visages naturally, have no need to correct them; but yet because they would be
doing something, they deform their natural beauty with their ugly spots and
patches, without any reason or any advantage to themselves from thence
accrewing, making themselves foul to seem fair; a strong Paradox, more suitable
to the condition of a Bedlam then of any rational creature: Therefore such
irrational Animals deserve rather to be sent to the Anticyra to gather
Hellebore to recover their wits, then to be confuted with reason, of which they
are incapable; so that the censure so as above pronounced against painted Faces
by such pious and learned men may fitly be applied to spotted Faces, as well as
to painted: And the judgment of these holy and learned men (as is foolishly
supposed) cannot be justly questioned, in respect of their Old years, or
Religious life, but for those causes to be the more approved; for long
Experience gains Knowledge, and what pleases or displeases God is best
known to godly men; so that Objection is frivolous. To proceed with their
Objections:

They may perhaps say, There is no Law of God forbids painting or spotting of
Faces, therefore it may lawfully be used, there being no sin in it, and not
being prohibited either by the Law of God or man, why may it not without
offense be used? I answer, That painting of Faces is censured and condemned in
the holy Scriptures, if not in express words, yet implicitly, and by necessary
consequence; for first, such painting and disfiguring of that natural favor,
which God has made, by false and adulterate tinctures and colors, does
proceed either from foolish pride of the heart, which is a sin, or from some
lascivious and wanton humor, against the Precept of the Almighty, that
requires holiness and chastity, and prohibits all Fornication and Adultery,
even in the thought of the heart; from which thought these creatures can hardly
be free, for that a principal cause of their painting and spotting is to make
themselves (in their opinion) seem fair or comely in the eyes of young Gallants
abroad, or at home, for otherwise there would be no use of their spotting, if
none but themselves beheld it; and they must needs be proud thereof in thinking
themselves to be so admirably beautiful or comely above others by these
impostures: And it is also scandalous and of evil report, being offensive to
all sober and discreet people, who beholding their vanity cannot choose but be
jealous of their integrity, and all things of this nature offensive to others
(if as they would have them, they are things in their own nature indifferent)
are prohibited by Gods Word, as tending to the breach of Christian Peace and
Charity. Moreover, we read in the second Book of Kings, Qu. Jezebel. 2 Kings
9.30.
chapter 9. v. 30. That Jezebel, that wicked Queen, painted her face and eyes with
Stibium, (or some other Fucus) after which her painting she was eaten up with
Dogs, and that by Gods just judgment, says Archbishop Vshor in his large
Catechism upon the Seventh Commandment: Cyprian de oper. and eleemosynz.
And St. Cyprian alluding hereunto thus writes, Inunge oculos tues non Stibio
Diabolico, sed collyrio Christ's, Anoint thine eyes not with Diabolical
Stibium, but with the eye salve of Christ. Ezekiel. 23.40. Jetem. 4.30.
So also Ezekiel. 23.40. and Jeremiah 4.30. where Painting is numbered among other
proud Ornaments and Dressings, and therefore not approved; so you see the use
of Painting is not exempt from censure in the holy Scriptures.

Now to prove spotting and patching of Fair Faces to be deformed, they assume
themselves to be Judges; but they being themselves concerned herein, must needs
be partial Judges, and therefore the decision hereof rests in the judgment
of others more indifferent; And who is there old or young that beholding their
sported and patched faces (especially having before seen their fair natural
complexions) but will adjudge them deformed, being so speckled with such black
and loathsome Spots and Patches? Again, they may perhaps have this wanton
conceit in blacking themselves, that having heard talk of a good Woman compared
to a black Swan, they might desire to make themselves like to that rare Bird
called a Black Swan; if so, let them conform their manners as well as their
faces to the condition of such a woman as is compared to a black Swan, which is
a rare, Bird, as the Poet says, Rara avis in terris, nigroque simillima cygno;

A rare Bird in the world, most like to a black Swan: And so they may make
recompense for their Deformity.

Moreover they will say, What do we more in altering or counterfeiting our
natural complexions, by painting and spotting our Faces, then Dyers do, in
dying white Silk, Wool, or Thread into any other color? This is usual and
lawful, without derogation to God's workmanship, why may not we then do the
like, to please our selves in mending our defects? I answer, The Dyers intent
in dying white or other natural colors into other colors, makes the
difference between you and them; for their intent is only for a civil and
lawful respect to dye their commodities into several colors for the use of
such as may desire them, who likewise wear them without pride or wantonness,
as comely and decent colors; but your intent of painting and spotting your
faces is not out of any civil or decent respect, but out of the foolish pride
and fantastical opinion of handsomnesse (whatsoever you pretend) to please your
Paramours, and from your lascivious and wanton dispositions thereupon
following, and for necessary use, benefit or advantage which may accrue from
thence, and which is displeasing to all sober and discreet men: All which
qualities being not in dying, your comparison will not hold. Yet I grant that
there may be perhaps some more moderate women of the more noble rank, who may
use such painting or spotting their faces, not out of any proud or lascivious
disposition, which they abhor, but only to follow the fashions of the times in
imitation of others, and for no other respect; and these, although they are not
so much to be blamed as the others, yet are they not wholly to be excused, for
the danger of infection of others, by their example; who perceiving women of
worth and of civil conversation without pride or wantonness to use it in
imitation of them, using it heedlesly, may be drawn lasciviously to abuse it,
adding sin unto folly; and therefore such also should be wary in the using of
it: but my invective is not against the infirmity of such virtuous Ladies, but
against the impudent only.

Now howsoever to correct or cure any deformity or blemish in Nature by lawful
means, not accompanied with sinful actions, is tolerable; yet the deforming
and defacing of comely and handsome natural fair faces with unnecessary and
undecent Tincture, Spots and Patches, is intolerable; so the evil proceeding
from painting and spotting comely visages, is the chief thing to be avoided,
and is principally condemned.

They will say, peradventure, that they thus paint or spot themselves to be the
better esteemed of others; I partly believe them, that their intent is chiefly
to please others, and in pleasing them to enjoy more freely their lascivious
embracements; and this is very likely; for if they did it not to show
themselves to others, what need they to trouble themselves privately at home,
where none take notice of their bravery? And they that seek to please others by
altering their own complexions do first dislike themselves; for had they not
disliked themselves, they would not have sought to amend that which they could
not dislike: But what madness is it, says an ancient Father, to change
Nature's shape, and to seek a Picture? doubtless thou deservest to be loathed
of others, because thou do loath thy self, and being displeased with the
pleasure of God, do please thy self in that that is displeasing to him.

Having now done with their Allegations in defense of their painting and
spotting the faces, I shall for a more full confutation of these vanities
proceed in my discourse as follows; And first, touching the color of black,
which they so much extol above others.

Albeit I grant the color of Black in it self be not condernned, unless
abused, yet in all respects it is not so highly to be magnified as to be
preferred before all others, as an Ornament to set out the luster and beauty of
fair Ladies; and no less are Spot, and Patches in their visages, in all
respects, to be esteemed; for example sake, Death it self (more terrible then
any thing else) has the Epithet of Atra Mors, black Death; Conjurers, the
Devils prime Agents here on earth, are called Necromancers, and their art
Necromancy, that is, the Black Art; the Progeny of cursed Cham, are held to be
the Black-mores; the most dangerous disease of the Jaundies is called Atra
Bilis, the Black Jaundies: and no mercy or pardon is to be expected when the
black Flag or Ensign is hung out; yea, the Devil himself is called the Prince
of Darkness, and black Pluto has his Palace in a dark Dungeon, and his Family
the black Fiends of Hell, unto whom our black-fac'd Girls make themselves as
like as may be, as the old saying is, Like to like, quoth the Devil to the
Collier.

These black-patched faces are also dreadful to young children, being
naturally affrighted at their unnatural hellish looks, taking them for
Bug-beares, Devils, or Infernal Spirits, having been told, that such Fiends
appear in that likeness; and loathsome they are to those of riper years,
insomuch as their nauseous stomachs are turned (especially at meals) when
casting their eyes on their black Patches, they are put in mind of those filthy
scabs and purulent sores, unto which such plasters are commonly and properly
applied, the noisome smell wereof is oft-times reported to have been so
offensive, that for prevention for the future they have found a way by
perfuming their Plasters and Patches, as I have been informed.

And howsoever the black and speckled colors please them above all others, yet
the color it self is not above all others so amiable, as that it should entice
them merely to delight therein; if we will give credit to learned Authors,
whose Testimonies I have collected as follows.

Anthonius Thylesius, a learned Author, thus writes thereof; Ant. Thy'esius de
Coloribus. c. 3.
Ater color est tristis, visu injucundus, lugentibus accommodatus; Black, faith
he, is a sad color, unpleasant to look on, and fit for mourners. And again,
Colores maculosi sunt equorum and canum, Idem. c. 13.
Spotted colors belong to horses and dogs: (He does not say, to fair faces.)

Joannes Imperialis thus writes of spotted colors, Imperialis in musaeo l. 3.
c. 6.
Color purus est sine maculis, quae ingenium non designant, quoniam sunt
impuritatis exustionum bilis, vel flavae vel atrae sequentes, ex quibus durus,
incredulus, asper, obstinatus, vipereus fit homo; refert enim viperarum corium
hujusmedi maculis conspersum: It is a pure color, says Imperialis, which is
without spots, which spots declare no ingenuity, because they are the
consequent impurities of the inflammation of the Yellow or Black Jaundise, by
which a man becomes hard, incredulous, rough, obstinate, viperous; for it
resembles the Vipers skin speckled with such spots. What the nature of a Viper
is, S. Amb. Hexam. To. 1. l. 5. c. 1.
you may hear St. Ambrose thus describe. The Viper is a Beast, says he, more
vile then the vilest, poisonous by nature, and spiteful, odious to look on and
hateful; a spotted Serpent it is, so poisonous and deadly, that it causes
present death to any that it seizes on, as may appear by the Viper which
fastened on St. Paul as he was warming him by the fire in the Isle of Malta;
from whose danger God miraculously delivered him, insomuch as the barbarous
people then seeing his mavelous delivery, took St. Paul to be a God, Ambros.
To. 4. Hexam. l. 5. c. 7.
Acts 28.6. St. Ambrose moreover thus writes of the poisonous spotted Viper:
Viperae os siquis calcaverit recens duntaxat mortuae, gravius quam venenum
nocere perhibetur, and immedicabile vulnus serpere, If any one says he, spurn
the mouth of a Viper though newly dead, it is reported to be more dangerous
then the poison, and that an incurable wound follows thereupon.

Christ calls the wicked Jews of his time a Generation of Vipers, Matthew. 3.7.
and 12.34. It seems he could not liken them to a worse creature.

Toads also, Snakes and other Serpents, and diverse savage Beasts, as Leopards,
Tigers, Wild-Cats and the like, are partly of a poisonous, and partly of a
fierce and cruel nature and disposition; and all of them speckled like our
black-fac'd Ladies, yet they would not be likened to them.

Josephus Laurentius in his Philosophica, thus writes of this black color:
Juseph. Laurentius Philosophica.
Rei se deturpabant ad misericordiam captandam, condemned persons were wont to
foul themselves (speaking of the black color) that they might be pityed; so it
seems this was esteemed a doleful color of no delight. Again, unlucky days
says Laurentius, are called Atri Dies, black days, and were Carbone notati,
marked with a biack coal (not doubtless for any comeliness or beauty in that
color) and fortunate days were called Dies candidi, white days, and marked
with Creta, white Chalk: If then these Black-birds desire to be fortunate, they
should by this Rule make themselves Candidae, and not Nigrae or Atrae, white
ones, not black.

Besides these testimonies of Learned Writers before produced touching Spots
and black colors, (that nothing may be wanting conducible hereunto) hear what
the sacred Scriptures write both concerning Spots, as also touching black
colors and blackness. And first how Spots have generally been taken
throughout the Scriptures for faults and deformities both in the Body and Mind
internally and externally; and never mentioned as Ornaments to set forth or
illustrate the inward or outward parts of Man or Woman, to which purpose our
black patched Ladies pretend to use them: And then observe also what formidable
Expressions the holy Word of God has left us concerning Blackness or Darkness,
able to deter any from using that which represents the same, in which color
notwithstanding our spotted Ladies do now delight. And first to begin with such
Texts of the Scripture as write of Spots, and then in order to proceed with the
other.

That Spots are blemishes appears Numb. 19.2. in these words, Number. 19.2.
A red heyfer without spot wherein is no blemish shall be burnt, etc. And Numb.
28.3. Numb. 28.3.
Ye shall offer unto the Lord two lambs of the first year without spot. Again,
Numb. 28.11. Numb. 28.11.
Ye shall offer seven lambs without spot. And Numb. 29.17. Numb. 29.17.
Ye shall offer fourteen lambs without spot.

Ye see that in all these places of holy Scripture spotted Lambs are forbidden
to be offered unto the Lord: for no Beasts were to be offered but such as were
Immaculate, without spot; so it seems Spots were not then in such request as
they are now with our spotted Faces.

Also Job. 11.15. Zophar said unto Job, Job 11.15.
Thou shall lift up thy face without spot. Which our now speckled faces cannot
do.

Also Cantic. 4.7. Thou art all fair, my Love, Cantic. 4.7.
there is no spot in thee: speaking of the Church, which should be without spot.

So Ephesians. 5.27. the Church is there termed A glorious Church, Ephesians. 5.17.
not having spot or wrinkle, nor any such thing, but holy and without blemish.
So hereby is inferred, That a Spot is a blemish.

Also 1 Timothy 6.14. Keep the Commandment without spot, that is, 1 Timothy 6.14.
without stain or blemish. So let me advise our Wantons to keep their faces and
fames.

Again, Heb. 9.14. Christ offered himself without spot to God. Hebr. 9.14.
The original Greek word (...) signifies inculpatum, immaculatism, maculae
expers, without fault, immaculate, having no spot.

Also 1 Pet. 1.19. Christ, 1 Pet. 1.19.
a Lamb, without blemish and without spot. From hence a Spot may be taken for a
Blemish.

And 2 Pet. 2.13. The Apostle terms wicked persons Spots and Blemishes. 2 Pet.
2.13.


Again, 2 Pet. 3.14.
2 Pet. 3.14. The Apostle admonishes his beloved ones, That they be found by
Christ in peace without spot or blemish; So that to be spotted is blameworthy.

Jude also in his Epistle, Jude ver. 12.
v. 12. says, Wicked seducers are spots in the feasts of charity, feeding
themselves without fear. Even so our spotted ones without shame or fear
frequent Feasts and Meetings (though of another sort) but being spotted their
society ought not to be admitted. Again, the same Apostle, Jude v. 13. compares
these spotted ones to the raging waves of the Sea, Jude ver. 13.
foaming out their own shame; and unto wandering stars, to whom is reserved
the blackness of darkness for ever; suitable to our now spotted faces,
haunters of Feasts, and wanderers or gadders from place to place to get
customers.

Thus much concerning Spots spiritual and corporal out of the holy
Scriptures. Now you shall hear next what we have collected out of the same
Sacred written Word concerning blackness or darkness, and the black color
correspondent thereunto, as follows;

Job 3. v. 4, Job cap. 3. ver. 4, 5, 6.
5, 6. The holy man Job being terribly afflicted by the permission of God, for
trial of his integrity, uses these execrations, Let the day perish wherein I
was born, etc. Let that day, says he, be darkness, let not God regard it from
above, neither let the light shine upon it; let darkness and the shadoow of
death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it; let the blackness of the day
terrify it, and for that night let darkness seize upon it, etc.

Here you see how holy Job in his anguish and terrible grief wisneth this
darkness or blackness to be sent by God on the earth, so that the day of his
birth had never been: And therefore no such color of Black can be from hence
desired, but rather detested.

Again, Job 30.30.
this holy man Job, in his lamentable affliction, cries out thus, My skin,
says he, is black upon me, and my bines are burnt with heat. Our foolish
black-patch Girls may here observe how holy Job cries out of the blackness
of his skin, as one of his punishments, and yet they think that their black
faces are an ornament to them; but let them learn of Job how to esteem it
rightly.

Isaiah 5.3. The Prophet here says, Isaiah 5.3.
God cloatheth the heavens with blackness. Here notice is to be taken, That
blackness of the heavens is here set down as a Punishment, not as a Blessing
from Almighty God; and therefore such resemblances ought rather to terrify
then to delight us.

Cant. 1.5, 6. I am black, but comely. Cant. 1.5, 6.
Here the Church of Christ calls her self black, not (as some may think) for
any comeliness in that color, for Black is there distinguished from Comely in
these very words, I am black, but comely; but she calls her self Black, because
she was brought into such a sorrowful and doleful condition by the tribulations
and afflictions she lay under by her persecutors, who obscured and denigrated
her glory and renown, and made her as it were seem black and contemptible, (for
so learned Expositors interpret it) and therefore confessing her deformity,
signified by her black color, she wills her flock, v. 6. not to look upon
her; Look not upon me, says she, because I am black, meaning deformed
outwardly (accounting external Black a deformity) but internally comely. Let
our black-spotted faces then, whose visages are not made black against their
wills (as the Churches was) but who voluntarily black themselves, consider that
they are not, and ought not to be honored or esteemed for their black faces,
but rather to be esteemed as deformed, and therefore ought to forbear so to
disfigure themselves, and likewise to persuade others (as the Church here does)
not to behold them; for the Church here, as is expounded by the Text,
confesses her deformity in being black, oppressed and dejected by her
persecutors,

Jerem. 4.28. The Prophet says, Jerem. 4.28.
That God for the sins of his people, among other his heavy judgments
denounced against them, That the heavens above should be black; whereby it
appears that Black is a dreadful color, and yet our wantons are in love
therewith.

Again, Jerem. 8.3. The Prophet says, Jerem. 8.3.
For the hurt of the daughter of my people I am hurt, I am black. Here to be
black, is to be afflicted, not to be desired, as our black ones would have it.

Jerem. 14.2. Judah mourns, Jer. 14.2.
the gates thereof languish, they are black unto the ground. Here blackness
notes the sad condition of the people in a great Famine; no pattern for our
Blackbirds to cheer up themselves with their colors.

Lam. 4.18. Sion bewailing her pitiful estate, Lam. 4.18.
thus bewaileth them, Their visage is blacker then a coal, or, according to
the Hebrew, darker then blackness; so then black visages are sent as a
judgment of Gods wrath, not as an ornament.

Lam. 5.10. Sion in her Prayer to God, Lam. 5.10.
says, Our skin was black like an oven, because of the terrible famine. Our
black ones would be loath their skins should be compared to an Oven, or be a
sign of Famine; they like Feasting better then Fasting.

Zeeh. 6.2. Mention is is there made of a Vision, Zech. 6.2.
wherein was a Chariot of black Horses; happily our black Wenches (if they use to
read the Bible) from this place took their pattern of their Coach and black
Horses pictured in their faces.

Joel 2.6. All faces shall gather blackness, Joel 2.6.
or, as Pagnin out of the Hebrew interprets it, blackness as a pot. This is
denounced as one of Gods terrible judgments; at which though some of our black
ones are not troubled, yet it would trouble them more to have theit black Faces
compared to a black Pot, a word of disgrace.

Nah. 2.10. The Prophet there showing what judgments were pronounced against
the great city of Nineveh; Nah. 2.10.
among others says, The faces of them all gather blackness. Here observe,
that black faces are mentioned among Gods punishments; so then to be dreaded,
not beloved.

Lastly, Rev. 7.17.
Rev. 7.17. A multitude of all nations not to be numbered stood before the
throne, and before the lamb, clothed in white robes: So if our black Ladies
expect to appear before the Throne of God in Heaven, it must not be in black,
but in white robes.

Rev. 6.13. The Sun became black, Rev. 6.12.
which was in the great day of Gods wrath. Note that this was a dreadful sign
of Gods displeasure, set forth under the color of Black.

By these places of the holy Scriptures we may learn, that black colors and
blackness it self oft-times have been hideous signs and tokens of Gods heavy
displeasure, and therefore not always without exception are they generally to
be approved or commended, nor fit in such respect to be imitated, but rather to
be dreaded, so often as we call to remembrance the terrible effects of such
dreadful colors: yet I grant, that black colors used civilly in many other
things, not abused or mis-applied, are not only tolerable, but commendable
also, and useful, and may be used without offense, without disgrace, as black
hair, and a black eye in man or woman, is a lively and graceful color; from
whence I guess, that once illustrious and famous Prince of Wales, Edward, Son
and Heir of King Edward the third, was called The Black Prince, a name of no
disparagement, but rather of terror to his enemies, of which the French were
sensible: black Garments worn usually by Divines, Physicians, Lawyers, Citizens
and Mourners (as above) being the most proper color for the most sober and
civil sort of men; a black color in painting Walls, Houses, or Tables, or in
any curious Works weaved, or of Needle Work, mixed or checkered with other
colors for variety-sake, oft-times adorneth and sets forth the work; and
all black colors in Beasts, Fowl, or other living creatures, being natural,
are in their kinds commendable, being such as God has ordained for them;
likewise the natural black complexions of Black-Moors is more respected by them
then the White, for the abuse and not the good use of colors is condemned; for
colors fitly applied is a grace, and unfitly applied turn to the disgrace of
the subject, unto which they are applied; even as black Patches also being
applied to the face to cover and cure scabs and sores, are very useful and
tolerable; but otherwise worn, as an ornament to the face, are useless and
disgraceful; but the painting, spotting and patching of faces is the deforming
of comely faces and good complexions, which is here justly reprehended, and
cannot be excused, notwithstanding any foolish fashion which apishly they
imitate, which being undecent, ought to be out of fashion, when it makes the
wearers thereof to be of no good fashion; so that Black is not here censured,
but the disfiguring of Gods Image by Black.

But the folly and vanity of these uncouth fashions is not only to be censured
as ridiculous, ugly and nauseous, but the pride, lasciviousness, and other
vices that accompany their impudence, wherewith God is offended, and good men
displeased, is principally to be reprehended; but lest these wantons should not
believe these their foolish actions in painting, patching and spotting their
faces (which are all one, but spotting the worse, because of its greater
deformity) to be sinful or displeasing to God; let them hear the judgment of
the holy Fathers of the Primitive times, and of other learned Doctors and
Scholars in this point, unto whom they must grant, that more credit ought to be
given then to their private fantastic humors, or to any the abettors of them:
for against these learned and pious men no just exception can be taken: I will
first begin with Origin, and so proceed.

Origin. Tom. 2. Hom. 4. thus writes; Origin. To. 2. homil. 4. He was scholar
to Clem. Alexand. and lived Anno 226.
They, says he, that use this painting, do injury to God, whose workmanship
they would seem to mend, being discontented with it; Does the Law of God
require or favor it? Does Reason uncorrupted teach it? or have the Laws of any
wise or understanding heads endured or enjoined it? No, they that use these
paintings of the face do them in contumeliam Creatoris, to the reproach of
their Creator. So Origin.

Tertullian, Tertul. de habitu muliebr. c. 5. A. D. 203.
another ancient Father of the Primitive Church, thus writes, In illum
delinquit, quae cutem medicaminibus ungunt, genas rubore maculant, oculos
fuligine collinunt; displicet illis nimirum plastica dei; in ipsis redarguunt,
reprehendunt artificem omnium; reprehendunt enim, cum emendant, cum adjiciunt,
utique ab adversario artifice sumentes additamenta ista, id est, Diabolo, etc.
Quod nascitur opus Dei est, ergo quod fingitur Diaboli negotium est, etc. Hodie
Deus vos tales videat, quales tunc videbit, etc. Vbi Deus, ibi pudicitia, ibi
gravitas adjutrix and socia ejus. Quo ergo pacto pudicitiam sine instrumento
ejus, id est, sine gravitate tractabimus? Quomodo autem gravitatem
administrandae pudicitiae adhibemimus, nisi in facie, and in cultu, and in
totius hominis contemplatione, severitas circumferetur. They offend against him
who anoint their skin with medicines, who bespot their eyelids with red, and
dawb their eyes with foot; for the workmanship of God displeases them; therein
they reprove and find fault with the maker of all things; for they find fault
when they amend, when they add thereto, taking such additions from the
adversaryworkman, that is, the Devil, etc. That which is born is the work of
God, therefore that which is counterfeit is the business of the Devil, etc.
Let God behold you on this day such as he then (to wit, at the Resurrection)
shall behold you, etc. Where God is, there is Modesty, there is Gravity her
helper and associate: After what manner shall we then use modesty without her
instrument, that is, without Gravity? and how shall we apply Gravity to
Modesty, unless Severity be observed in the face, and in the attire, and in
regarding of the whole man?

Herein Tertullian does intimate, that look what Modesty and Gravity women here
on earth have put on, in the like shall they appear in their face and ornaments
at the day of Judgment: And moreover he makes a doubt, whether the Angels will
carry up into Heaven such a painted creature, An cum cerussa and purpurisso and
croco expictam, Angeli in nubila sublevent, obviam Christo? Whether, says he,
the Angels will then carry up into the clouds one painted with white Lead, red
Cheek-varnish and Saffron, to meet Christ or not? So Tertullian.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, Clem. Alex. Paedagog. l. 3. c. 2. A. D. 204.
That as a salve applied does by the very sight give cause to suspect that he
that wears it is diseased, so these false Dies, Tinctures and colors dawbed
on women's faces, do signify that the soul is sick within. Again, as branded
marks make known a Fugitive, so beautiful colors disclose an Harlot; and he
that calls them Harlots who make vizards of their faces is not mistaken; for
they that take more delight in their faces then in their hearts, set forth
themselves to please others: And is it not an absurd thing, that Horses, Birds,
and other living creatures, should rise up from the green grass and meadows
and fly away, rejoicing in their own natural ornament, mains, colors and
plumes, and that a woman, as if she were inferior to beasts, should think her
self deformed, that she stands in need of external, saleable, and counterfeit
beauty, etc. So Clem. Alex.

St. Cyprian, S. Cyprian. de habitu Virginis. Anno 250.
De habitu Virginis, thus writes, Ornamentorum insignia and lenocinia fucoru^,
non gisi prostitutis, and impudicis foeminis congruit, a^ nullarum fere
praetiosior cultus est, quam quarum pudor vilis est; The flags of attire and
the alluring provocations of painted faces belong to none but prostituted and
shameless women, but the attire of almost no women is more precious then of
those whose bashfulnesse is set out meanly. Again, Qui se pingunt in hoc seculo
aliter quam creavit Deus, metuent, ne cum dies resurrectionis venerit, arufex
creaturam suam non recognoscat; They who paint themselves in this world
otherwise then God made them, let them beware, that when the Resurrection shall
come, the Workmaster do not know his workmanship. Again, says the same Father,
If some cunning Painter should set forth the countenance and shape of a woman,
and having ended his work another should take upon him, as being more skilful,
to reform and mend it, the first workman might justly seem to be injured and
offended; And do thou think, O woman, to escape unpunished, presuming with
the like audacious rashness to offend God? Does Sincerity and Truth continue,
when those things that are sincere are polluted with counterfeit colors, and
those things which are true are changed into falsehood with deceitful tricks?
The Lord says, Thou art not able to make one hair white or black, Mat. 5.36.
and thou to put down his saying, would thou be stronger? By audacious
endeavor and sacrilegious attempt thou colourest thy hairs; fear not thou,
I prithee, who art thus disguised, lest the Workman that made thee should not
acknowledge thee, and lest he should say, This is not my Work, this is none of
our Image? Thou have polluted thy skin with deceitful Art, thou have changed
thy hair with a counterfeit color, thy face is falsified, thy shape is
defiled, thy countenance is borrowed; thou can not see God, having not the
eyes that God has made, but which the Devil has marred; thou have followed
him, thou have imitated the red-shining and painted eyes of the Serpent, being
trimmed up in thine enemies fashion; thou art to burn also in like manner with
him: Ought not these things, I prithee, to be confidered of the servants of
God? are they not to be dreaded always, both day and night? Thus St. Cyprian.

Lactantius speaking of these foolish paintings, says thus, Lactantius de
falsa sapientia, cap. 29. A. C. 290.
Nihil aliud sunt quam deliramenta inconsideratae levitatis, They are nothing
but the dotage of inconsiderate Inconstancy. Thus Lactantius.

St. Ambrose, de Virg. l. 1. thus writes hereof, S. Ambr. de Virgin. l. 1. A.
C. 374. Id Hexam. l. 6. c. 8. A. C 374.
De adulterio vultus meditantur adulterium castitatis, By adulterating the
visage they meditate the adulterating their chastity: The same Father also
says in Hexameron. l. 6. this painting is Pictura Mcretricis, the picture of
an Harlot. Again, says the same Father, What a dotage is it to change the
natural face which God has made thee, for a painted face which thou have made
thy self? Thus St. Ambr.

St. Hierom also thus writes to the widow Furia, S. Hierom To. 1. ad Furiam,
de viduitate servanda. A. C. 390.
Quid pulchrius anima, quae Dei Filia appellatur, and nullos extrinsecus
quaerit ornatus? What is there more beautiful then the Soul, that is called
the daughter of God, that seeks not after outward Ornaments? Again, Quanto
foedior, tanto pulchrior, quid faciet in facie Christiana purpurissus and
cerussa? quorum alterum ruborem genarum, labiorumque mentitur, alterum candorem
Oris and Colli; ignes juvenum, fomenta libidinum, impudica mentis indicia;
ornatus iste non Domini est; velam^n istud Antichristi est; Que fiducia erigit
ad coelum vultus, quos conditor non agnoscit; Frustra obtenditur Adolescentia,
and aetas puellaris asseritur: The more beautiful she is, the more filthy she
is; what advantage does the red-cheek color and the white lead bring to the
visage of a Christian woman? the one of them counterfeits the redness of the
eyelids and lips, the other the whiteness of the mouth and neck; they are the
fire of youth, the foments of lust, the tokens of an unchaste mind. This
ornament is not of the Lord; it is the veyle of Antichrist; with what
confidence does she lift up those eyes to Heaven which her Maker ownes not?
Youth and girlish age is in vain alleged for excuse, etc. Thus St. Hierom.

St. Chrysostom disliking the painting of women, S. Chrysostom. To. 2. Hom 31.
gives this advice (amongst others) unto the husband of a painted wife; Let
her, says he, ever and anon hear thee say, That the painted faces of women do
displease thee, and that they cause such a loathing in thee that thou can not
endure them: Allege also the judgment of others that are of thy mind, and tell
her, that gear does mar them that are comely without it; make her believe
that it will glad thy heart to see her with such a face as God has made, but
that a face corrupted and altered from its nature, and dawbed with artificial
colors, is commonly disliked amongst good men. Thus Chrysostom.

Ye may here observe how S. Chrysostom disliked this art of painting faces, by
persuading the husband to dissuade his wife from it.

S. Augustine also thus says of the true attire of Christian women, S.
Augustine ep. 72. ad Possidon. A. C. 400.
The true Ornament of Christians, says he, are not only no counterfeit or
lying Paintings, but good Manners. Thus Saint Aug.

If women think painting an Ornament, Stobaeus, Scrm. 72.
hear what a Philosopher said to that purpose; Democritus a Philosopher (says
Stobaeus) said, That the sparing of speech adorned a woman, and the sparing of
an ornament is an ornament unto her.

But if the setting forth of Beauty be their aim, Isidor. Clar. To. 1. O^at. 53.
listen what Isidorus Clarus will tell them touching that point; Such, says
this learned man, as would needs appear conspicuous and beautiful here, shall
inherit eternal deformity with the Devil and his Angels.

Peter Martyr, P. Mart. 2. Reg. c. 9.30. Id. loc. com. l. 2. c. 11.
a learned and sound Protestant, 2 Kings 9.30. says, It is no good face that
seeks these helps. Again, Loc. commun. l. 2. cap. 11. If Christian women, says
he, will so color and paint themselves, I pray what does a Matron differ from
an Harlot?

Jo: Calv. Jer. 4.30
Calvin on Ierem. 4.30. says, Harlots to entice Adulterers are wont to paint
their faces. You see here painting faces is the trick of an Harlot.

Mr. Downham, Jo: Downham, Christian Warf. c. 14. l. 1.
a Reverend English Divine, in his Christian Warfare, c. 14. l. 1. writing
against all painting of the face, thus says, Painting of the face, the Devils
invention, absolutely a sin, not only in the abuse, but the very use, the
nature of the thing; and not only in the intention of the doer; it is utterly
wicked and abominable against the law of God, the light of Nature, against
self-shame and conviction; a reproach of God, a perverting of his Works in
Nature, a cheat of others, a lure and bait to Sin, a fruit of Pride and Vanity,
poisonous to the Body, and pernicious to the Soul; it is the proper practice of
Harlots and lewd women, and it is inconsistent with a Christian profession and
a good conscience. And all this Master Downham takes out of the holy Fathers;
and he brings in also Tertullian arguing against it, Tertull.
as the Devils counterfeiting and mocking of God, by seeking to mend his works,
as if God needed his enemies help to complete his creatures, etc. Thus Mr. Io:
Downham.

Festus Pompeius, an ancient Roman Writer, Sext. Pompeius Festus de verbs
signif.
concerning the painting of lewd women, thus writes, The Schaeniculae, says
he, were common Whores, so called from their using of the Ointment Schoenum,
(the worst of all Ointments. Plaut. in Nervolaria^
) From Plautus also he calls them Diabolares and Miraculae, or Monsters; so
interpreted by Ant. Augustinus in his Anotat. upon Festus; For painted Whores
seem more like to Devils and Monsters then Women. From hence we may see that
this custom of painting faces was no new invention, but practiced by common
Strumpets, by Pagan Harlots, at Rome before the Birth of Christ, and condemned
then even by the Heathens themselves as a Devilish Custom, comparing them that
used it to Devils and Monsters; yet these impudent creatures, in these our
days, that profess themselves to be Christians, would be accounted wise and
witty in making themselves such ugly Monsters; but herein they are much
mistaken, for as a learned man seriously says of such as delighted in
Monsters, Balth. Bonifa. h^st. Ludicra. l. 16. c. 14.
Monstrosum profecto videtur, quod sapientia, rerum pulcherrima, monstrorum
fuerit amans adeo pertinax ut iis undique circumsepta eorum consuetudine, non
secus ac Venus Gratiarum contubernio jucundissime frueretur. Verily (says
Boniface) it seems to be a monstrous thing, that Wisdom, the most beautiful of
all things, should be such a wilful lover of Monsters, that being compassed
about with them on every side, she should with great joy use their society, as
if it were Venus the companion of the Graces: But such a one (says mine
Author) is verily a Monster, though formosum and aspectabile illecebrosum and
delectabile; beautiful, amiable to behold, alluring and delectable: And here we
see that wisdom belongs not to these creatures who thinking they look like
Venus, make themselves Monsters, resembling rather Proserpina, who (as the
Poets feign) lived as much in Hell as in Heaven, as I fear these Monsters do,
if not more; but Africa breeds Monsters, Tangiers in Africa being ours, why may
not then our creatures be Monsters? I grant they may be what indeed they are.

But these so wise creatures (in their own conceit) do think, that where Nature
is defective they may justly correct it; but herein they are deceived, for that
which is natural being Gods immediate workmanship is to be preferred before any
artificial invention of man, though never so curious; if we believe Solon, one
of the wise men of Greece, who being demanded by King Craesus sitting on his
Throne in his Royal glorious Robes, Solon.
whether ever he saw the like before? Yes, said Solon, the attire of Peacocks
and Parrots seem to me more glorious, for that theirs is natural.

Let then every one submit to Nature, which no man ought to correct, nor can
long restrain, but it will soon revert, as the old saying is, Quicquid Natura
dedit corrigere nefas est, It is unlawful to correct what Nature has bestowed.
So also, Naturam expellas furca licet usque recurret, Though you force Nature
it will return again.

Dr. John Bulwer has not long since published a laborious Work, Dr. Bulwer in
his Man transformed, p. 260.
entitled, Man transformed, or the Artificial Changeling, wherein among diverse
transfigurations of the outward lineaments of man's Natural body, he has with
great judgment set forth his observations upon this painting and spotting of
Faces by our English Ladies, some few whereof I shall here impart to the
Reader, leaving the rest (for brevity sake) to be perused by any one who shall
desire it out of the Book it self; such as I have collected out of the rest are
these which follow. Our Doctor having before set down particularly the common
use of painting and branding of Faces, used principally among the Indians,
Africans, Americans, and other barbarous Nations, at last proceeds with the
painting and spotting the faces used of late times by our English Ladies in
these words following:

Our English Ladies, says he, who seem to have borrowed some of their
Cosmetical Conceits from barbarous Nations, are seldom known to be contented
with a face of Gods making; for they are adding, detracting or altering,
continually, having many Fucusses in readiness for the same purpose: Sometimes
they think they have too much color, then they use art to make them look pale
and fair; now they have too little color, then Spanish Paper, red Leather, and
other Cosmetical Rubricks must be had: yet for all this it may be the skins of
their faces do not please them; off they go to Mercury-water, and so they
remain like peeled Ewes, until their faces have recovered a new Epidermis.

Our Ladies here, says the Doctor, have lately entertained a vain custom of
spotting their faces, out of an affectation of a Mole to set off their beauty,
such as Venus had; and it will, if one black Patch will serve to make their
faces remarkable; for some fill their visages full of them, varied into all
manner of shapes and figures.

This is as odious and as senseless an affectation as ever was used by any
barbarous Nation in the world; and I doubt our Ladies that use them are not
well advised of the effect they work; for these Spots in fair Faces advantage
not Beauty, as they suppose, because contraries compared and placed near one
another show their luster more plainly, but because it gives Envy satisfaction,
which takes pleasure in defects, or by reason it takes away that astonishment
which instead of delighting confounds, not that imperfection can make perfect,
or that the defect can increase beauty, and therewith delight, for these Spots
in a beautiful face add not grace to a visage, nor increase delight; they
entertain it because they extinguish and then renew it, etc. A woman the more
curious she is about her face, the more careless about her house, the
repairing of the one being the ruining of the other, which makes Gusman cry
even out, O filthiness above all other filthiness, O affront above all other
affronts, that God having given thee one face, thou should abuse his Image
and make thy self another! And is it not a wonder (as my Lod Bacon notes) that
this corrupt custom of Painting has so long escaped penal Laws, both of the
Church and State, which have been very severe against the excessive vanity of
Apparel, and the effeminate trimmiug of hair: and the wonder is the greater how
it has escaped Ecclesiastical censure, since all the Fathers of the Church
have strongly inveighed against forced and feigned beauty, and this practice of
introducing other hues then the blood naturally affords, etc. God would not
(says a grave and learned Divine) have the face mangled and torn, Dr. Done,
Seim. 20.
but then he would not have it varnished with foreign complexions: It is ill
when it is not our own blood that appears in our cheeks; it may do some ill
offices of blood, it may tempt, but it gives over when it should do a good
office of blood, it cannot blush; God would not have us disfigure our face with
sad countenances in Fasting and other Discipline, nor would have us go about to
mar his work, or to do his last work (which he has reserved to himself in
heaven) here on earth, that is, to glorify our bodies with such additions
here, as though we would need no glorification there. Thus Doctor Done. In the
invention of black Patches the French showed their wity pride, which could so
cunningly turn Botches into Beauty, and make ugliness handsome; yet in point
of phantasticalnesse we may excuse that Nation, as having taken up the fashion
rather for necessity then novelty, inasmuch as those French Pimples have need
of a French Plaster. Thur Dr. Bulwer.

I greatly pity the foolish pride and vanity of these silly women, who
voluntarily bring shame on themselves by their peevishness, in flighting the
prudent advice and wholesome counsel and solid reasons which the zealous holy
Fathers of the Primitive Church, and other learned and pious Divines, have set
before them, which if they would duly consider and regard, they would, no
doubt, see their own errors, and be persuaded to imitate the fashions of those
sober and discreet Ladies and Gentlewomen, who abhor such vain and foolish
fashions which these so delight in, and follow such fashions as may tend to
their credit and reputations: for nothing more bewitches them, nor allures them
to these vain courses, then the fashions of the times, on which they dote in
such manner, as that (be they decent or undecent all is one to them) they more
affect them then any good counsel whatsoever, which may cross their humors;
although they can show no more reason to justify their apish imitations, then
can Apes themselves, such is the strength of one ill example once brought to a
custom.

But if there be no remedy but that they will still continue in their old
courses, and sit in the seat of Scorners, despising all good admonition, though
for their own welfare, I shall not then endeavor to make a Blackmoor white,
but must leave them to the care and correction of the Magistrate, who
foreseeing the danger of the contagious infection of their disease, that is
likely to increase by toleration, if not in time prevented, will doubtless no
longer connive thereat, but will speedily take such a course to reduce them to
a conformity with civil people, as the strict course of the Law shall
prescribe; which I conceive may properly be by way of Indictment of High
Treason, for that they having not the fear of God before their eyes, but moved
by the instigation of the Devil, did abuse, counterfeit and deface Gods Image
in their faces, to the evil example of others, and against Gods Crown and
Dignity; there will need no evidence to convict them, for their crime will
appear in their foreheads, and the sentence will be according to their offense,
to which I leave them. Herein the diligence of the Magistrate will be expected;
for if he should prove negligent, the Delinquent would be impudent, and the
Magistrate justly blamed; for Qui non impedit, promovet, He that hinders not
a crime promoteth it; yet if in time these Girls will voluntarily of
themselves reform their manners, they may prevent this shame which is likely to
fall on them; if not, they must be forced to feel the smart of their obstinacy
and contempt.

There is a wity discourse not long since published of Artificial Beauty,
wherein many reasons are strongly urged for toleration of painting women's faces
in some sort, where their beautiful complexions are thereby the more
illustrated; but those arguments will not serve their turn, who produce them on
the behalf of black-spotting Faces, whereby their comely complexions are
deformed, the one tending to correct Nature, (which in some sort may be
tolerable) the other to destroy Nature (which is in no sort to be admitted;)
but although the one may be more tolerable then the other in their several
respects, yet neither of them are commendable, being both counterfeits. Philo
de Gigant.
Therefore Moses (as Philo says) banished Painting and Statuary Art, because
they corrupt the truth with lies, and deceive credulous minds by those
representations which are presented to their eyes.

And now fair Ladies and Gentlewomen, if you think I have been too rigid
against your fashions, pardon old Age, which naturally is averse to such
vanities, which may bring disgrace, but no commendations to your good names:
and though you may be clear from any just censure of light behavior, yet for
your credit-sake you should endeavor to be free also from the very suspicion
thereof; Plutarch. invit. Jul. Caes.
for as Plutarch writes, Suspicion only moved Julius Caesar to put away his
wife Pompeia (a gallant Lady of Noble Birth) because Caefar would not that his
wife should not be so much as suspected of incontinency.

If I have rubbed too hard upon your Sores, you know that foul Spots,
especially upon fair Subjects, are not slightly rubbed out, but will require
much and hard impression: Remember this, That never any one discreet man
praised you for your patched faces, and also think how many daily dispraise you
for the same.

Having thus decyphered this new Mold of spotted Faces, I shall for a Farewell
salute these black ones, with a few rude Rythmes, which may peradventure be
more acceptable to them then Prose, because commonly such more delight in
Rythme then in Reason, and therewithal I shall conclude this discourse.

On black-spotted Faces.
PRoud fools with spots their faces patch thinking Gods work to mend,
But being dead God knows them not, to Pluto they must wend;
Whose gates stand open to welcome them; they may well know by this,
That Noctes atque dies pat et atris Janua ditis. Atris hic pro atri non
improprie invertitur.

Hell gate is open day and night for such as in black spots delight,
If pride their faces spotted make, for pride then hell their souls will take.
If folly be the cause of it, let simple fools then learn more wit;
Black Spots and Patches on the face, to sober women bring disgrace;
Lewd Harlots by such spots are known, let Harlots then enjoy their own.
So holy Fathers testify, that Whores did chiefly use
The practice of Face-painting, in their Brothel-house or Stues. Clem. Alex. S.
Cypr. S. Ambr. S. Hierom. Besides P. Mar^ Jo: Calv. Dr. Downham, etc. as before.

Pure and unspotted ought to be, such as expect Eternity.
Who then immaculate would be, of ugly spots he must be free:
But if where spots condemned are, impurity of mind be meant,
Then outward spots to face applied, can surely be no ornament.
Thus I have done with this Metamorphosis of fair Faces, which God has made,
into black Visages, which the Devil has forged, which being so much applauded
by the greater sort of young Gentlewomen (otherwise perhaps of good breeding)
and voluntarily with delight used, though to their own shame, cannot improperly
be styled A Wonder of Wonders.

Sic dixit MISO-SPILVS.

The End.

