VI. SEVERAL VICTORIES OBTAINED By Major-Generall Brown, Lievtenant-Generall
Cromwell, and Col. Fines,

AGAINST The Kings Forces near Oxford, on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and
Sunday last: with several Lists of the names of the chief prisoners of the
Kings party which were taken: viz.

6. Colonells and Majors. 9 Captains. 11. Lievtenants. 14. Colors and
Ensigns. 53. other Officers. 540. killed and taken. 600. and odd Arms. 590
Horse. 3. Barrells of powder, besides other Ammunition.
WITH All the particulars, and manner of each fight, and the most material
Collections of the Letters which come from Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell,
Major-Generall Brown, and the rest that were sent from the Army.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Austin. 1645.

Six several victories obtained against the Kings Forces near Oxford, by
several Fights, on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday last.
ON Tuesday the 22. of April, 1645. there were quartered between two and three
thousand of Sir Thomas Fairfaxes horse about Oxford, to stop the Kings
Artillery and Carriages from passing out, which were ready in Oxford (with a
convoy) to march (as intelligence was given) toward Rupert. And
Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell having intelligence that they intended to pass
through Shotoverwood, drew toward Woodstock and so thereabouts toward Islip,
to be ready to attend their motion, in case they came that way.

On Wednesday the 23. of April, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell had intelligence
of about 100. horse and foot that were marching toward him, and that evenning
some of our men showed themselves in a small party, which drew the enemy near,
and command was given by Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, that all our Forces
should be in a readiness, and upon their watch all the night for fear of the
enemy, which was carefully done, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell himself being in
his own person (to encourage them) all the while with them, for there came
intelligence that the enemy intended to watch for an opportunity to take our
forces at an advantage, and then suddenly to fall upon them, of which they much
presumed: but found our men too vigilant for them.

On Thursday the 24. of April, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell fell upon them
near Islip (where were a Brigade of above 1000. under the command of the Earl
of Northampton) consisting of his own Regiment, and the Lord Wilmots Regiment,
beat them at their own game, fought with them with much gallantry (though the
best horse the King has.) And at the second charge entered their whole Body,
disordered them, which was followed with so much valor that in short time they
totally routed them, and pursued them above 3. miles, killed and took 200. and
odd, and about 60. were drowned by making such speed to get over a water. We
took also 400 Horse, and 3. Colors, about 20. Officers, and diverse Arms, and
wounded many of their men besides, who fled into Oxford, and some into
Blechington-house. But Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell sent away his prisoners and
marched against Blechington, and summoned Colonel VVindebank to surrender that
Garrison, which after some dispute about it (being strong surrounded) it was
surrendered to Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell upon condition for the soldiers to
march away with their lives; Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell took there 250.
Muskets, 70. Horse, 100. Pikes, and other Arms, 3. barrells of Gunpowder,
with Match and other Ammunition.

On Friday the 25. of April, our Horse were divided into several Squadrons,
both for convenience of quarter and also to attend the motions of the enemy,
and Colonel John Fines quartered toward Wilcot, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell
with his own Regiment drawing between him and Oxford, and this day some
straglers of the enemies were taken prisoners.

On Saturday the 26 of April, Major-Generall Brown having notice that Sir
Thomas Fairfaxes Horse were so near him, drew a party out of Abingdon to
march that way, to be in a readiness (if occasion were) who marching toward
Longworth, had notice of a party of the enemy to be about Buckland, so they
marched that way, but the enemy was gone toward Farringdon; but Major-Generall
Brownes Forces followed them so close, that they fell upon them, and took a
Captain, and 3 other Officers, and 10 Prisoners, with which they intended
presently to return toward Abingdon; but having intelligence of another
party of the enemies that were coming from the Devises, intending (as was
supposed) for Oxford, Scouts were sent to find them out, and having discovered
them, Major-Generall Brownes Forces marched unto them, fell upon them, and took
a Colonel, a Sargeant-Major, 3 Captain, 3 Lievtenants, and diverse other
Prisoners; besides Horse, and Arms, and carried them to Abbingdon.

The same evening Colonel Fines (with his Regiment) having intelligence of a
party of the enemies that were come near Witney, drew toward them, and with
much gallantrie fell upon them, and took from them 120 Horse, 3 Colors, 40
Prisoners, and 50 Arms.

The same night news came into Abingdon, that that day, viz. Saturday the 26
of April, Colonel Windebank was brought before a Council of War in Oxford,
about the furrendring of Bletchington-House to Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell,
and that diverse great persons in Oxford were much enraged against him, taking
it very ill, that a Garrison of so great consequence to them (as they value it)
should be so soon lost; in so much, that it is believed Col. Windebank will be
put to death for it.

The same night Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell had intelligence, that a party of
the enemies Foot (under the comm^^^ of Colonel Sir Henry Vaughan, formerly a
Member (...) House of Commons; but since one of the Juncto,) were about Witney
toward Farringdon; wherefore hoe drew that way, intending to fall upon them
the next morning, if he could reach them.

On Sunday the 27 of April, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell sent out Scouts to
discover the motions of Colonel Vaughan, and receiving advertisement where he
quartered near Bampton-Bush, he marched on that way, parting his Body into
several Squadrons, and with valiant courage marched up close to them; the
enemies having little courage to fight, (so terrible is the very name of
Cromwell to them) begged quarter for their lives, which was granted them; and
so Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell took there Colonel Sir Henry Vaughan, their
Commander in chief, 2 Lievtenant-Colonels, 1 Sargeant-Major, 5 Captains, 8
Lievtenants, 8 Ensigns, 1 Doctor, who was Chaplain to them, his name is
Dunse; 20 Sargeants, and other inferior Officers; 230 Prisoners, and about 200
Arms; some powder, match, and Ammunition, with such provisions as they had.
The rest of the day was spent in the public worship of God; and thanks was
given to the Lord (thorowout those our Armies, which were within hearing of the
great victories:) for the same.

On Monday the 28 of April, Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell marched toward
Abingdon with his Prisoners, and about one of the clock being come within three
miles of Abingdon, and some congratulations with Major-Generall Brown; he sent
his Prisoners to Abingdon, and a Convoy with them, himself marching to
Yeilford, having a further design, whereof (if God permit) he hopes to give a
good account in few days, for he is full of action, and performs all with
much gallantrie, even forgetting himself and his natural rest, to do the
Kingdom ^^^^hfull and opportune service.

(...) so indeed all his Soldiers, with one resolution, do equally express
so much valor for the good and safety of the Kingdom, as can be expected.

Thus have I in brief given you the sum of each days proceedings of those
several victories, which God has been pleased to give to Sir Thomas Fairfaxes
Forces, and Major-Generall Brownes on Thursday, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday
last.

And for your further satisfaction, here follows a perfect List of the
particulars of each victory.

A List of the particulars of each victory, as follows:
I. A List of Lieutenant General Cromwells Victory near Islip, the 24. of
April. 1645. 200. and odd killed and taken. 60. Drowned. 400. Horse taken. 3.
Colors taken. 20. Officers killed and taken. Their whole Body routed.
II. A List of what was taken ut Bletchington by Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell,
the 24. of April. 1645. 250. Muskets. 70. Horse. 3. Barrells of powder. 100.
Pikes, with other arms.
III. A List of what was taken by Major General Brown (near Farringdon) the
26. of April. 1645. 1. Captain. 3. Other Officers. 18. Prisoners. 14. Arms.
IV. A List of what Major General Brown took of a party coming from the
Devizes toward Oxford, April 26. 1645. Colonel Conquest. Serjeant-Major
Bamfield. 3. Captains. 3. Lievtenants, and other prisoners.
V. A List of what was taken by Colonel Fines at Witney, the 26. of April.
1645. 3. Colors. 10. Officers. 120. Horse. 40. Prisoners, and 50. Arms.
VI. A List of what was taken by Lievtenant-Generall Cromwell, at Bampton-Bush,
the 27. of April. 1645. Colonel Sir Henry Vaughan, one of the Junto, and
Commander in chief. Lievtenant-Colonell Lee. Lievtenant-Colonel Littleton
Serjeant-Major Lee. Captain Powell. Captain Webster. Captain Lee. Captain
Lewis. Captain Lister. 8. Lievtenants. 8. Ensigns. Doctor Dunse, Chaplain to
Col. Vaughan. 20. Sergeants, and other inferior Officers. 230. Prisoners. 200.
Arms, with some barrells of powder, match, and other provisions.

FINIS.

