SOME NOTES OR HEADS OF A PREFACE AND OF A LECTURE.

PREACHED AT DISTINCKORN-HILL:

IN THE PARISH OF GAASTOVN, April 25 1688.

By Master Alexander Shields Preacher of the Gospel.

Psalm, (...) Samuel (...). Cha^^* from the (...) Verse to the (...)

April 25, 1688. Some Notes or Heads of a PREFACE Preached at Distinckor^ Hill,
in the Parish of Gaastoun, by Mr. Alexander Shields, Preacher of the Gospel.
The 79 Psalm being Sung.
ALL our Songs this Day may be Sad Lamentation, for if we understood the Place
where we are: It is, by the Rivers of Babylon, and we ought to hang our Harps
on the Willows, and our Songs ought to be Songs of Mourning, and our Voice the
Voice of Weeping. And this is a very pertinent Song of Lamentation which we
have bee^^singing (Psalm 79.) and very appostle and proper for the Case of our
Day, when the Heathens have entered into onr Sanctuary, and laid Jerusalem on
Heaps; and the Gentiles are treading down our outer Courts And this will always
hold true, so long as bloody Papists do so much prevail, and the Blood of the
Lord's Servants (that aim at Faithfulness and contends for GOD) is shed like
water, and runs down like a River about our Jerusalem* We are become a Reproach
to our Neighbors, and made a corn and a Derision to them that are round about
us. And this may be matter of Lamentation to us, but if it were only so with
us, the matter were (...). But not only we are made a Reproach and a Derision,
but the Word of GOD, and the Cause of CHRIST, and the Covenanted Work of
Reformation is Reproached, and made a Lud^brium and a Laughing stock to the
Heathen round about us: To Papists, Atheists, Prelates and Malignants, and
Enemies one all hands. And when we look on the cruelty of Papists and
Malignants, and upon our dastardly Yeildings, our foolish Yeildings: Turn which
way we will, look before us, look behind us, look on every hand, we see matter
of sad Lamentation, and lad Significations of the Lord's Displeasure against
us: And this we must make mention and take notice of when we come before His
Presence, Who is this day, not only a Holy GOD, but an Angry GGD, who is
sh^wing His Wra^h in Characters of Blood. Ye may Remember the last time I was
in this Country, we did hear a very sad Subject suitable to Reflect upon. Which
was, our sears did then come upon us, and are come upon us since. I had News to
tell you then, and if a right use has not been made thereof, they will be
sadder, and sadder still. We say* (...) (...) have not been affected rightly,
and concerned with them, but have been ^ghting and not taking it to heart, they
will be sadder still: Then we were Alarmed with the sad and sudden surprising
Report of the Apprehending and taking of two Faithful Servants of JESUS CHRIST
who were contending for the Prerogatives of the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, and the Concerns of all the Churches, and the Depositum of the Church of
Scotland, who were let fall into the Enemies hands, and given up into the Holy
all-overruling Providence of GOD, to the Power of their murdering Enemies, One
thereof his Blood has been shed like Water since, which make this Song that we
have been singing very pertinent, and which may make all our Songs, Songs of
Mourning. For his Blood has a crying Language, and I fear that many has
forgotten it, that seemed to be affected with it then, and many is even
despising it. But I say that the Blood of that Faithful Servant of JESUS
CHRIST, Mr. James Renwick, has a Cry to the H^avens against this Generation.
And we shall show some things that is the Language of it: For we ought not to
forge^ it, for it is precious in the ^ight of GOD, and it ought to to be so in
our ^ight also: For if we forget it, it will Cry against us as well as others;
we o^ght to enquire into the Language of such a Dispensation, for it has a
very loud Cry to op^n Ears, and w^akened Consciences. And

First, It cries to us, That there is a dreadful day comingon this Generation,
when the Godly man perishes, and when the Righteous and Merciful Men are taken
away; it is always an Insallible Symptom of Wra^h to come, Isa. 57. 1. We have
all the Symp^oms of approaching Wrath, that ever a Generation had, for there
are many Righteous Men taken away by bloody Violent Men, who we^e Righteous in
their state, Righteous in their course, and Righteous in their Cause: Many also
merciful Men are taken away merciful Men who would ^ain have had the Generation
brought off from the evils of the Generation, and did spend their time and
strength for them that did not pity themselves, those were merciful Men; and
it is so much the more a Symptom of Wrath, that those Tokens are not taken
notice of, but are despised and made light of, and this does speak out a
surp^ising stroke, and the near approach of it, when People are crying Peace,
then behold sudden destruction, according 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3. And are not the
generality crying peace and safety, and what may we expect, but sudden
Destruction! For, O! it is an unhappy Peace, unhappy it is nature, and unhappy in
it is effects; For it is peace with the Enemies of God; yea, we have all the
procu^ing causes that ever brought down the Wrath of God on any Generation.

2dly. I Will tell you what the blood of that Martyr cries, and it is this, that
there is not only Wrath and Anger, impendent and hanging over our heads, but it
is also incumbent and lying on us already, and that his anger is not turned
away but his hand is stretched out still, and it is even against us in
particular, who are the persecuted party; and this calls us to search and try
our ways, that we may know what it is that the Lord contends with us for: And
indeed we may find in a very slight and overly search and enquiry, many
procuring causes of it on our part, O it says, we have slighted many Warnings
The Lord has been sending his Servants, rising up ^aily, and sending them, and
many of them have spent their blood, and for the most part, it seems to have
been in vain as to us, he has sent one still after another, but we d^d not
receive their Message as we should have d^ne, and we may fear, that he will
cease to contend any more with us, but will say to us, they are joined to their
Idols, let them alone. For many to this day have discove^ed a great deal of
their incorrigibl^ness, as the Lord before the Flood gave Warning to the Old
World by the Preaching of N^ah; He set a day to their Repentance (One Hundred
and Twenty Years) and after that they should get no more time to repent: It
c^m^s to this at leng^h, that he says, I will no more strive with them, I Will
say no more to them let them not away in their iniquities; and it seems to say
this, that the Lord has set a Day to Scotland's R^pentance and I (...) it be
(...) than many are looking for: The Lord is even saying, They shall have that
time and no longe^! H^ has suffered long, but now he is w^a^^ed with
Repenting: The^^fore the t^me is coming that he will say to Scotland as he said
to these in the 15 of Jer. 1, and 2 Verses, such as are for Death to Death, and
such as are for the Sword to the Sword; and such as are for the Famine to the
Famine, and such as are for the Captivity to the Captivity, and these that are
for Massacres to M^ssacres and these that are for Martyrdom to Martyrdom. But I
fear there shall be but few that shall be honored with Marty^dom, O! It says,
We have undervalued his Message and M^ssenger, and the Lord would not always
let him be contemned, but he has been provoked to take away Message and
Messenger, and altogether.

Thirdly, As it C^yes for Vengeance against all these that have had any
Accession to the shedding of it di^^ctly or indirectly: So i^ has another Cry
and they are D^^^ and D^ad that w^ll not take notice of it, and (...) it. And
it is this, That those who are now speaking so fair to this Generation, they
have Murder in their hearts: And it proclaims the Cruel^y of Bloody Pap^sts who
had ^he chiefest hand in it. And that tho many be crying up the Clemency of the
Tyrant on the Throne, yet it says, we have to do with Men that have Murder in
their Hearts, although they be now speaking fair, ^leechingly and Flatteringly to
this Generation; Yet when they speak fair, believe them not, for there are
seven Abominations in their Hearts. Though many be crying up the Leuity of the
Mutdering Enemies. The Lord was pleased to Alarm us with this Dispensation,
though to us very costly; Which says, that they have not changed their Nature,
they have the same Nature still: they have the same end, and Design still,
though they have changed their Methods and Measures a little, yet wherever they
find any Asserting the Testimony of the day, their Rage and Fury is as great
against them as ever: And it says, it is no time now to fall Asleep, and to cry
peace, and Safety: For the Lord is calling us to awaken, and when, the Lion
Roars, who will not fear? and when the Lord God has spoken, who can but
P^ophesie? But we by this pa^ticular see, that we have to do with Bloody
Papist^, although they be now speaking fair, alter all the Blood they have shed
both on Fie^ds, and on Scaffolds, and in the Seas; yet they have the same
Nature still they (...) same Captain, and they are Prosecuting the same Wa^
still against the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. The Drag^n and his Angels
is ma^^ging and carrying on the same War still against Michael and his Ang^ls
that he did forme^ly, though he had chauged his Method a little. O Scotland,
who has bewitched you? have you not had the Experi^nce of the Dreadfulness of
the Tre^chery and Cruelty of Papists before? and will ye believe them at their
first Word, Especially with a Tolleration; when the most part of the P^otestant
Churches of Europe have had a Taste of their Falsehood, and have been Cheated by
such a method. Was not the Protestants in France Cheated by such a Tolleration
granted to them by the Tyrant there? which when he saw sit, he took away; and
made them either to Renounce and Abjure their Religion, or then endure great
Sufferings. Was not the Protestants in the Value of Pi^dmont Ruined by making
Peace and Consederacy with the Duke of Savoy? And will nothing awaken us? O
poor Scotland, awaken ye and ^eep not now in Peace and Ease, for you have to do
with those that are intending nothing but Massacres, nothing but the Subversion
of Religion, and the utter Ruin and Overthrow of the Cove^anted Reformation,
and all that adhere to it. And they ar^ beguiled that thought the Devil was
grown better in his Old Age: For many thought (so to speak) that the Devil and
Antichrist were grown better i^ their Old Age by granting this Toleration.
Therefore has the Lord Allarmed us by this Dispensation: He would take one of
his Jewels and let him fall into their Hands, and suffer them to discover their
Bloodiness upon him and thereby let us see whom we have to do with. It has
this Language with it; and woe to them that will not hear it.

Fourthly, It has another Cry, for as little as ye may think of it: Yet it
has this Language with it, that there is a very sad Defection this day, and
that there are few Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth. We may say as Jeremiah
says, Chap. 9 He Complains sadly in such a Case, and says, Oh! that my head
were Waters, and mine Eyes a Fountain of Tears, that I might Weep day and Night
for the Slain of the Daughter of my People. Oh! that I had in the Wilderness a
lodging-place of way: faring-men, that I might leave my People, and go from
them. For they be all Adulterers, an Assembly of Treacherous men: And they Bend
their Tongues like their Bows for Lies: But they are not Valiant for the Truth
upon the Earth. What way does it sig^ifie this ye'll say? Then I Will tell You,
none can be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and Faithful for Christ, but
he will be exposed to the Cruelty and Rage of His Bloodies Antichristian
Enemies; it has been so always, and will be so. For Michael and the Dragon are
two Parties; and there must be a War kept up by all the Lord's Called, and
Chosen, and Faithful, against the Dragon and Antichrist, without any Cessation,
Truce or Transaction with them; And if any will discover any measure of
Valiantness for the Cause, or will be Zealous for Christ; then he must exp^ct
for the Fury of all the World. He may look for the Rage of the Devil and of
Antichrist of Papists, Prelates and Malignants to be against him: For where
Satan has his Seat on the Throne of the Kingdom, the poor Antipas must s^ffer
Martyrdom (Rev. 2, 14.) I say it speaks out much Desection, when those that
pretend to be for the Truth on the Earth, and those that should contend for the
Truth, gets leave to enjoy all their Liberties from Enemies.

For it cannot be, neither was it ever seen, but all that were Valiant for the
Truth, and Zealous for the Cause of Christ, but they had all the Enemies of
Truth upon their Top. And these that now have peace, it says they are not so
now, for the Covenants are not only broken and burnt, but Declared Criminal to
be owned; and the Covenanted Reformation like to be Ruined and razed: And when
there is so much peace with Antichrist, it is a Wrath-prefaging thing, a Wrath
procuring thing. And his Blood cries for Vengeance against all those who have
been seeking to have peace with the Enemies of GOD, that have encroached on all
His Prerogatives. For those who would be Zealous in Adhering to, and contending
for those things, must expect to have all Truths Euemies against them. And now
when an Absolute Power (which is the incommunicable Prerogative of JEHOVAH) is
arrogate by the Tyrant now upon the Throne, a Vassal of Antichrist: And this
Power Recognosced, by the accepting and embracing of the Toleration which flows
from it, and when Popery is like to come in at this Gap, and be established,
any who would be Faithful in Witnessing against those things, and would be
Zealous in contending for the Prerogatives of CHRIST, and the Privileges of His
Church, may look and expect to have the Fury and Rage of all Christ's Enemies
bent against them. But now when there is so much silence as to those things,
and so great enjoying of Peace and Quietness: it says, there is a great
Delection, and that there is few Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth. Nay,
many have bought Ease at the rate of Selling the Truth.

Fifthly, I Will tell you what it proclaims, and it is that, that Jeremiah
complains of in his day, Chap. 9. 3. That many has bent their Tongues like
their Bows for Lies: But they were not valiant for the Truth. Yet there was a
great deal of Zeal in the Witnesses of God in that day; So it cries for
Vengeance against the Shedders; also it proclaims shame and ignominy on lying
Tongues that reproaches Truths Sufferers. And it proclaims sad things to those
who were guilty of reproaching him; and if this had been among Enemies, the
matter had been less: For we would think it a Reproach not to be Reproached by
the Enemies of God. But to be reproached by these who are not only Protestants,
but Covenanted Presbyterians, it is very sad: Yet those who are now above the
reach of reproaching Tongues have met with it first and last. For from the
Death of Mr. James Guthrie, till Mr. James Renwick suffered, all the faithful
and Zealous Ministers of Christ were reproached: Was not Mr: James Guthrie
called a Fool? Was not Mr. Kid and Mr. King called Jesuits? And was not Mr.
Donald Cargil and Mr. Richard Cameron called the same? And what Reproaches and
Calumnies that could be broached out of Hell, was not cast on Mr. James
Renwick? He was seen at Masses, and in League with the Enemies, and they would
not stir not trouble him, I cannot rehearse the one hall of them, but the Lord
has Vindicated his Servant of them all, though dear to us. But his blood Cries
aloud against those Reproaches, ye would take notice of it, and not think it a
light matter to reproach the Servants of the Living God: For there is no part
of the present Testimony that we have Witnessed for, and that we do own, but it
is sounded upon the word of God, the Confession of Faith, and the Constitution
of the Covenanted Church of Scotland, we are able to make this out. Wherefore
in Reproaching us, ye Reproach the Living God, the Cause of Christ and the
Covenanted Reformation of the Church of Scotland. But, O it is sad, that those
that are Presbyterians have such Arguments against us, for all their Arguments
are such as Papists have; all have the same Arguments against us, and cast the
same Reproaches upon us: For not only all the Papists, Prelates, and Malignants
of the Land, but also our Declining Brethren Ministers and Professors, use one
and the same Arguments against us, and casts the same reproaches upon us: But
we have this Advantage by it, that all our Enemies are on the one hand, which
makes it the easier to deal with them. What can any say against us? But all the
Papists and Malignants in the Lord will say so too: So we have them all upon
the left hand, and none upon the Right, I say, there is very much to be learned
by this bloody Dispensation. For the Papists are begun to their bloody
Pract^c^s; from which it is to be Learned (...) they will not be restrained,
until they do strange bloody Works, for it is their nature; and they cannot be
restrained from it, and it ought to have a dreadful cry in our Ears.

Sixthly, It has another Cry, which is this, as it c^ys for Vengeance against
all the Shedders, and all that have any acc^ssion to the she^^ing of it: So it
calls aloud to us, to enquire into the Heads for which he suffered; least we be
found Trample^s on his Blood. The Testimony against this Antichristian
Tolleration is now Sealed with Blood. The Testimony against this present
Tyrrannical Government of this Duke of York is now Sealed with Blood. The
Testimony of the Gospel Ordinances dispensed by Christ's Faithful Servants in
the persecuted Field-Meetings, is now Sealed with Blood. The testimony for
Defensive Arms is now Sealed with Blood He testified against that Land
destroying fin, the paying of the Cess and the Locality, for bearing down the
Free Preaching of the Gospel (which was never Settled before) And let me tell
you, O ye Cess Payers, for I know that there are many of you here: I have sad
News to tell you, and whether you will hear or forbear, I must tell you it: but
I would counsel you to hear and forbear the Pr^ctice of paying it^ I say, I
must tell you from the Lord, that ye are Guilty of the Murder of the Lord's
People, and of this Martyr's blood amongst the rest, which testified against
it, and Sealed it with his Blood: Nay, Let me tell you more, ye are guilty of
the sheding of the blood of Jesus Christ, and Crucifieing of Him afresh: For ye
have given your concurrence and your helping hand to the Crucifyiug Christ
afresh again in Scotland, for Christ has been as really Crucified in Scotland,
as He was upon Mount Calvary without the Gates of Jerusalem, and ye are as
gui^^y of his Blood as the Soldiers who did it. Ye may think this strange, but
it is true, for there is such a thing as the Crucifieing of Christ afresh, Heb.
6. 9. And Christ may be crucified again Mystically in his Truths, Cause, and
Members, when his Truth and Cause are Opposed, Contradicted and Reproached, and
his Members Murdered by wicked bloody Enemies, then is He Mystically crucified
afresh, and put to open shame. And in Scotland, is not his Truths and Cause
opposed, Contradicted and Reproached, and his Members Murdered? Did not the
wicked Convention and Parliament who laid on the Cess tell you in the Narrative
of their Acts, that it was for suppressing of Field Meetings, called by them
the Randevouzes of Rebellion! So term they the Meetings of the Lords People for
Gospel Ordinances: So that they have not lest you ignorant of that wherefore
they required it; which was, to Banish Christ and his Gospel out of the Land,
and to Murder all his Servants and People who would avow and avouch their
Adherance to the same: And they required your help and supply to get this
wicked turn done. which I dare aver in the sight of Heaven, ye are Christ's
Murderers, and the Murderers of all the Saints that has been Murdered since:
For you have bought the Swords that did it; and you have bought the Ropes that
hanged them, and if you had not been the Hangmen your selves, you could have
done no more, for it was told you, that it was for that end.

Then again in the Paying of it* it has this Aggravation, that it is against
Light; Ye are convinced it is a Sin: For many of you, if we come to you and
speak about it, ye will confess it is a Sin, and yet ye go on in the Paying of
it without any Excuse: O that is dreadful! will Ye but consider the sinfulness
of it? You dare not deny but it is a Breach of Covenant, and that it is against
the Acts of our Ass^mblies; and the Word of GOD condemns it: And yet Ye pay it,
that Ye might keep Your Houses and enjoy Your Land. O there shall be a Curse
lying on Houses and that have preferred them to the Blessed and Glorious
Gosp^l, the Cause of a Ma^llings, broken Covenant, the Blood of his Murdered
Servants, and the Guilt of crucifieing of CHRIST afresh shall ly on You; and
the Blood of this Martyr that Suffered last, who Testified against that sin;
cries for Vengeance against You, for it was never before Sealed with Blood, and
that gives us to Mark it the more. And if You will not hear and forbear it, an
Europe shall hear of the Terrible Judgments that shall come upon You, for the
promoting, Maintaining and Helping forward this Heaven-daring-revolt against
the SON of the Most HIGH. Now I would have You to consider what his Blood cries
to You for; and say it to Hear^; for it call^ You to Esteem, Love, and conteud
for those Truth^ which he Sealed with his Blood: For they are worthy of the
Lives of Thousands. Yea, ev^n of all the Wo^ld: The least of Christ's Truths,
is worth the Lives of all the World; much more such great Truths.

I thought I would tell You this in the Entry. Now let us compose our selves,
and (...) our selves in the Sig^t of this Great GOD, and beg His Presence and
Assistance to what we are about. Let us pray.

April 15. 1688. Some Notes or Heads of a LECTVRE Preached at Distinckorn-Hill
in the Parish of Gaastoun, by Mr. Alexander Shields, Preacher of the Gospel.
Upon 1. Samuel 15. Chap, from the 13 verse to the 24*
THe People of Ireal and the People of Scotland a^e very like other: they have
been equal in ^rivileges and they have been equal in Sin^, They were a special
privileged people, as war in all the World. They were a Covenanted people, a
peculiar people, They were likewise a very treache^our people, and guilty of
many breaches of Covenant. They were unsteadfast and changeable, they could not
stay long at one thing; and they were a very Loyal people: Yea, and sometimes a
wicked Loyal people. They would have a King like the rest of the Nations. Well,
the Lord gave them a King in His Anger, and took him away in His Wrath. They
might well have wanted a King; for they had a very good Government before, They
had the Lord to be their King: And He raised them up Judges fi^ed for Governing
and Ruling aright Therefore because they desired this Change, The Lord says
unto Samuel, hearken unto them, for the^ have not rejected thee, but they have
rejected Me, that I should not Reign over them. Well, the Lord gave them one,
but such an one that made the Child to weep that was unborn. Well, he began
right well. And the Lord is here taking a Proof of him, whether he would
perform Obedience to his Command or not; and he puts him on this piece of
Service to go and Execute Vengeance on Amalek which was a Necessar Duty, a
Moral Duty, for they were to have War with Amalek for ever. For the Lord had
given a particular Charge to the Children of Is^ael, Deuteronomy, 25 and last verse.
To blot ou^ the Remembrance of Amalek from under the Heaven, and not to forget
it: And the Lord pu^s this in the hands of Saul to discover his Hypocrisy, I
shall go no further on the Introduction, but to lead to ^he Application to our
Case.

We have Amalek to deal wi^h; for Amalek does Typifie all the Enemies of the
Church in general, and has a Reference to them in these Words that we have
Read: There is these six or seven Things contai^ed,

There is First, the Meeting of Samuel and Saul together in that 13^ verse and
that Me^ting was little for Readiness profit: Poor Samuel in the Night before
(when he heard that he disobeyed the Command of the Lord) had been Weeping and
Crying all Night to GOD for him; And he^e he comes to him, and he came with an
Intention to be free with Saul.

We have Secondly Saul's accosting the Prophet; he took the first word and
spoke, wherein are two things First Saul's Hypocritical Salutation of Samuel,
and Saul said unto him, blessed be thou of the Lord. 2ly, his Vaun^ing of his
Performances I have performed the Commandment of the Lord: He began to justify
himself. We have

Thirdly, The Prophets Challenging of him in the 14 verse, as if he said, have
ye done so? have ye performed the Commandment of the Lord? What means then the
bleating of the sheep, and the l^wing, of the Oxen in mine ears? For you get a
Commission to go and Destroy these and cursed Am^lekites, and all that
appertained to them. G^d's Command was to cut off all, and if ye have done it,
what means all this Din then? Every Rout of the Oxen, and every Bleat of the
sheep, declares you to be a Rebel against GOD.

Fourthly, We have (...) Excuse, and Extenuation of his sin: It was the people
that did it, not I; and they d^d it for a good End, viz. That they might take
of those sheep and oxen to Sacrifice unto the Lord in Gilgall.

Fifthly, We have the Prophets pressing home the Charge with many aggravating
Circumstances to the 16* 17. 18 19. verses: As if the Prophet had said, well,
you Excuse your self, but I must be free with you; remember this, that y^u may
see the Aggravation of your sin: Remember what you were when God advanced you?
Ye were little in your own fight when you were An inted King over I^rael: And
further you were then put in a Capacity to do the Will of God, and (...) Obey
His Command. And then the Lord was very particular with you, To go and destroy,
and root cut these Cursed Amal^kites; but ye have not obeyed His Voice, but
have Rebelled against him.

Sixthly, We have Readiness persisting in his justifying of himself in the 20
verse. Yea, I have Obeyed the Voice of the Lord, and have gone the Way that the
Lord sent me; and I have brought Agag the King of Amalek, and have utterly
Destroyed the Amalekites; but the People to^k of the Spot^, Sheep and Oxen to
Sacrifice unto the Lord thy God in Gisgall. He would not give over the Plea,
what they had done, they had done it for a good End.

And then in the Seventh place, We have the Prophets convincing him of his
Rebellions in the 22, 23 Verses; as if he had said, a Sacrifice, what cares the
Lord for your Sacrifice, or you either? He loves Obedience better than
S^crifice. Will ye serve God in your own way? No, he will be served in his own
way: But now ye are not his Servant, seeing ye have Disobeyed his Comm^nd; ye
are but a Rebel.

Then in the last place, We have the Sentence that the Prophet pronounces
against this Rebel: As if he had said, seeing ye have Dis^beyed his Command, He
has taken away and invalidate your Authority; ye may have the Title and the
Name for a while, but ye are no more King over Israel; He will have no more of
your Service. So these are the particulars of the words which we have read, and
we shall go over them again, and speak a little to each of them as time will
allow, applying them to our times.

The First thing then is the Meeting of the Prophet and this Hypocritical King:
The Lord had told Samuel in the Night before, how He was Displeased with S^ul,
and that he had Rej^cted him, and would not have him to be King any longer: And
the Prophet Weeps all the N^ght over for poor Saul. This was his Exercise, for
if he could have gotten the W^ath and Anger of the Lord turned away from Saul,
he would (...) have had it done as we should all of us do, We should not desire
the Evil day on any; but should (...) for the sins of Enemies, and for the
Judgments of Enemies: So likeways we should them. And he went from one place
to another till he gets Saul to witness against (...) 12 Verse. And when Samuel
^rose early to meet Saul, in the morning it was told Samu^ saying Saul came to
Carmel and behold, he set him upon a place, and is gone about, at passed on,
and gone down to Gi^gall.

Whence we Observe, when judges or any in Eminent Note Rebel against God, all
the Servants of God should not only mourn over them in secret, but witness
against them publicly, as Samuel did. Ministers should be free, and Faithful
in preaching against the sins of every one who ever be offended, this is a
clear Duty, it Ye will consider these two or three things, First Why this
should be done. 2dly. Who is the Object against whom they should witness. 3dly.
When is the time that this should be done.

First then, Why Rebellion should be witnessed against be in whom it will,
which is a duty very much slighted in our D^y: We should not suffer sin upon
our B^other, when we see him sin, we suffer sin upon him when we do not reprove
him, and the not reproving of him, is a ^ating of him. We hate our Brother when
we do not tell him of his Sin, and they are guilty of their blood, 33 Ezekiel,
They that do not d^clare the whole Coun^el of God, cannot say that they are
free of the blood of all Men: They should tell what are their sins, and that
they should repent of their sins.

Secondly, It is clear, If ye will consider the Names that Ministers get in
Scripture, as Watchmen, and those must ^et the Trumpet to their Mouth, and give
Warning when the sea danger coming, otherways they are guilty of their Bl^od.
And also it is clear from what they have in Commission, 58 of ^a. They must cry
aloud and not spare, and lift up their Voice like a Trumpet, and show the Lords
People their Transgressi^ns, and the House of Jac^b their Sins: Zek. 16 2.
Cause Jerusalem know her abominati^ns, Zek. 20. 4 Cause them to know their
Fathers Sins. And when Ministers does not this, they cannot say with Paul, That
they are free from the blood of all Men. Acts 28. Seeing if they do not tell the
People of their Sins, they have shu^ned to declare unto them all the Counsel of
God: F^r how can People Repent of and mourn for those sins that they do not
know nor told of; There is many a Direction to the Servants of God to declare
against the Sins of his People, and they should make their Witness against
public sins, as public as they can.

Thirdly, It is clear, if ye will consider, that there is no way left to avert
the Wrath of God from the whole Land, but a public pl^ading against those
sins: For we find that for Saul's Sin, there was Three Years Famine on the whole
Land. For David's sin of Numbering the People, there fell of the People Ten
Thousand* And for Man (...) sin the Ears of all Judah was made to ^in, let So
as upon the one hand, the sins of ^ulers b^ings on the Wrath of God on a Land*
So upon the other hand the unfaithfulness of Ministers in not giving faithful
Warning, and telling the People their sin and Du^y, brings Wrath upon the whole
Land, Lev 10. 6. And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Eleazar, and unto ^^hamar
his Son, uncover not your Heads, neither rent your Clothes least you die, and
least Wrath come upon all the People, Isa 44. 43. Jer. 14 13. Micha 3, ^ad 5.
Where it is clearly insinuated, that the sins and unfait^fulness of Ministers
brings Wrath upon a^l the People. N^w I say, there is no other way lest to
avert the Wrath of God from a Land but public pleading for Truth and against
Sin and Defection, which is clear, Isa. 59 15 16 Verses, Yea truth falls, and
he that departs from Evil, makes himself a prey, And the Lord saw it* and it
displeassed Him, that there was no Judgment, and He saw that there was no Man,
and wondered that there was no Intercessor. And Jer. 5 1. Run ye to and from
through the Streets of Jerusalem, and see now and know, and seek in the broad
places thereof, if ye can find a Man, if there be any that executes Judgment
and seeks the Truth, and I will pardon it: As if the Lord would say. Now I am
going to bring Judgment on the Land, and if ye can get any that executes
Judgment and seeks the Truth, I will turn away my Wrath: And in the 9 of Jer.
3 verse They are not Val^ant for the Truth. And Ezekiel. 22. 30. And I fought for
a Man among them that should make up the Hedge and stand in the Gap (before ME)
for the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none: Theref^re have I
poured cut my Indignati^n upon them; I have consumed them with the Fire of my
Wrath. Where we may see, if there had been any to make up the Hedge and stand
in the Gap (Before ME) the Land would not have been destroyed. We may see
likewise from this, that Ministers should not only be free and Faithful in
Witn^ssing for Truth, but they must wrestle with G^d as well as for God, and
their Wi^n^ss must be as public as can be, f^r the expressions of seeking the
truth, and m^king up the Hed^e does import i^, seeing these cannot be done bu^
in a public manner: But alas! There is n^ne found this day to stand in the
Gap, and to plead with their Mother, tha^ she should put away her Whoredom and
Defections, yet it is the only way to turn away Wrath for all that, Ho^ea 2. 2.
Ala! We have few in Scotland this day to Wres^le, Mourn and Plead: And yet
every Rebellion that it done against G^d, when we do not declare against it, we
declare our selves guilty of concealing Treason.

Secondly, Against whom should we Witness? against all, Great or Sin ^ll, they
must not Spare t^em when they Sin? either (...) Fear or Fav^ur. So we find
Samuel here did Witness against Saul, and Nathan the Prophet did Witness
against David, Hanani the Seir against Assa, and against J^h^shaphat. So we
find ^^aiah did Witness against Hezekiah Elijah against Jerobeam, and Elijah
against Achab. Yea many times these Examples has been ^d^uced to us to Witness
against all Sins be (...) it will; Especially M^nisters should preach against
the sins of Tyrants Our ancient Re^^^mers at the beginning or the Reformation,
made use of the freedom and faithfulness of the Prophets in reproving the sins
of the King of Judah and Israel, to prove the lawfuln^ss of what they did, in
reproving, the sins of the Great Folk in their time. And some of t^en took the
Freed^m to say there is many Folk now a days, that will h^ve no other Religion
than the Queens, and the Queen will have no other Religion than the Cardinals,
and the Cardinal will have no other Religion than the (...); and the P^pe will
have no other Religion than what pleases the D^vi^: And so it may be said of
many in our d^y; Many will have no other Minister but such as pleases the King,
the King does n^thing but that pleases the Pope, the Pope d^es nothing but what
pleases the Devil! And look Ye and see what sort of Preaching that must be then
Have ye not a brave Tolleration of it then? For upon these Terms was it given;
That Ministers should preach nothing that war Se^it^^us ^r Treasonable or might
any way tend to al^enat the hearts of the People from the King and his
Government: And what is that? But that they should preach nothing against the
sins of the Time, nothing of the Tyranny of the Time, n^thing against that
Abs^lute Power he has arrogated, nothing of the Incoming of P^pery at the Gate
and Gap of this Tolleration, nor of the Snares of the Times, not what was the
People's Duty in such a Case; for that would be Sedit^^us by the King, the
Pope, And christ, and the Devil! And alas! it is sad (...), that this
Toleration is complied with, and that the Freedom and Faithfulness that should
be used in these things, is forborne by the Ministers that Preaches in the
Meeting Houses, for this pleases the King and the Pope, and the Devil well.

Thirdly, When is the time that Ministers should be thus Free, Faithful and
Public to Witness against public sins, Samuel took a very fit time to reprove
and convince Saul, just after the committing of the sin: And if ever there was
a time to Witness against public Sins, this is it: But in Answer to this. I
shall show you from Scripture: when is the time and Season of giving a public
Witness and Testimony for Truth and against Sin. As first, when Enemies are
relenting a little from their Cru^lty, former Rage and Fury against the Lord's
People, yields somewhat, and offers Liberty upon easier Terms than before; when
they are very accommodating and yielding, then that is the ver^ Season of a
Testimony for Truth, without yiedling in the least to them Thus it was with
Pharaoh, he was very stubborn at first, but after that he had kept the
Children of ^rael long in ^ond, he yields much, and grants to let them go upon
condition that they would let him but keep some of the Sheep; but Moses thought
this a fit time of giving a Testimony; he would not yield to Pharaoh in this,
not a Hoof says Moses shall be left behind us, and we should all be Slaves this
Hundred Years, N^y though we should never be delivered. The Tyrant upon the
Throat has somewhat relented of his former Fury, he has yielded somewhat, and
offers Accommodation with the Lord's People, but yet upon c^ndition^
Destructive to the cause of Christ: Then now is a time of giving a Testimony,
declaring, th^^ we will not quite one H^of of Truth, nor yield to him in the
feast: So when ever Enemies will be pleased with less than formerly, that is
the time to testify against Sin.

Secondly, When ever there is a Tolerati^n granted when Idolatry and I^^laters
is Tolerated, as in Jud^es, 20. The Children (...) to the Cananites, there
came an Angel of the Lord, to wit a Pr^phet and testified against them. And
Soul h^re had given a Toleration to Agag, by sparing of his Life, Sam^^^
testified against him, and t^ld him, that he was but a Rebel to (...) for the
doing if it^ (...) when (...) gave a Tolerati^n to (...) he called him his
Brother and (...) his Life there comes a Pr^phet (...) the Lord and reprove^
him, 1 Kings ^0, and says, Thy Life shall go (...) his Life, and (...) People
(...) As also when Ah^z to^k a Toleration from the A^syrious, and entered into
(...) Ass^ci^tion and Confederacy, with Tiglath Pelezar King ^f (...), the
Prophet (...) thought this the Season of giving a Testimony Chap 8, 12: Sa^ ye,
(...) a Con^ederacy to all them to whom this People shall say a C^n^ederacy And
is not n^w Idolatry and Idolaters Tolerated, is not Papists and Quakers
Tolerated? Then this is the time of giving a Testimony for Truth, and against
every thing contrar^ to it.

Then Thirdly, When People are halting between two Opinions; then is the time
of giving a Testimony, as Elijah the Prophet did 1 Kings 18. When the Children
of Israel were halting between two Opinions, he showed himself to Achab, who
has s^ught his Life many a day before, And at this time many People are halting
between tw^ Opinions; for some will go to the Curats one day, and to the
Tolerated Meetings another, and come to the Field Meetings the Third, then this
is the time of giving a Testimony. For we must tell you, not to halt between
two Opinions, and as Elijah said to them. if the Lord be God, follow Him, but
if Beal* then follow Him: So we say unto you, if ye be for God then avouch it
and of you be for Antichrist, then be for Antichrist, it is no time now to keep
Peace both with CHRIST and Antichrist, for it is a thing imp^ssible.

Fourthly, When the wicked are very high in Power, as H^man in the Days of
Mordecal, then is the time of giving a Testimony: as we see Mordee^^ did he
would not Reverence him, nor reveal his Cap to him, though his Life should have
gone for it, and the Life of all the Jews. So now, is not now the Papists high
in Power! Hosea 8 1 Set ye the Trumpet to thy mouth, and what shall he sound
when he has it there? Even this among these things, Verse 4. They have set up
Kings but not by me: They have set up a Popish Tyrant upon the Throne of
Britain, for which the Wrath of God shall come on this Land. When Enemies are
come to a great height of Heaven daring Wickedness, is it not then a time for
Ministers to preach freely against them: To set the Trumpet to their mouth and
give a certain sound. O it was the Duty of all the Ministers in Scotland when
ever this Popish Tyrant mounted the Throne, to have set the Trumpet to their
Mouth and sounded an Alarm; and to have given the People Warning of the great
danger they were in; thereby they should have told them, they have set up a
Tyrant yonder upon the Throne of Britain and Ireland, who is seeking to Subvert
and overturn Religion, and all the Liberties of Mankind, and he has now
arrogate to himself an absolute Power, whereby he may do what he pleases. O
therefore have a care of your selves, have nothing ado with him, make no
Bargain or Transaction with them.

Fifthly, When the Servants of God are in hazard to be destroyed for the
Testimony, and are to be massacred and murdered by Cruel bloody Enemies, then
is the Season of a Testimony, and appearing publicly, to tell the People the
hazard in orde^ to the preventing of the same, as we see in the case of
Mord^cai and Esther, when the Jews were in hazard to be massacred and murdered.
And now are we not all as really in hazard to be massacred and murdered as ever
the Jews were? For it is well known, that the Papists have as great hatred at
a^l Pre^byterians as they had at the Jews, and is not this the time of giving a
Testim^ny against them? Alas! it is sad to see many at peace with Papists, and
like to live in Neighbourh^od with them But I must tell you it, there is not a
Man this day in Scotland at Peace with Papists, but he is a R^bel to Christ:
For if he were faithful to Christ, then he mi^ht exp^ct to have Satan and all
his Instruments on his top.

Sixthly, The time (...) Defecti^n, especially the time of Defections of
Ministers is the season of giving a public Testimony so Truth against them, as
we see in the 13 of Ezekiel: 2 verse He it bidden Prophecy against the Prophets,
and also he is bidden tell them they are but Daubers and that the Wall should
^all which they had daubed with untempered Mortar* and we have also this to
m^k^ the S^^s^n^f^ a public Testimony for truth, and we should look upon the
havin^, of it as matter of Sorrow and Lamentation. But alas? has not many
M^^^sters this day g^ne on in sad st^ps of De^ection, are they not daubing with
Untempered Mortar? This should be told them that they are unfaithful to Christ
in doing such things, and that by their so doing, that they bring not only the
Wrath of GOD upon themselves but upon the wh^le Land.

Seventhly, When the Testimony is discharged, and Duty interdicted by Law, then
is the very Season for a Testimony for it: As in Daniel's time, when Prayers
were interdicted by Law, he would pr^^ then as well as ever; though he was a
very wise man, and no Pharisee, yet he not only disobeyed the wicked Law, but
he wou^d let his Enemies know it, that he did not ^bey it by opening his
windows. And have we not this also to make this the very season of a Testimony
for truth and against enemies, when the Covenants are not only broken and
burnt, but declared Criminal to be owned, and this makes it the very time of
declaring publicly the Obliga^ion thereof upon us, and our Adherence
thereunto. Likewise is not Field-Meetings (which the LORD many times signally
countenanced) strictly interdicted by a wicked Law and discha^ged under pain of
Death; and this makes it to be an inavoidable Testimony to keep them up, (...)
blood should be mingled with our Sacr^fice. Now by these things may we not see
when ^he Se^son is for giving a public Testimony for Truth, and against the
Enemies there^f. And (...) have all these concur^ing in our C^se, which makes
the giving of a public Testimony for Truth, and against in Enemies an
indispensible Duty: For in our Case the Object is ^eat. Now ^hen the
Prerogatives of CHRIST, Who is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth is usu^ped
by this Absolute Power which the Tyrant upon the Throne (this V^sse^ (...)
Antichrist) has blasphemously arrogated to himself. When this Popish Tyrant
claim this absolute Power to himself, and when the Privileges of the Church and
Liberties of Mankind is encroached upon by this Monster, and when the Wrath of
God is burning against the Generation* (...) then to keep silence: O who ca^
hold his Peace, The Lion has Roared who can but (...). There is none can hold
their Tongue that has any Zeal for the G^d of Israel, No, he, they cannot.

Secondly, The second thing to be considered, is, Readiness acc^sting of Samuel
when they were met; Saul took the first word, for he had an ill Conscience in
this. There is these two things, First, (...) flattering Complement., just like
the Flatterers in our day. Secondly, A flauoring Profession. First then, There
is here a flattering Complement; and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou of the
Lord; O Terrible! this was a taking of the Lords Name (...) vain

Hence we observe, That H^pocritical Enemies of God are sometimes very free of
their Complements, and oftimes are very ready to ble^s as Saul was here; but
their Blessing had better been wanting, for they are nothing worth. We find
this Expression very frequent, blessed be thou of the Lord: As First, When any
body gives them any thing, then they will get their Blessing for it; as we see
Micah^s Mother did, when he told her, that he had the eleven hundred Shekels of
Silver, about which she had cursed; and she said, Bl^ssed be thou of the Lord
my Son, Judges 17, 2. So if any Body will give the Enemies any thing they may
expect their Blessing; but they will not be much the Richer of it when they
have gotten it. Secondly, When any Body makes any Address to them, or help them
to do an ^ll Turn, then they will get their Blessing for i^: As when the
Ziph^tes, these Intelligencers came and told Saul where David was and Saul said
Bl^ssed be ye of the Lord as if he had said, Blessed be ye of the Lord, for ye
are ^oyal Subjects, seeing ye come to tell me where my Enemy David h^un^s,
ble^^ed be ye. Thirdly, When such an Occasi^n is put it into the Hands of the
Lords People, as that they man cut them off, and they spare them; as when David
spared Saul's Life, 1 Samuel 24 16. Blessed be thou my Son David, thou shall
prevail, says Hypocritical Saul, And Fourthlie, When they have done an ill
Turn, to stop the mouths of Reprovers, they will say, they have not sinned as
the Papists have d^ne this d^y. Fifthlie, When they have a mind to do an ill
Turn to any, then they will speak fair, and fall to their Complements as we
see Joab did when he killed Am^sa 2 Samuel 20. 9 It is said Proverbs 26, 25.
When they speak fair, believe them not, for there are seven Abominations in
their heart..

Well, one word by way of Application: There are many in Scotland, has win the
Blessing of Enemies; well, hold them with it, but it is not much worth when
they have gotten it will do them little good. Many of you by Com^lying in
hearing of Curats, taking of Oaths and Bonds, and paying the Cess, have win
Antichris^s Blessing, and the Devil's Blessing; but when ye have gotten it, you
will win nothing by it, not be the Richer b^ it, And many of you by embracing
this Tolleration, have given your Helping hand, when they are going to set up
Dagon, and when you ly by from giving a Testimony against it, and when there is
such smooth preaching that will trouble Antichrist much, O but he will be well
pleased with it. Oh! consider it, Ye who have had any hand in this? for Ye have
given your Helping hand to set up Poper^e, and so you have got their Blessing.

The second thing to be considered an Readiness accosting of Samuel, (...), Readiness
Flau^^ing profession, I have performed the Commandment of the LORD, I shall
note this from it, That Hipocrites are very ready to make a show of their
Profession, and to ^unt of their performances, which is alwise the Mark of a
Hipocrite. For if Ye would speak to some Folk, they will tell You that they
have done as much and suffered as much for the Cause as any, and they will make
a show of their Profession, and boast of their Performances often times for these
ends. (...) To be in Favor with People, that they may esteem much of them
(...) ^erformances:) seeking to be advanced; they ^ill tell you, they have done
(...) Duty and the (...) Duty; and O out they have done much for the LORD. O
this is (...) in His Sight (...) of what he had done, when he said, Come with
me, and see (...) the LORD, 2 King^ (...) So many Hypocrites in Scotland have
made a great ^in of their profession, and (...) of what they had done, that
they might be much este^med, and in Favor with people: Many (...) their
Talking of owning the Covenant, a (...) to moun^ themselves into the (...) of
Pre^^ment, who have helped to But^ i^ since; it which the LORD's Sp^^^ has been
grieved. Secondly, (...) did boast of their pretended performances, and do make
them a sc^gg to (...) their Knavery (...); whereas their pre^enc^ is, to ^^ke
themselves Rich: I have done bravely, says he, This (...) been much in
Scotland: Many have had a great show of P^^^^ssion, and ^^^gged much of that
they had done. So, many Fo^ks will ^^ke up a Profession of Re^igion, to (...)
t^eir Knavery (...) bu^ GOD will discover such to (...) shame. There will some
Folks appear for the Lord with (...) Sworns; w^ereas their En^ is to make
themselves Rich: For there (...) many who came out (...) Bridge, that came out
for no other End, (...) to get a Booty and a Spoil, to make themselves Rich*
Thirdly, H^pocrites (...) much o^ their Performances, that they may persuade
others to sin; and all that I can say for this End, is, as (...) to allu^e
People to that which is sinful. Tu^ W^^rish Woman spoken of by (...)* Prove 4
When she is allu^ing the Young Men to commit Fornication with her, she make^
use of this is ^n Argument to persuade him, 14 Ver. I have Peace-Off^rings with
me this day; I have performed my Vows. So when they would have others to concur
in a Conspiracy with them, they are brave Men then, and they will talk much o^
their performances. They boast of their Performances, that they may make the
some a Prop to le^n upon: They have nothing to bragg of but their own works,
and they build upon that, and go about to establish their own Righ^eousness;
and some Folks lean upon their own principles, great profession, and much
suff^ring. O ^our (...) Foundation! poor Saul thought that what he had done
would me^it Favor from GOD: so Hypo^^i^es lean on many things (that are not
CHRIST) as props. Lastly, Hypocrites may make their great p^ofession and
performances, a ple^ to extenuate and defend, and justify their (...); as Saul
did here to just^fie and ex^enuate his sin of disobeying the Commandment o^ the
LORD, I have performed the Commendment of the Lord. So alas! for a (...)
De^ections that have been in Scotland, for which the Heavens may stand
astonished, and all N^^io^s that have (...): Yet this is the common plea, and
pretext of many Complyers to ex^enuat their De^^ction: Yet they will say, O
they have performed the Commandment of the LORD, they have done much, and
suffe^ed much. Ay, if ye will speak to some of the greatest Complyers in ^ll
the Land, that ^ave gone on in all the Compliances in all the Land, bearing of
Curates, taking of Oaths, (...), and the rest; and all this to covet their
Defection, as Saul did here. O this is abominable in the LORD's sight.

Now the Third thing ^o be spoken to, is, The Prophet's challenging Saul, and
telling (...), that he was a Lying H^pocrite; as if the Prophet had said, ye
talk much of performing of the Comm^ndment of the LORD, but there are many
Witnesses to the contrary: Ye say yet have performed and obeyed the LORD's
Comm^n^, have ye done so? What means then the ble^ting of the Sheep, and the
^owing of the Oxen which I hear? Every Rout and every Ble^^ decla^es the (...),
Whence we observe, that Defection shall be discovered by their Effects, as Math
9. 14, The Tree is known by us (...): Though we may say, we have performed the
Com^^ndmen^s of the Lord, there are many things that evidence the (...): For if
we will (...) the sins of out time, we may see many evide^ces of our
Defections, our Ble^^ing of the Sheep, and Lowing of the Oxen (...) Witness
(...) Alas! Our De^ections are great and many, and very ^ai^our and yet it is
s^d to he^r such a justi^yin^ of our selves, as there is, I shall only tell you
some o^ them that we may think upon and (...) for the same.

As for Example, we have swor^ away our selves and all that we have to the Lord
in a Solem^ League and Covenant; and we are commanded (...) which we have
received. Let (...) run through shortly all the Ar^icles thereof, (...) shall
see we have broken them all.

First, According to the first Article of the (...), we are sworn through Grace
to endeavor in our Places and Stations, the ^wor^ of our Reforme^ Religion in
the Church of Scotland in Doctrine, Worship. Discipline and Government. Well,
have no done this? Ay, ay, Minister and People will born say they have done it:
But now I say, if we have done it What (...) Blea^ing of the Sheep and Lowing
of the Oxen: If we have keeps this A^^icle of our Covenant then how comes it,
that the Overtu^ne^ (...) to sit upon the Throne, and submitted unto And in
Absolute Power claimed by the Granter of this Toler^tion, and the Accepters do
re^cognos^e that Absolute power to be in him, for that Toleration flows from
it: The Design whereof, is, to overturn Religion, and introduce Idolatry; yet
how is the same not only embraced and accepted by the most part, but thanked
for by all the Presbyterian Ministerses, their Address bears. O can this
consist with Presbyterian Principles, and yet the obligation of the Covenant
dare not be preached in no Tolerated Meeting this day in Scotland* And yet it
was the Doctrine of the Reformers of the Church of Scotland, that Folk should
Witness for these things. But now nothing may be preached that may tend to
alienate the hearts of the people from Papists; and is not the Doctrine
encroached upon by this Tolleration? when it is prescribed to Ministers how
they should preach: And is not the Discipline enc^o^ched upon? For none are
Tolerated, but those whom the Enemies please, and these have no power to
exercise, Discipline: And the Goverument is also Enc^oached upon. So that it is
the most shameful thing, and most destructive thing that ever was in the Church
before. For there was never such a Bondage is this: What means the ble^^ing of
the sheep, and l^wing of the ^xen? O! may we not see how we have broken this
Article.

Secondly, We are commanded to keep the Lords Land cle^n, we are bound in the
second Article to extirpate Popery and Prelacy, etc: Now have we done this?
(...), Ministers and Professors will say that they have done it, but (...) we
have done it, then what means the bleeting of the deep and lowing of the ^xen?
if we have extirpated Prelacy; then what means the Ringing of the Bells to
the Curates preaching, which some of you might have heard the day by the way?
For if we had been Faithful in keeping this Article, there would none of them
been in the Kirks this day. If we have endeavored to extirpate Pop^ry: Then
what means the Mumbling o^ the Mass in many places of the Land? Do ye not hear
tell of Masses? Do ye not he^r of a Popish Tyrant on the Throne, a V^ssel of
Antichrist? And yet Acknowledged ^s the Vicegere^t of JEHOVAH? Have you been
ex^irpating those, when you have been Hyring them by paying them these things
that they Requ^^e of you: And what means the embracing of and Accepting A
Tolleration? The Design of the grauting of which, is, to introduce Popery: For
was ever Popery introduced ^here once it was Rooted out without A Tolleration?
And is this the way to extirpate Popery? O! no, no, Are there not many of you
br^ve Coven^nters indeed, when ye countenance A Tolleration which opens ^ Gap
to let in Popery? But some of you will say, may not Papists do good? For Cyrus
was a Heathen, and he gave Liberty to the Jews to go Home to their own Land
and build the Temple of Jerusalem; there we see he did good? O ye who ple^d
thus, have a care what you say, and do not Father your Ill gotten Get^s on the
Holy scripture? Do not wrest the scriptures of Truth? for ye have no ground to
plead the Lawfulness of your practice from this Example of Cyrus. This
Antichristian Tolleration now so Universally Accepted, improved and App^^uded
of, is no way^ like that Liberty granted by Cyrus to the Lords people; it is
neither like it in the Gra^ter, nor in the Terms whereupon it is gran^ted, nor
in the Design wherefore it was granted, nor in any other thing are they like
other: For Cyrus was prophesied of, long before he was born, by (...) Prophet
Isaiah that he should build the LORD's House, and let go his Captives: He was
ex^traordinarlie (...) up by the Lord, and called of GOD to give Liberty to His
people, and to Establish their Religion by a Decree: Now this cannot be said of
him who grants this Tolleration. Again Cyrus in his Proclamation gives Liberty
to the Lords people, the Jews only, and not to any of the Nations as Ammanites,
Philistians or the Rest; and the thing he granted, is, the Free Exercise of
their Religion in their own Land, Ezra 1, ^. And he gives a Noble Testimony to
the Glory of GOD: But he does not give any Liberty to the Idolatrous (...) to
Exercise their Idolatries. Now this cannot be said of the Tyrant and his
Proclamation for this Tolleration: For is gives Liberty to Idolaters and
Heretics, Papists and Quakers; And he grants Religion among ^ther things to be
Tolerated. But Cyrus does not Tolerate the Religion of the Je^s as a thing to
(...) suffered: but by a real Decree, and he gives Testimony to Truth and
people of GOD: ^ut this Tyrant gives no Testimony to the Gorie of GOD, he does
not Encourage and Establish ^eligion as Duty; but Toller^^s it under the
Notion of a Crime, And gives Liberty to it under ^e Notion of a Fru^t to be
pardoned. Now Religion cannot be Tolerated; but should be ^wned, encouraged,
and established as suc^: Likewise he gives Liberty to Idol^ters to Exercise
^eir Idolatries; and to Heretics to spread Abroad and vent their Heretics; he
gives Papists liberty to say their Mass; and Quakers to vent their
^^^sphemies: So that now, as it were, the (...) of the Lord is set up beside
Dagon. Moreover Cy^us granted the Jews the (...) Exercise of their ^eligion,
without any Bonds, Restriction or Limitatio^s: But this cannot be said of this
Toller^^^on; For it is clogged with Restrictions and Limitations: By it
Ministers are Restricted in (...) Doctrine; For they must pre^ch nothing that
any way may tend to Allenate the Hearts of the subjects from the Granter of it
or his Government; and the place of their preaching is also Restricted, it must
be in Houses, and not in the Fields. Likeways the Design of Cyrus granting
Liberty to the Jews was good; For he gave them Liberty to go up to Jerusalem
to Build the House of the LORD: But this is not the Design of this Granter, it
is to Introduce Popery; And he intends not to Build the House of the LORD; but
to Build Babylon: And he will make use of this Tolleration as a scaffolding to
keep up that Tower of Babylon; And when ever he has the building finished,
then he will pull down the scaffold again. Then again, some plead for the
Lawfulness of Accepting and making use of this Liberty from the Philistians
sending Home the Ark. A^, ay, say they, seeing the Philistians sends us Home the
Ark, why may we not Receive it? may not the Philistians Kin^ (...) home the Ark
of the LORD? But they have no ground for this neither: For the Ark and Dagon
cannot stand together under one sconce: For no sooner was the Ark set up but
Dagon went down, But now if ye will look upon the Liberty granted by this
Tolleration, is the bringing back of the Ark, then the Ark and Dagon are
standing very peaceably and pleasan^^y together under one sconce; this c^nnot
be, for they cannot stand together, and now many, both Ministers and Professors
are living peaceably. And in good Neighborhood with Papists and Quakers. O
abominable! what is this? O this is sad, that ever this should have been heard
of in Scotland. Moreover when the Lords of the Philistians sent back the Ark,
the Kine that carried it, went straight to Beths^^mesh in the Land of Israel;
but now they are going away to Babylon: And if this Liberty granted by this
Tolleration be the Ark, then they are carrying it the high-gate to Rome.

Then Thirdly, In the third Article of our Solemn League and Covenant, we are
bound to stand fast in the Defense, and to maintain the Liberties of the
Church, and Privileges of the Kingdom, as We are Men and Christians. We have
observed this, that some will plead on this Article of the Covenant for owning
a Popish King: But O^! is there not an express Condition and Qualification
there, that we shall own no Magistrates over us, but in subordination to the Law
of GOD, and those who will give us security for our Religion and Liberty: And
have we not the Laws of GOD against Tyranny, and also the Laws of the Land,
which we are bound to maintain every Soul of us; and now we do subscribe our
selves Breakers of it, when we own a Papist. Now have we performed this? Ay,
ay, it may be some Ministers and Pro^essors will say they have; but if we have
done it, then what means the ble^ting of the sheep, and l^wing of the oxen?
What means the lowing of the Bulls of Bas^an? What meant the Wicked walking
on every side? And what means the Bloo^^^shed? All these things do Witness
against us, if We have kept this Article in refusing to set up Magistrates
over us without security given for our Religion and Liberty: Neither was it
Requi^ed of him, now when he is set up, and has Arrogate to himself an
absolute power; by virtue whereof he has stoped and disabled all our Penal
statutes made against Idolaters: and is intending to (...) us of all Privileges
and Liberties, as we are Men and Christians. And if we have maintained and
Defended out Privileges as we are Men and Christians, then what means the
great Oppression both of Bodies and Consciences in the Land? What me^neth the
Gro^^ing of many poor people under heavy Burdens and great Bondage. Nay, we are
obliged to cut off Idolat^rs: The Idolater should be put to Death, according to
the Law of GOD; and those Penal statutes in the Old Testament are not abrogated
yet, for they are Moral.

Fourthly, In the Fourth Article of the solemn League and Covenant, we are
bound to bring the Malignant Enemies of GOD to Condign punishment. By the Law
of GOD Idolaters should die the Death; and M^rderers should Die the Death; that
the Land should not be defiled with Blood ^ Well have we done this? ay, ay,
Ministers and Professors will say they have done it: But if we have performed
this, then what means the bleeting of the sheep, (...) lowing of the Oxen? If
we have Endeavored to bring the Enemies of GOD to condign Punishment: Then
what means the setting them up in places of Power and Trust, and instead of
bringing Idolaters and Murderers to punishment; We have set them up Con^ederate
with them, and taken Protection from them, and instead of bringing them to
punishment, we have maintained them: For what is your C^ss but a Grassing of
Antichrists Bulls to push and destroy the LORDS people. The Devil has so many
Oxen to Feed, and (...) Requires you to Feed them, that they may (...) down the
Work of GOD: and where is there any that stands up and justifies themselves? O
is that a keeping of the Covenant, to maintain its Destroyers? And is that a
bringing of these Enemies, Idolaters and Murderers to punishment, to Feed them,
and Confederate with them? O ye have made thereby an unhappy Conjunction.

Fifthly, By the fifth Article of our Solemn League and Covenant, we are
obliged to seek and promote Peace and Union. Now can we say we have done this?
Ay, ay, Ministers and Professo^ will say they ^ave done it; then what means
our Joining in this unhappy and unhallowed Union for our bitter Debates and
Contentions have been the Fruit of our Defections: For our Defection has
brought on Division, and Division has brought on Confusion; our yet we must
not Unite in this Tolleration; We must not Unite in a course of Def^ction from
the LORD, for that would bring on Wrath and Indignation, and the Judgment of
the Lord upon us. But (...); we have United with Antichrists* The Reek of our
Chimneys, and the Bleeting of your sheep, ones Witness against you. I do not
envy your Piece in the Way of Righteousness: But this I may say, if ye be
Confessors of His Name, and appear for Him as ye ought to do, ye will no^ get
sitting long* and I fe^r there is not a Man that can (...) himself of the
bre^ch of this Article.

Sixthly, By the sixth Article of the Covenant, we are bound to Defend our
Brethren in their pursuing the Ends of the Covenant; and we are oblige^ to take
what is (...) to one ^s done to all: Well, have we not done this? Have we
defended but Brethren? Ay, ay, may be some Ministers and Professors will say
they have done it, if we have done it, What means the Bl^^^ing of the sheep,
and Lowing of the Oxen? What means your w^th^rawing your Help from your
brethren when in Hazard? What means your not Relieving your brethren (when in
your power to do it) when drawn to Death by Enemies? Oh! many of you instead of
^elping your brethren, you have helped the Enemies, Alas! We are Guilty of the
Breach of Covenant; We have not endeavored to perform these things which we
are bound to perform: For there is not one Article of the Solemn League and
Covenant, but we have ^^oken: And we have not endeavored as we should ^ave
done in our several places and Callings to preserve the Reformed Religion in
the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government. We
have not endeavored as we should have done to ex^^^pate Popery and Prelacy,
And the Accepting this Tolleration is a Breach of every Article of the
Covenant. For how can the^ extirpate Popery and Prelacy, seeing they make use of
this Tolleration that Tollerates then: And ye who go to these Tolleration
Meetings ye are guilty of br^ach of Covenant, for ye strengthen the Hand^ of
Papists (...); ye cannot endeavor the Ex^irp^tion of Popery when ye are at
peace with Papists. And then we are to Repeat and turn to the LORD, and
Acknowledge our Sins, and engage to our Duty. Well, have we performed this,
what means then our justifieing of our se^ves in main^aining of this present
course For that is inconsistent with true Repentance and mourning for sin,
which is clear from ^7 Cor. 7. 10, 11. If we had mourned for the sin of forme^
Indulgences, we could not (...) on this Tolleration but with Detestation; for
it has lo^ded us with many Reproaches (...) may pretend to what they will, it
is impossible that they shall be ^ound among the (...) of Zion, while they
continue in that Course, which is clear from that forecited place of (...): For
you give all that that is Required of you? and by so doing you make your (...)
guilty of the bre^th of Covenant. O consider the sin thereof, and the Judgment
that GOD will ass^redly pursue for such a^ Indignity done unto Hi^. Remember
Si^s, and take Warning: And I Charge you to take Warning: For if ever there was
a Defection in Scotland, this is one: For this hundred and Twenty Years, there
has not a Testimony been wanting to the Truth; And this Tolleration Condemns
them all. O will not the s^a of Hearing the Curats make us guilty of the sin of
Prelacy?

And will not the hearing of these Tolerated Meetings, make us guilty of the
sin of this Tolleration? I am no^ imposing upon you my own N^tions; I invite
you to nothing; but the Scripture (...): For if you will search them, and the
Ancient Records of our Church, the Acts and Constitutions of her General
Assemblies, and the Writings of True and Faithful Champions, you would (...)
these things not to be my Whimsi^s, but to be the Truth which I tell you; I
invite you the^ to se^rch them, and I (...)

The Fourth Thing in the Words (...) be spoken unto is, Sou^s Excuse and
Extenuation of his Sin ^ and there is a Fourfold Excuse in i^, I shall Observe
this from it in general; whatever Men as Hypocrites pretend to in Excusing
their Sin, it will not do the Turn, but it makes it the mo^^ (...), N^w, the
first Excuse (...) Saul makes, is ^his, the^ have brought them from the
Amal^kites, and this does discover his ignor^nce: For i^ was (...) to spare
them; they should all have been (...)* For the Amalekites were Devoted Enemies
among other N^^ions. They might have (...) these things, (...) they had an
express Charge, Deuteronomy. 25. 17, 18, 19 Verses, To blot out the Remembrance of
Amal^k from under Heaven: For they were accursed Enemies of GOD, and they were
Idolaters, and they ought not to have been sp^red by tampering with them: No,
no, they were all to be cut off, M^n, Woman, and Child, and all that belon^ed
to them; nothing was to be sp^red. The Children of Israel was to keep up and to
have mantained a War against them without any Cess^^^on, Peace, or T^^^saction
with them. And if it was S^ule sin to sp^re Agag, and the best of the Sheep,
and of Oxen? and if it was Isreal's Interest to have ma^ntained a Wit against
Amalek. It is as (...) our duty and the duty of all the People of CHRIST to
keep up and maintain War without any Cess^tion, Peace, or Transaction against
Antichrist, and against Papists, now under the New Testament; as it was theirs
under the Old, For they are great Enemies to Truth, and as great Idolaters as
they were, it was Isreal's sin to spare Agag: But we have not only spared the
Papis^ but we have set up a Papist over us! And if it was Saul's sin, and the
peoples sin to sp^re Agag. So it it would have been greater sin and a shame to
have set up Agag on the Throne of Israel, So it was cut sin to spare Papists;
but more to set np a Papist over us; so (...) is our sin surpassing theirs.
Well, remember Sir^, you have many Oxen, and many Sheep bleeting; but will you
Examine how you got them? there are many of you that h^s p^ace uo^, you have
Houses and L^nds; well, got you them and your Consciences kept both? was you
Wiser than other Folk; or was you Honester nor others? or was you more False an
others have been? some will say, I got mine kept by hearing the Curats;
others will say, I got mine kept by countenancing this Tolleration: Well, you
got it from the Amalekites the Enemies of GOD and you may have little Peace by
reflecting on the Way that you have them, and them you have it from, O consider
(...) sinfuln^ss of making Pe^ce with Papists, these Enemies of God, against
whom we are to maintain a War without any Cess^tion: For CHRIST has proclaimed
a War against all such. Look and ye will see the Declaration of War in the 14
of the Revelation 9 verse. And any of you that have got any thing that you have
this way; O strive to get a better ^^ck of them.

The second Excuse which Saul makes, is this. That it was the People did it,
and not he: (just like many in out day* but he lied like a Traitor; for it was
by his Command. Whence we Observe, that Hypocrites will ay lay the Blame on
others: For if he asked at the People, they would* have laid the Blame on Saul.
So in our day, spe^r at the Ministers who is to Blame for all ^his Defection,
and they will say the Blame lies upon the people; and if we spear at the
people, they will the say Flame upon the Ministers, and say, they left them,
and would not preach to them in the (...) of Temptations and Trials; and
Ministers will say, that they would h^ve preached, if the people would have
heard them: But where these Excu^es are, there is little Sense of sin, and
Humiliation for si^ and little fear of the Judgments of GOD that will pursue
such sits, where every one is laying the Charge off themselves: For Ministers
say, they would have kept their Kirks and preache^, but the people would not
bide with us, and what could we do? For we wanted our Judg^^g (...) and what
could we do? It is not the Ministers; it is the people. Come to the people and
they will say, the Ministers went to the Kirks and heard the Curats, and we
went too; and the (...) counseled us to take the Bond, and what could we do?
But God will lay the blame upon the whole Ware, both Ministers and people.

A Third excuse that Saul makes, is, that he spared the Sheep and Oxen for a
Sacrifice to the Lord thy God. Whence we Observe, that it is the Mark and Psea
of Hypocrites to justify all their Detections from the good end that they have
in going about them. We are ready to justify our Actions, tho they be bad,
because of the good end we think we have in going about them; A good end will
not justify a bad Action. If we should spear at some Ministers, wherefore
bowed ye to the Supremacy, wherefore accepted ye the Indulgence? It was ^o get
liberty to Pre^ch the Gospel say they. Wherefore did ye accept this Toleration?
They will Answer, it was to Preach the Gospel that we did it, and it was the
Salvation o^ Souls that we intended th^reby; and is not that a very good end?
Poor Man has thy Preaching no other end but the Salvation of Souls? Ay, ay, ye
think ye have a brave Ple^ of it, but remember, though it be the indispensible
Duty of Ministers to Preach the Gospel,; yet to accept of a Liberty to preach
the Gospel no way which encroaches upon and wrongs the Prerogatives of the
great King and head of the Church, is a sin, though their end be good in
accepting the same: Where is thy Obedience Man* For Obedience is better than
Sacrifice. Constancy and Faithfulness in the Matters of God, is called for at
Ministers hands. The conversion and edification of Souls is indeed the great
end of p^eac^ing the Gospel, but that is not all, it is but the one half of the
end of it. There is also the Glory of Christ, He must and will be Glo^ified,
whether Souls get good by i^ or no: For the Preaching of the Gospel is not only
the Testimony of Christ, but the Testimony for Christ. Ministers must obey all
Christ's Commands, For what cares the Lord for thy Sacrifice or thee either,
that thou has gott^ from the A^^^lekites* For the pre^ching of the Gospel by
accepting and improving of the Liberty granted by this Toleration, is not a
Testimony for Christ, seeing it so wro^gs and (...) upon the Prerogatives of
Christ. And it is no less than presumption for any to expect the Lord's
presence at any of the Tolerated Meetings: For they have not a promise for i^
(...) (...) And now ^^ough we suffer under their H^nds for this, we have
nothing to say, ou^ ^dore the Righteousness of the LORD therein.

Thirdly, Another Aggravation of Readiness Sin, was a disobeying a per^mptor
Commission which he got to go and dest^oy the Amalekites, beside what the
Children of (...) go^ in commandment from the Lord, to blot out the remembrance
of them from under He^^^n. Deuteronomy. 25, 17. ^aul got a particular Commi^^^on to go
and destroy them all, and to have nothing ^o do with the^. The Lord has told
us, and we are comm^nded peremp^orly not to meddle with his Enemies, and to
have a (...), not to (...) It is utterly unlawful in matters of Religion to
tamper with the E^emies of God, and yet for all this, we cannot forbear to take
and give with them, out Fathers (...) with them when they fell upon these
Resolu^^ons, and all along (...) our ^ampering with them, (...) destroyed us,
and we con^inue this day to run ou^ Heads against the Bosses of (...)'s
Back^ers; and on these Rocks on which the People of God have perished formerly.

Then in the l^^t p^^ce, the Prophe^^ convinc^ng him of his sin: Wherefore
(...) thou not Obey, the Voice of the LORD? And here the Pro^het (...) i^
Rebellion. Hence we Note, that all Rebellions in the World, Rebellion against
GOD is the greatest; and of all Rebellions in the World, the Rebellion of a
King against GOD is the greatest: For it is called here as the sin of
Witchcraft The Brutishness of the Enemies appeared much in using this Argument:
that Rebellion was is the sin of (...)) against some of the Prisoners taken at
Pentland; but some of them ^nswered very pertinently, (which was to this
purpose) that the Rebellion there spoken of, was not the Rebellion of a People
against a King; But the Rebellion of a King against GOD; and this was Saul's
sin. It i^ true, to Rebel against Lawful M^^istrates that are Ordained of
GOD, (...) sin: but it is no Rebellion to (...); But now what is this
Rebellion? There (...) several things in Scripture called Rebellion against GOD.

I shall ment^on these five or six of them, First, Murmuring against the LORD,
is called (...) Numb. 14, 9. O there has been much sed Murmuring in ou^ days,
many of us has murmured in the Wilderness. We have (...) against him: And it
is to be feared that many of u^ shall die in Ordinances appointed by Him (...)
His word, Josh. 22, 19. But (...) not against the Lord, nor against us, in
building you an Altar (...) the Altar of the Lord our God. Alas! (...) h^th
been much of this Rebellion in Scotland* setting up Worship not according to
his (...). Inve^ting, preverting, and corrup^^ng the Worship of GOD* Hence
conformity with Prelacy, (...) Rebellion against God: For he never appoint
(...) Lord his (...) Word: It is none of his Ordinances, Hence this
Antichristian Toleration is (...) against GOD: There is no Warrant for it in
his Word: The (...) of this Toleration (whereby the power which the (...)
claims in (...), is Recog^os^^: the Evils in it in ^ffect justified, and not
witnessed against; and the wicked Design of its g^^nting strengthened) is
Rebellion against GOD; and this Toleration is a (...) against GOD: The Cl^iming
an Absolute power which is the prerogative of God O such a dreadful day (...)
coming upon him, and all that take part with him! Thirdly, (...) i^ called
Rebelli^n against GOD, Isa. 1, 2, O there has been much (...) and Ways in
Scotland: There is a great Backsliding from Pr^ctice, Princ^ples (...) it was
always the P^^^ciple of the Church o^ Scotland to oppose Tyranny and (...) the
Doctrine of the Church of Scotland to be against a Toleration: It was their
con^^ant Principles neither ^o give Toleration to Papists, no^ take (...) from
Papists. But O there is a great Backsliding from former F^ithfulness, and from
former Love and Ze^l. Fourthly: Obstinary, and ^e^using to hearken to the
Co^^andments of the Lord, and to turn again unto Him, is (...) Rebellion, Ezekiel.
20, ^. Dan. 9. 5. O there has been much Rebellion in Scotlands Fifthly,
Confederacy and As^ociation with the Enemies of GOD, it called Religion against
Him, Hosea 7. 14. And they Rebelled against ME. And one of the ways whereby
they Rebelled against (...) calling to Eg^^^. and going to Assyria, (...) 11.
they were going back to Egypt to ge^ help from them; that was in Con^ede^^^^^
and making (...) with them. O there is much of this Rebellion in Scotland, many
^re saying a Confeder^cy with enemies, and are at Peace with them, and this
Rebellion is the sin and shame, and the Judgment of Backsliding Scotland, And
w^ to ^ll them that have any ^ccession to this dreadful Confederacy, I shall
say no more at this time. The LORD Himself give you to consider what is said,
Amen.


