AN APOLOGY OF THE TREATISE De non temerandis Ecclesiis. AGAINST A TREATISE BY
an unknown Author, written against it in some particulars. By Sir Henry
Spelman, Knight. ALSO HIS EPISTLE TO Richard Carew Esquire, of Anthony in
Cornwall concerning Tithes.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Philemon Stephens, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyard, at the sign of the gilded Lion. 1646.

TO THE READER.
THe first Treatise, de non temerandis ecclesijs, being published above thirty
years ago, there wanted not the approbation of the best and most religious men
in behalf thereof: neither also wanted there one of a contrary humor, to
oppose something: which though it be in such weak manner, as deserved not any
just answer from so eminent a person, yet it pleased the learned knight, out of
his care to instruct him and others, to show the weakness of his reasons: and
that not only in this apology, but also in a more serious work, his learned
Glossary, so much commended, and desired to be finished, by great Princes and
chief men, both at home and in foreign parts. The passage shall be here
inserted for a more full testimony of the Authors judgment, and of the
weakness of the adversaries reasons.

Excerptum e Glossario Domini Spelmanni page 238. in voce Ecclesia.
ECclesia] pro templo, seu domo, qua fideles convenient, ritus divinos
celebraturi. Lippis and tonsoribus notum; adducor tamen ut asseram, quod
sciolus quidam libellum nostrum De non temerandis Ecclesijs, pro Mart suo
impetens, graviter mihi imponit, (...) ecclesijs dixisse hac significatione.
nec patitur vir bonus ut easdem, aedes appellarem sacras: ludibrio enim habet
ejusmodi epitheton, locis vel aedibus attributum. Carpsisset aequius, si ignot
is ei vocabulis, Basilicis, Dominicis, Titulis, Curiacis, Martyrijs vel
similibus usus fuissem. Sed doctrinam hominis and farinam videris.

Occurrit (...) apud Graecos veteres, ut Curia, and Senatus apud Romanos, non
solum pro caetu and congregatione, sed etiam pro loco in quem convenitur, ut
ipsa lexica testantur. Lucianus, (...), i. e. ubi ecclesiam (scil. Curiam in
qua consultant) undique stravero. perhibetur and Apostolus, secundum plures
interpretes, antiquos, medios, recentiores, hoc sensu dixisse. (...), Ecclesiam
1 Cor. 11. 22.
Dei contemnitis. Liquide Synodus Laodicena, (...). i. e. in sanctissima
ecclesia sanctissimae martyris euphemiae. Tertull. lib. de fuga in persecut.
sec. 3. Convenient in ecclesiam: confugiunt in ecclesiam. Augustine. epist. 109.
Quando ergo simul estis in ecclesia, and ubicunque viri sunt, invicem and
pudicitiam custodite. Hieronymus in Esaiam cap. 60. Videmus Caesares, --
aedificare ecclesias expensis publicis. and epist. 8. Alij aedificent
ecclesias, vestient parietes marmorum crustis, columnarum moles advehant,
earumque deaurent capita, etc. fastidit in re tam nota olei tantum perdere;
clarum est Ecclesiam idem esse christianis, quod Synagogam Judaeis; and
Augustinum habes in eandem sententiam in Psalm. 82. unde and priscus quidam.

Nobis ecclesia datur, Hebraeis Synagoga.

Plura si cupias, numerosa habeas exemplain Burchardi Decretorum. lib. 3. qui
de ecclesijs, inscribitur.

Besides also not to conceal the doubts and apprehensions of wiser and more
learned men upon the argument, there was also a gentleman of eminent quality
and learning, Mr. Richard Carew of Anthony in Cornwall who was not satisfied in
all points, with this treatise of Sir Henry, whereupon he wrote his doubts in
some particulars unto him; submitting much to his judgment. Unto whom for
satisfaction, Sir Henry wrote a very pious epistle which shall here follow
after the apology for satisfaction to the better sort, who sometime stumble out
of private interest, or passion, as well as inferior men. Hoping that such
will be easily corrected in their opinion as Mr. Carew was, being a Gentleman
ennobled no less in regard of his parentage and descent, then for his virtue
and learning, as Cambden testifies of him in his Britannia. In Cornwall.


THE APOLOGY.
This Apologye clears some passages, as,

1. Touching the word Ecclesia, which signisies either a material Church, or
the Congregation of the people assembled. 2. An explication of the text of Esa.
56. 7. My house shall be called the house of prayer. 3. The place of the
Aposile, 1 Cor. 11. 12. Despise ye the Church of God? 4. The exposition of the
83. Psalm. against such as destroy Churches, and the maintenance of them, and
the Ministers. 5. The number of Churches spoild among us.
COming to my worthy friend Sir Ralph Hare, and lying a while idle there, I
thought that idle time fittest for some idle work, and disposed my self
therefore to give some answer to such passages of this Treatise, as the Author
at his pleasure has very idly if not maliciously taxed me in. But being far
from my books, and having not so much as that Treatise of his by me, or any
note out of it, I shall no doubt forget, mistake, omit, and misplace many
things. Wherein (good Reader) I must entreat thy patience and favor.

It being brought unto me, I ran over diverse leaves thereof, wherein I met
multa verba, nulla verbera; but judging therefore the Author by his work, I
thought neither of them worth the answering: himself, as it seems, some rude
Naball delighting in contentions and uncivil speech: wherein I will not
contend with him, only I will consider of his reasons, though indeed they are
such as will show him to be a weak adversary Qui strepit magis quam sauciat.
And therefore though I sit safe out of his dint, yet will I let the reader see,
how vainly he bestows his shot, and how far from the mark.

As for the parts of my book wherein I labor as he says, to prove tithes to
be due jure divino, and his answers thereto, my purpose is not here to meddle
with them, for that they require a more spacious discourse then either that
volume admitted, or I now mean to enter into, it being not a private question,
between him and me, but long controverted by greater clerks) and left to this
day as questionem vexatam non judicatam. The truth is, the course of my
argument lead me upon it, and I therefore produced some arguments tending to
the maintenance thereof, but referring the point unto a greater work, and
forbearing to declare my self therein, without ample and more laborious
examination of so great a controversy: leaving therefore that as a general
cause, whereof he may perhaps have more another time, I will here wage my self
against him only in those things, wherein he charge me particularly in my
own person; and passing over amongst them such snatches of his, as scarcely
ruffle the hair, I will only meddle with those parts, where he thinks he
biteth deepest.

First, he quarrelleth with me about the title of my book, in that I use the
word Ecclesia for a material Church, or (as in contempt he terms it) a
Steeplehouse.
stone-house: affirming in his learning, that it signifies only the
congregation: which assertion if he could make good, would give him a great
hand in the cause, for that much of his argument following lies very heavily
upon this pin. Surely if I guess right some Dictionary has deceived him, for
perhaps his reading reaches not so far, as to resolve him herein: but if two
thousand authorities be sufficient to defend me withal, I speak it without
hyperbole, I assure my self I could produce them. Who knows not how ordinary
a thing it is, to have one word signify both the persons, and the place: as
Civitas, the citizens, or town; Collegium* the society or house; Senatus, the
Senators, or Senate house; Synagoga, the assembly, or place of assembly. I am
sure he will confess, that where it is said, He loves our nation and has
built us a synagogue: It is not there meant of the persons, he built them a
congregation, but of the place. A Synagogue, and Ecclesia, signify both one
and the same thing, the congregation, or place of congregation; in which sense
we Christians notwithstanding use only the word Ecclesia, for our
congregations, and houses of prayer, for that the Jews had taken up the other
word, for their Oratories, according to an old verse:

Nobis Ecclesia datur, Hebraeis Synagoga. And in this manner was the word (...)
used amongst the Greeks before the Christians borrowed it from them, as it
appears by some of your Lexicons, where it is said, (...), Caetus, concilium,
congregatio, etc. ponitur etiam pro loco ipso in quem convenitur. Lucianus,
(...). i.e. Ubi curiam (in qua consultant) undique stravero. And that the
Church has ever since used it in the same sort shall by and by appear, when
we come to insist more particularly upon this point. Feign would I know what
himself would call one of our stone-Churches, in Latin. Templum, savours of
Judaisme* and if I should have used a word of the ancient Fathers, and said, De
non temerandis Basilicis, Curiacis, or Dominicis, it may be I should have
driven him to his Dictionary, and yet left him pusled. I thought fanum too
profane a word, but he perhaps would think it so much the fitter; for a
Church, and a playhouse seem a like to him.

Another of his quarrels is that I apply the place of Isaiah the Prophet, cap.
56. 7. My house shall be called an house of prayer, locally to places of
prayer, whereas he says, it was spoken figuratively of the congregation of the
faithful. I exclude not that sense, but I assure my self our Savior Christ,
when he whipped the sellers out of the Temple, not out of the congregation,
applied this Scripture to the very place of prayer: and it is questionless
that the old and late classicke writers so expound it.

Some quotations here were intended out of ancient and modern Authors, which
though I could easily supply, yet being loath to add any thing to the original
copy, I leave it to the learned reader to consult the Commentators, which is
easily done.

Again it much offends him, that I interpret the words of Saint Paul 1 Cor.
11. 12. Despise ye the Church of God? as spoken of the material place, which
after his manner he will also have to be only understood of the Congregation;
and had the word ecclesia no other signification, then doubtless he had
obtained the cause. But observe I pray, what I have formerly said touching that
point, and then take into your consideration, the words of the Apostle as they
lie in that chapter. First in the 18. verse he says, (...) Quando convenisti
in ecclesia. For these be the very words, and how we shall English them is the
question. Whether when ye come together in the Congregation, that is, in the
assembly; or when ye come together in the Church, that is, in the place of the
assembly. I confess the words indefinitely spoken may bear either
interpretation, and I condemn neither of them in this place. Yet let us see
which is more probable, or at least whether my trespass deserves his
reprehension. The Apostle continuing his speech upon the same subject, in the
20. verse. goes on thus: (...): as if he should say, convenientibus igitur
vobis in eodem; leaving (...), in eodem, spoken neutrally, and as it were, to
be applied either to the assembly, or the place; which to put it out of doubt,
Beza, and our English Geneva translation do add the word, locus, a place, in
a different letter, to declare the meaning of the Apostle and read it
accordingly: When you come together therefore into one place. So that now it is
determined how the word Ecclesia, or Church, in the 18. verse. before going is
to be expounded: and then join the words subsequent unto it, wherein the
Apostle complains of the abusing that thing, which before he spoke of, and in
reprehension of the abuse committed therein by eating and drinking; he says
verse. 22. Have ye not houses to eat, and to drink in? or, despise ye the
Church of God? Where the very antithesis of houses, to eat and drink in, with
the Church of God do still pursue the precedent interpretation of Ecclesia for
the place of assembly: as if distinguishing between places and not persons, he
should have said, Your houses are the places to eat and drink in, but the
Church is the place of prayer: otherwise he might perhaps have said, Have ye
not other meetings to eat and drink at, but despise ye this holy meeting? And
I think it not without special providence, that the Translators therefore did
translate here, (...)? an ecclesiam Dei contemniti? Despise ye the Church of
God? not despise ye the Congregation of God? for the word Church, coming of
the German word Kirken, and that of the Greek word (...), which signifies
Dominicum, or the Lords House, and was in ancient times, as Eusebius and
Nicephorus witness, the common name of material Churches, does to this day
properly signify the same: and we do never use it for a particular
congregation, but either generally for the body or society of the faithful
through a whole kingdom, or common wealth; or particularly for the very place
of prayer only.

This foundation being now laid upon the words of the Apostle himself, let us
see how it has been since understood by the Fathers, and Doctors of the
Church, as well ancient as modern. Hieroms opinion appears already in my
book, and Chrysostomes you shall hear anon. But this man despises the first,
and therefore I am sure he will account as lightly of the second. A Senate of
Fathers moves him not an hair: a right monothelite, he opposes his own only
will against them all. Yet to satisfy some others, whose ears perhaps may be
better in tune, I will cite one who for humbleness of spirit, integrity of
life, and admirable learning for the time he lived in, has ever since been
venerable throughout the world; and no forreigner but our Countreyman Bid, who
upon these words Numquid domos non habetis? -- an Ecclesiam Dei contemnitis?

Ecclesia (says he) homines sunt de quibus dicitur ut exhiberet sibi gloriosam
ecclesiam, hoc tamen vocari etiam ipsam domum orationum, idem Apostolus testis
est, vbi ait, numquid domos non habetis ad manducandum and bibendum? an
ecclesiam Dei contemnitis? and hoc quotidianus usus loquendi obtinuit, ut in
ecclesiam prodire, ad ecclesiam confugere, non dicatur nisi qui ad locum ipsum,
parietesque prodierit, vel confugerit, quibus ecclesiae congregatio continetur.
But he will say that all this old wine savours of the caske, therefore we will
spend no more time in broaching of it. Taste of the new. Peter Martyr upon the
place. Quando convenitis] potest (says he) hoc referri ad locum qui unus omnes
continebat, ita ut notetur corporalis conjunctio, etc. and then, An ecclesiam
Dei contemnitis? potest accipi Ecclesia (says he) pro caetu saecro, vel* pro
loco quo fideles convenient, etc. Si vero de loco intellexeris (ut Chrysostomus
videtur sentire) docemur contaminari locum ex abusu. Vnde Augustinus dicebat,
In Oratorio nemo aliquid agat nisi ad quod factum est, vnde and nomen recepit;
ad alia munera obeunda plateas and domus habemus. And complaining of abusing of
Churches he goes on: At nunc templa deambulationibus, fabulis and omnibus
negotiis prophanis toto die patent C. hristus flagello parato ex funiculis,
ejectis ementibus, and vendentibus, templum Dei repurgavit: and goes still on
in this manner much further. Marlorat also a common and good friend to our
Preachers being well pleased with this exposition and invective of Peter
Martyr, translateth it verbatim into his own Commentary upon this place; and
thereby delivers it also to the world as his own opinion.

But come we now to that part of my book which puts him most out of patience
above all the rest, my application of the 83. Psalm to such as destroy
Churches, and bereave them of their maintenance. This he says, fitteth my
matter as an Elephants skin does a gnat, yea it has no cohaerency therewith
either figuratively, allegorical, or anagogicall. To retort his scoff I might
say, it seems, an Elephant of absurdity to the Gnat of his learning: but I
desire rather to satisfy him ( Si malitia non mutaverit intellectum) then to
disgrace him.

It cannot be denied if there be a correspondency between the body of our
Church and Common wealth, with the body of the Church and Common wealth of the
Jews, the same must also hold proportionably amongst the members thereof, and
in consequence that the passages of state, of government, of peace, war,
liberty, oppression, prosperity, adversity, and other occurrents either active
or passive, must hold some aspect and analogy, one unto the other. And then
also that whatsoever is denounced against the enemies of the one, trencheth
comparatively against the enemies of the other. Come then unto the matter. The
prophet inveigheth against them that seek to spoil, oppress, or disturb the
Church of God seated in India; be it openly by war, or secretly by some
stratagem of wit: Does not this thwart them also that attempt the like in our
Church? Yes, says he, against them of the King of Spaines Armado in 88. and
those of the Powder Treason, wherein the universal desolation both of the King
and Kingdom, Church and Commonwealth were not only projected, but attempted
by our enemies.

But show me, will he say, what has the appropriating of a pelting Parsonage,
or the pulling down of a stone-house, which you call a Church, is unto this?
for the one is an Elephant, the other but a Gnatt.

I answer. Eadem est ratio partium quae est totius. And out of this reason and
analogy our Savior Christ argues him that casts but a lascivious look to
be guilty of the great Commandment, non maechaberis, as well as him that
committed the very heinous act it self: and then also that whatsoever the
Prophet denounces against them that spoil the Church in general, the same
descends upon every particular man, that spoileth the same in any particular
part: as, Omne genus praedicatur de omnibus and singulis suis speciebus etiam
insimis and individuis.

Now that the taking up of these parsonages and defacing of places of public
prayer is a spoil of the Church of God, appears in this, that the means and
maintenance of the service of God, and of his ministers is thereby diminished,
and destroyed, which subtraction of maintenance from the minister, God in
Malachi 3. 8. declares to be a spoiling of himself, for that his service is
thereby hindered, and his Church impaired. And although this man affirms, that
although there were never a stone-Church or minister in the kingdom, yet the
Church, and service of God might stand well enough, for that every man's family
is a Church, and every master thereof tied to instruct his servants, every
father his children: yet by example of the Church in the time of the Apostles,
we ought to have places of public prayer, and some to instruct these masters
and fathers; for the husbandman, the artisan, the day-labourer, are not
commanded to neglect their vocation and turn preachers, as too many now adays
do. And though perhaps some such good men out of their devotion would preach
now and then to instruct their brethren, yet who shall do it ordinarily, and
where shall the Assembly be entertained; for every town has not a Guild Hall,
a Sessionshouse, a Cockpit, or a Playhouse fit for such a multitude. And
though they may, as he says, serve God abroad with Paul; in a dungeon with
Jeremy, or on a muckhill with Job, yet heat or cold, wet or wind will hinder
them at one time or other: so that doubtless it were very necessary to have a
man, and a place publicly appointed for the service of God in every
Congregation. And then since this man cannot perform his office without
maintenance, and such a place as we speak of, the taking of them away puts him
from doing his duty, deprives his parishioners of their instruction, and then
by consequence spoils the Church of God; and so the curse of the Psalm lies
justly against them.

But let us now take a view of the gnat he speaks of, and which he contemns
so much in respect of the smalnesse thereof. Had there been but three or four
of these livings taken from the Church, his fancy might have had the more
color, to use such fond applications: but if it comes to three or four
hundred, it grows now beyond the size of a Gnat, what shall we then say of
3845. livings, or appropriate Parsonages,
thus taken from the Church, which is more by 1126. then the half of all those
that remain, and within 897. as many as them all: for the Churches not
appropriate are but 5439. through all England and Wales. So that the parishes
of the Churches appropriate contain near about the one half of the kingdom,
which is more, if Hierome in his Epistle to Dardanus (as I take it) deceive
Dardanus.
me not, then twice so much as all the land of Judea, though we reckon the
kingdom of Israel into it, but many times more then the kingdom of Judea,
which contained but the two tribes only that stuck to God; and of whose times
this Psalm seems to be a prophecy. And thus ye see both the gnat and the
Elephant that he speaks of, though I mean not to propose them to you by way
of comparison, but discover his intemperance or want of judgment.

But to support his credit with a broken prop, it may be he will say, that upon
the appropriating these Churches and transferring of them to the King, there
was a provision left in most of the parishes for a Vicar, or Curate to do
divine service there, and that nothing was taken from them but superfluity: so
to keep them in diet, and bridle their immoderate luxury, which he
proclaims to be so exorbitant as scarcely all England, and Virginia to boot,
can satisfy. Lord bless us! is it possible that our Churchmen should become
so monstrous? or has Shimei thus railed against the body of them without his
peril? I hope much better of their temperance, then of his tongue: But I leave
them to make their own Apology, for I have digressed beyond my purpose, and
therefore will spend no time in discoursing upon the provision made for Vicars
and Curates in these Churches appropriate. He seems to be of Micahs mind,
that ten shekels, or a matter of four nobles a year, besides diet and a suite
of apparel is a fair maintenance for one of our Ministers. In which point I
have elsewhere declared my self at large, and will not therefore here insist
upon it; only this I would know of him, what surplusage, or superfluity there
could be to give unto the King, or take from the Church, when besides the
maintenance of the Ministers, much was to be disposed by them in relieving the
poor, and other pious uses.

Henricus Spelmannus Richardo suo Careo viro praestanti Sal. P. D.
MAnsuetudinis tu^ prorsus est (vir Eximie) ut hominem me parui, and ignotum,
tanta benevolentia amplecterere. Quanquam enim secundum honorum vocabula quae
fastus mundanus jam obtinuit, Equestris dignitas major sit Armigera; in multis
tame^ Spelmannus minor est Careo. Nec me certe pudet hoc liberius profiteri,
Cum magnus ipse sic edocuit Augustinus; and Episcopus licet, presbytero cessit
Hieronymo. Placent equidem and literae tuae, and tua omnia; placent seria,
placent joci, in nomine vero meo quae egregia benignitate lusisti non possum in
tuo (multo illustriori) retribuere. Palmam igitur cedo, and quod Graecis olim,
in Caria sua gente admirati sunt, nos in Carea nostra gente agnoscimus:
ingenium splendidum, bellarumque intentionum faecundissimum. Deus bone! quantum
in nomine, and ominis and numinis? Cariae gentes (inquit Herodotus in clione)
omnium quae illis temporibus claruerunt ingeniosissimae erant. An fatale hoc
Careo nomini? etiam in alio orb, and post tot saecula? quin and seni? non
equidem invideo, miror magis: sed quem laudas authorem? an non Deus hanc tibi
prae caeteris copiam fecit? nec sola haec sed concomitantia multa ^largitus
est. Quidi ergo respondit Simon, (Luc. 7. 43.) interroganti domino, Quis plus
diliget, nonne is, inquit, cui plus donavit? recte. Nosti quae volo. Si divina
clementia tantas tibi* indulserit benignitate^* perponde sedulo, quantis tu
amoris, muneris and obsequii vinculis tenearis. Bona haec omnia in te congessit
bonus hic dominus, animi, corporis, fortunae: tune in ipsius familiam hostis
accingeris? quin and ab ecclesia sua praedam referes?

O utinam fortis in re meliore fuisses.

Sed in host probitatem agnosco; video enim vacillantem te quasi, and de
militia ista dubie cogitantem. laudo. At ^anum illud consilium amplectere, quod
omnium judicio probatissimum habetur, e dubiis certius tene, nec periculis
caput objicias: hoc est, omnino te non immisceas rebus sacris and deo dicatis,
hoc porro tutissimum. Vides rem non leviter litigatam a doctissimis: Vides
patres, Concilia, omnemque Theologorum scholam, graviter hos insectari, qui in
res ecclesiae utcunque involaverunt. Esto quod de decimis dissentiant, an sint
de jure divino? in isto tamen non consentire solum, sed and conjurasse plane
omnes videatur, Deo dicata surripi non posse in exitium ecclesiae. Quid autem
est ecclesiam excindere si hoc non sit? panem tollere ministrorum, quin and
sine noxa? At Ecclesiam (aies) in hoc connivisse; Episcopos conspirasse;
parliamentaria ipsa comitia Herculano nodo rem conclusisse, and sanxisse?
Sanxisse dicam? imo Deum testor quaenam sit sanctitas in ista sanctione. Sed de
re summa, summa cum humilitate. Nosti quam lenis sit ecclesia, tunicam
subtracturo, pallium etiam dimisit. Mat. 5. Number auferre igitur haec liceat
innocenti? dicant Corvi.

In eo autem cum salutis spem omnem sacramque ipsam posuisti anchoram; id
tandem revolvas animo, quinam hi essent Episcopi, and quoti? Valerentne suis
suffragiis procerum laicorum multitudini (qui spe haec omnia devoraverant)
repugnasse? Taceo technas, dolum, insidias, quae in tranfigendo negotio forte
non defuerant. Sed esto ecclesiam laeta front haec omnia concessisse; Certe
eatenus cum Baronio (Ascanio Cardinali respondente) in sententiam ivero,
Ecclesiam nihil posse in se statuere, hoc est, in suam perniciem. Idem enim est
and se abnuere, and ministros suos non alere. Nam in primis catalysis illius
legibus, nihil statutum est de ministrorum alimonio: mel abripitur, sed nec
loculi relinquuntur, nec alveus. Etiam ejiciuntur tam apes, quam fuci, nulla
omnino habita examinis ratione. Hoc justum dixeris? Concilio certe tum lapsum
est, quod in caeteras itemque regni ecclesias non grassatum sit. Quid enim
emeruit ecclesia Petri, ut suis juribus potius privaretur quam Pauli? Quid
ecclesia unius populi magis quam aletrius? a neutris enim peccatum est. Ecce
aenigmatis solutionem. Viatorem duplicem furibus eripuimus; liberum hunc adhuc,
sed illum vinctum: de utroque statuimus (misericordes) ut invenimus.
Emancipatur liber, perpetuo carceri addictus est vinctus. Sic cine nos edocuit
(Luc. 10.) Samaritanus? Sic fidem nostram apud Deum tuemur?

Jurarunt sane hi omnes, jurarunt, inquam, nostri majores, Reges, proceres,
parliamentariae ipsae celebritates, hoc est, Regnum integrum, omnisque populus,
non suo solum sed and nostro, and nepotum nostrorum nomine, interpositis etiam
horrendis execrationibus nulla se un* quam temporum aeternitate, haec ecclesiae
surrepturos. Quis obsecro nos liberos faciet ab his vinculis? Quis audax orator
causam hanc apud Deum aget? An ^locci pendeas? Cave ne fidem, quam apud me
splendidam habes illico labefactes. Si beati Rechabitae, qui nuda ipsa patris
sui mandata observaverunt, An non maledicti nos, qui non singularis unius, non
privati cujusdam parentis mandata contemnimus? Sed quos dixi ^^orum omnium
fides sanctione^ vot^, iurament^a, per (...) quasi improbitate per
fringimus,vi^amus, mandataqu^ne potibus anathemata, in singulorum capita
tanquam ex desiderio per^ra^imus, cum refractariis Judaeis dicontes, Super no^
sint, and natos nostros.

Vereor insa^os nos (u^i Judaeos) non discernere quae ex his nobis proveniunt
cal^^itates* Deum enim p^^emus nec mortalium curare vota, sed nec perfidiam:
Quid si lex una repentina, ter dena concilia, Senatus-consulta totidem, omnium
patr^^ dedreta, una explosione disruperit? adeone in ea sic inhaerendum est ut
ne in judicium, ne in examen vocetur? non cogitabo equidem quod in Tridentinum
Concilium solus ausus est and satis faeliciter Chemnitius. Sed iniquas leges
peccanti faepe populo irrepere novum non est* etiam in poenam alias a Domino
immissas esse, ut scriptum est, Dabo ijs leges quae non sunt bonae. Mihi autem
videtur, cum de abolendis monasteriis cogitaret Senatus ille consultus ( Anno
27. Henrici octavi) nihil etiam tunc in animo habuisse de tollendis
parochialium decimis praedijsve; sed de his tantum egisse quae ipsis caenobiis
inherebant: vel si quis id in cornu haberet faeni, latuisse hoc opinor sanctos
patres qui concilio aderant: in illo enim Actu ne verbum quidem de parochianis
decimis nec de ecclesiis, praediisve parochialibus. Sed nec de ipsis (quas
vocant) appropriatis Cum vero in vulgus jam exiisset Actus ille
parliamentarius, caeperintque omnia demoliri, and vi eripi, e jurisconsultorum
prodiit interpretatione, ut praed^ haec etiam in casses regios redigeretur.
Pardita ergo ea demum inter regni nobiles, necessario tandem habitum est, ut
subalternis legibus corroboraretur.

Sed quo me rapiet fili hujus deductio? disium pendum certe est, ne ulterius
trahar in labyrinthum. P^ture^ incaepturus silentii veniam (verbo uno aut
altero) a te exorasse; quod in rus vocatum, itineris me cura jam sollicitat;
Quandoquidem vero neque brevis est (dum redeam) via, sed nec tempus; haec
interea nobis excussit amor erga te noster fusius multo quam cogitarem.
Academici autem nitoris nihil in nostris paginis disquiras, oportet. Commune
enim illud (quod scribis) mihi tecum est. Cantabrigia (miserum me) matter exuit
cum 17. aestates non salutaveram, trajectoque celerrime Lincolniensi hospitio,
in patrium solum adolescens revocor. Gravibus hinc inde implicitus negotiis
privatis, (nec a publicis liber) ter rapior in Hiberniam. Quod reliquum fuit
vitae spatium, domi satis aerumnose exegi, denuo otii desiderio captus Londinum
tertio hinc anno veni: pace vero mihi videbar exoptatissima fruiturus, qua
Musarum limina ex voto delibarem. Sed En! nova in me rerum tempestas, nova
litium moles, inopinate proruit; qua luctantem adhuc varieque agitatum, nescio
quousque detinuerit. Poetae autem illud teneo, -- dabit Deus his quoque finem.
Habes vitae nostrae compendium; and (quam vides) magnam amoris effusionem donec
aliis tuis (per literas) quaesitis respondero. Sancte and faeliciter vale.

Londini, 18. September. 1615.
A Treatise concerning Impropriations of benefices, Cum privilegio regali.
THE PREFACE.
To the King our most gracious Sovereigne Lord, Francis Bigod Knight, his
humble and true faithful subject, and daily Orator, wishes daily
augmentation and increase of grace and honor.
I Did not perfytly know (most gracious, most christen, and most vyctorious
Prince) how that among all other virtues, that the virtuous gifts given by
grace only, through the goodness of Almighty God, of the incomparable gift of
gentleness and humanite, did so habundantly, accumulately, and so manifestly
possess and reign in your noble and princely heart, till that now it appears
manifestly by your exterior noble acts and deeds; for else undoubtedly I would
not only have bin ashamed so to attempt rudely, foolishly, and rather
presumptuously to trouble and disquiet such an imperyall majesty, with this my
rude and barbarous writing, in the hinderance of your godly and spiritual
studies, with which your highness takes such intolerable pain: as well to set
forth the mere sincere and new glory of God, as also the establishment,
quietness, and unity of this your christen Comen welthe. But also in my own
conceit and opinion calling to remembrance my great and manifold insufficiency
in learning, to write unto so mighty and famous a Prince I should even by and
by have disallowed mine own behavior in that behalf, and judged my self
worthy of blame* but now considering most benign Sovereign Lord, how much all
your subjects be imperpetually bound to laud, praise, and glorify almighty
god, to send unto us so Christen a king to have rule and governance over us
your subjects, by whose great and inestimable diligent labor, charge, study
and pain, we be delivered from the hard, sharp, and X. M. times more than
judicyall captivity of that Babylonicall man of Rome to the sweet and soft
service, yea rather liberty of the gospel. I can for my part no less do, then
to present to your grace something thereby to declare how gladly I would give
thanks to your highness, for such proofs, as I among others have received by
this said benefit in our deliverance which act is of it self so highly to the
great peace, unyte and wealth of this most noble Empire of England, that if
there were non other cause but that only we were bound to and with all our
diligence and industry to study, labor and devise how this benefit exceeding
all other, might world without end be extolled, praised, and made immortal,
and to receyte how much the furtherance of gods glory is by the same act set
forth and advanced, my learning ne yet wit will not serve me* Yet I dare
boldly afferme, pondering and considering depely the effect and circumstance of
this matter, This act is no less worth then well worthy to be set in the
book of Kings of the old testament, as a thing sounding to gods honor, as
much as any other history therein contained. but what should I attempt or go
about to express the condign and everlasting praises and thanks, which your
majesty has deserved of all your hole Cominalt for the benefits before named,
unless I would take in hand like an evil workman which by reason of his
unperfectnes in his science should utterly stain and deface the thing he would
most earnestly and diligently show and set forth. I will therefore most
excellent Emperor of this realm, set all this aside, and show to your grace
the cause of my enterprise, for so much as I perceave that all your gracious
proceedings are only driven and conveyed to the most high, just, and sincere
honor of Almighty God, the public wealth, and unity of all Christendom, most
especially of this your most noble Realm of England, it has animated and
encouraged me according to the small talent of learning that the Lord has lent
to me to put your grace in remembrance of the intolerable pestilence of
Impropriations of benefices to religious persons, (as they will be called) some
to men, and some to women, which in mine opinion is a thing plainly repugnant
to the most holy and blessed decrees and ordinances of Almighty God, and highly
to the extolling, supporting, and maintenance of the usurped power of the
Bishop of Rome, as your Majesty shall perceave in reading of this little
treatise, which your grace not being offended, I shall ever, God willing, be
able justly to defend, and also stop the mouths of them, that shall say and
abide by the contrary, and that not with mine own words, but with authorities
of holy Scripture. And further I do most humbly upon both my knees beseech
your Imperial Majesty, that unto such time, as this my little book be clearly
confuted by like holy Scripture and authorities, as I have approved the same,
that it may safely go abroad under protection of your gracious and redoubted
name.

And for the prosperous preservation of your most royal estate, of your most
noble and virtuous* Queen, of your dear daughter Lady Princess, daughter and
heir to you both, (according to my most bound duty) I shall daily pray, my
life enduring.

Sir Francis Bigott Knight of Yorkshire wrote this Note.
Treatise: whereof this Preface I received from Sir Henry Spelman, but the rest
of the book, I could never yet find, though it be mentioned by several
Authors, Bale, Hollinshead, and lately by Sir Richard Baker in his history. It
seems to have bin written after the Kings breach with the Pope, his marriage
with Anne Bolen, and the birth of Queen Elizabeth: as I conjecture by
circumstances. His purpose was chiefly bent against the Monasteries who had
unjustly gotten so many Parsonages into their possessions. It is much desired
that if any man have the rest of the book, that he would please to communicate
the copy, that hereafter, as occasion serves, it may be published completely,
together with some other things of this argument, that the learned Knight has
committed to my charge: but by reason of the present troubles I cannot now
attend to prepare them for the Press. As for Sir Francis Bigott himself, he
was found afterward active in the troubles of Yorkshire, that happened in 28.
H. 8. and being apprehended among others, was put to death, 29. H. 8. as our
common Chronicles do report.

Baleus says of him.

Franciscus Bigott ex Eboracensi patria auratus eques, homo natalium splendore
nobilis, ac doctus, and evangelicae veritatis amator, Scripsit contra clerum.
-- De Impropriaribus. lib. 1. Quosdam item latinos libros anglicanos reddidit,
inter seditiosos tandem, anno Domini 1537, invite tamen eo, repertus, eadem cum
illis indigna morte periit.

To the right Reverend Fathers and Brethren, the Bishops and Ministers of
Scotland.
I Have caused this little Treatise (right reverend and beloved in the Lord
Jesus) to be printed again in North-Britaine, for many causes: first, because
I was informed, that there came forth, but a few copies at the first printing
thereof in South-Britaine: Again, I hope this doing will incite that worthy
Knight, the Author thereof, quicklier to send out the greater work, which he
promises of that same argument; but principally to incite you, whom these
matters most nearely do concern, to look into them more advisedly, then as
yet ye have done: it was a private occasion, as that worshipful Gentleman
shows, that led him to this writing: You have a public, whereof it is pity
you are so little moved: who sees not the state of the Church of Scotland as
concerning the patrimony to go daily from worse to worse? Sacrilege and Simony
have so prevailed that it begins to be doubted of many, whether there be any
such sins, forbidden by God, and condemned in his Word? Neither can you deny
the cause of this evil, for the most part to have flowed from your selves:
your selling and making away of the Church rights without any conscience, the
buying and bartering of benifices, with your shameless and slavish courting of
corrupt patrones, has made the world think, that things Ecclesiastical are
of the nature of Temporal things, which may be done away at your pleasures:
and where at the first it was mere worldliness that led men on those courses,
now a great many to outface conscience, and delude all reproves, they stand
not to defend that Lands, Tithes, yea whatsoever belonged to the Church in
former ages, may lawfully be alienated by you, and possessed by seculars: which
opinion must either be taken out of the minds of men, or need you not look to
have these wicked facts in this kind unreformed: to this end should all
Ecclesiastical men labor to inform themselves, as well by the Word as by the
writings of Ancients, and Constitutions of Councels, touching the right and
lawfulness of ecclesiastical things, that when they are persuaded themselves
of the truth, they may the more effectualy teach others. There is no impiety
against which it is more requisite you set your selves in this time: for
besides the abounding of this sin and the judgment of God upon the land for
the same, who does not foresee, in the continuance of this course the assured
ruin and decay of true Religion?

Of all persecutions intended against the Church the Julian was ever held to be
the most dangerous: for occidere presbyteros, is nothing so hurtful, as
occidere presbyterium. When men are taken away, there is yet hope, that others
will be raised up in their places: but if the means of maintenance be taken
away, there follows the decay of the profession it self: Men do not apply
themselves commonly to Callings, for which no rewards are appointed; and say
that some have done it in our days, some out of zeal, and some out of heat of
contention, yet in aftertimes it is not like to continue so; neither let any
man tell me, that a Minister should have other ends proposed to him, then
worldly maintenance. I know that to be truth, yet as our Lord in the Gospel,
hoc etiam oportet facere, Et illud non om^^ere. Speaking of payment of tithes
to the Pharisees: It behooves them, says he, to be paid: if not, it is not to
be expected, that men will follow the Calling.

To rest upon the benevolence of the people, as it is a beggarly thing, and not
belonging to the dignity of the Ministry, so the first maintainers of that
conceit have found the charity of this kind so cold, that they will not any
more stand by their good-wills, to this allowance. Therefore it lies upon you
to foresee the estate of your Church, and either in this point of maintenance
to provide that it may be competent and assured, else look not for any thing
but ignorance and baseness, and all manner of mischiefs which flow from
these, to invade the whole Kingdom.

How a competency may be provided, except by restoring the Church to her
rights, I do not see; and what this right is, if I should stand to define, and
justify it here, I should exceed the bounds of an Epistle. Many of this time
have cleared the point sufficiently. And if any scruple be remaining, the
worthy Author, I hope, will remove it in the greater work we expect: whose
judgment and dexterity in handling the argument, may be perceived by this his
little pinnace. It should shame us of our calling to come behind men of his
place, elther in knowledge, or zeal. His example who is nothing obliged, to
labor in these points, as you are, shall do much, I trust, with you, for the
time to come. Should any look carefuller to the Vineyard then the keepers? or
should any out-goe the servants of the house in diligence? Repent therefore and
amend your own negligence, in ^his behalf, and call upon others for
amendment, whilst you have time. Think it not a light sin, to spoil Gods
inheritance; and if we look for heaven, let us be faithful to our Lord here on
earth. I beseech God to give us all wisdom, and keep us in mind of that
strict account, that we must one day give for all our doings, and chiefly these
which concern the Church, which is his body. Amen.

I thought good not to omit this Epistle to the Clergy Note.
of Scotland, prefixed before this edition at Edenborough, presently after the
first impression here; both because it proceeded from apious intent of the
Author, who it seems was very well affected, as also because he shows the
concurrence and approbation of the best religious in that Kingdom, where
sacrilegious practices have invaded that Church, more violently, since the
days of reformation, and clear light of the Gospel, then ever was done in the
darkest times of popery. Rolloc a grave and learned Divine of Scotland has
(besides Master Knox and others), in his Commentary upon Dan. 2. and 5.
discovered his judgment against the sacrilegious practices of his time, and
countrymen, reprehending them sharply, for taking to their own use and
profit, all that was pulled from the Church: and does severely cite them to
answer it before the tribunal of God: which though they neglect and contemn,
yet (says he) they shall be made inexcusable thereby.

Master Knox not long before his death, wrote to a General Assembly holden at
Sterling, 6. August 1571. and his Letter is among the Records of that Assembly,
out of which it is also published, with many other Records of Parliaments, and
Assemblies there holden in the compass of sixty years, in a Declaration lately
of the Church of Scotland.

The mighty Spirit of Comfort, Wisdom, and Concord remain with you: Dear
brethren, if ability of body would have suffered, I should not have troubled
you, -- etc. -- but now brethren, because the daily decay of my natural
strength threatens unto me certain and sudden departure from the misery of
this life, of love and conscience I exhort you, yea in the fear of God, I
charge and command you, that you take heed to your selves, and to the flock
over the which God has placed you Pastors. To discourse of the behavior of
your selves I may not, but to command you to be faithful to the flock, I dare
not forget. Unfaithful traitors to the flock shall ye be before the Lord
Jesus, if that with your consent, directly or indirectly ye suffer, unworthy
men to be thrust into the Ministry of the Church, under what pretense that
ever it be. Remember the Judge before whom ye must make an account, and resist
that Tyranny, as ye would avoid hell fire. This battle I grant will be hard,
but the second part will be harder, That is, with the like uprightness and
strength in God, ye gain-stand the merciless devourers of the patrimony of the
Church. If men will spoil, let them do it to their own peril and
condemnation; but communicate ye not with their sins of whatsoever state they
be, neither by consent, nor yet by silence, but with public protestation make
this known to the world, that ye are innocent of such robberies, which will,
ere it be long, provoke Gods vengeance upon the committers thereof, whereof you
will seek redress of God and man. God give you wisdom, strength and courage
in so just a cause, and mean happy end.

Knox.
Saint Andrews. 3. August. 1571.
An answer to a question of a Gentleman of quality (proposed to and made by a
Reverend and learned Divine living in London) concerning the settlement or
abolition of Tithes by the Parliament, which caused him to doubt how to dispose
of his Son whom he had designed for the Ministrey: wherein also are comprised
some Animadversions upon a late little pamphlet called, The Countries plea
against Tithes, discovering the ignorant mistakings of the Authors of it,
touching the maintenance of the Ministry.
Sir,
THough it were high presumption for a private man, as I am, to presage what so
wise a Senate as the Parliament will do for the future, either in point of
Tithes, or any other affair of so public concernment, yet I hope I may,
without reaching above my line, take upon me to tell you, that the ground of
your doubt touching their alienation of Tithes from the Ministry, (which I
shall bring in its proper place) is but such as will serve rather to bear up a
transient suspicion or surmise of such a matter, then a settled assurance that
it either is so already, or that hereafter it will be so. For the first, That
it is not so, I am sure; because,

1. They have passed an Ordinance for the Ministers recovery of Tithes, and
other Ministerial dues from such as do detain them, November 8. 1644. which
is still in force, through the influence of their power and favor.

2. They have made competent additions to very many livings out of impropriated
Tithes in the hands of Delinquents; and this they have done with so much
cheerfulness, and beneficence on the Ministers behalf, by the Committee for
plundered Ministers, that many have cause to bless God for them as their great
Patrons, and benefactors for that manner of maintenance; wherein they have done
beyond and above any Parliament that were before them, and they continue and
persist in the making of such augmentations, as occasion is offered, to this
very day.

3. They have given the repulse to diverse petitions against Tithes, which by
the instinct and instigation of men of unsound principles and unquiet spirits
have been put up unto them.

For the second, that they will not take them away in time to come, I have
these grounds, if not of infallible certainty, yet of very great probability.

Though they have resolved upon the sale of Bishops lands and revenues, in
their Ordinance of November 16. 1646. for that purpose, they have made an
especial exception with respect to the maintenance of Ministers in these
words, Except parsonages appropriate, tithes, tithes appropriate, oblations,
obventions, portions of tithes, parsonages, vicarages, Churches, Chapels,
advowsons, donatives, nomination, rights of patronage and presentation.

In excepting the right of patronage, they mean neither to leave it to the
power of the people to choose what Minister they please, (and the practice of
the Honorable Committee for plundered Ministers shows the same, for they
appoint and place Ministers very often without the petitions of the people, and
sometimes against them, as their wisdom sees cause; and if it were not so,
many would choose such as deserved to be put out again.) Nor to put the
Ministers upon the voluntary pensions, or contributions of the people for their
subsistence, but assign them under such a title what belongs unto them by
the Laws of the Land, viz. Tithes, obventions, etc. which intimates their mind
not only for the present, but for the future.

Their wisdom well knows that the Revenue of Tithes as it is most ancient
for the original of it, and most general in practice, both for times and
places, so it has the best warrant from the word of God (not only in the old
Testament, which none can deny, but in the new, which though it be denied by
some, is averred by others, as D. Carleton, M. Roberts, D. Sclater, M. Bagshaw,
in their treatises of Tithes, and yet unrefuted by any) and from the Laws of
many Christian States, especially from the Statutes of our Kingdom, whereof
abundant evidence is given in the book of the learned Antiquary, Sr Henry
Spelman.

3. That notwithstanding all the authority that may be pleaded for them, the
people are backward enough to pay to their Ministers a competent maintenance;
and if Tithes should be put down by the Parliament, it would be very much ado
to bring them up any other way to any reasonable proportion of allowance for
their support; and so in most places the Ministry would be reduced to extreme
poverty, and that poverty would produce contempt of their calling, and that
contempt atheism.

4. That it is evident that such as make the loudest noise against the tenure
of Tithes, are as opposite to the office and calling of Ministers as to their
maintenance; and intend by their lefthanded Logic (because as the saying is,
the Benefit or Benefice is allotted to the office) to make way for the taking
away of the Ministry, by the taking away of Tithes; and not to wait the
leisure of consequentiall operation, (according to the craft of Julian, who
robbed the Church of means, expecting the want of wages would in time bring
after it a want of workmen) but presently to bear down both, as Relatives
mutually infer one another, as well by a negative as a positive inference;
and so as the Parliament having put down the office of the Prelacy, now makes
sale of their lands, they, if they could prevail for the discarding of Tithes,
would by the same argument (clamor and slander) presently and importunately
press for deposition of the Ministry. And we see how they take upon them with
equal confidence and diligence, not only to write, but Erbury at Oxford and
Cox at London.
publicly to dispute against them both.

5. That if rights, so firmly set upon so many solid foundations, should be
supplanted, it would much weaken the tenure or title that any man has to his
lands, or goods, and would be a ready plea for rash innovators; and the rather,
because of the manner of the Anabaptists proceedings, who began their claim of
Christian liberty with a Sleydan Comment. l. 5. fol. 71. a
relaxation of Tithes, and went on to take off the Interdict or restraint in
hunting, fishing, and fowling, wherein they would allow neither Nobility, nor
Gentry, any more privilege then the meanest peasant. And as their principles
were loose; so were their practices licentious, for they held a Ibid.
community of goods, and equality of estates; Bonorum quoque communione and
humanitate cum primis esse consentaneam, and ut ex dignitate sunt omnes
aequales, and ex condition libere and promiscue omnibus bonis utuntur. Ibid.
fol. 64. prope finem.
whereupon e Quo factum est, ut vulgus ab operis atque labor desisteret, and
qua quisque re careret ab aliis qui abundabant etiam invitis acciperit. Ibid.
See also l. 10. princip.
the Common people gave over their work, and whatsoever they wanted they took
from the rich even against their good wills; So that it was a breach of their
Christian liberty, belike, to have a lock or a bolt on a door, to keep a
peculiar possession of any thing from them. And the liberty was more and more
amplified, according to the fancies of their dreaming doctors, for their
dreams were the oracles of their common people; and every day they set forth
their liberty in a new edition, corrupted and augmented, till all the partition
walls of propriety were broken down; and so not content to have other men's
goods at their disposal, and to be quit from payment of rents, and debts,
(having made a monopoly of Saintship to themselves) they excommunicated all who
were not of their faction both out of sacred society of the Church, and out of
common communion in the world as wicked and profane, and unworthy not only of
livelihood but of life also; and usurped a power to Promittebat auxilium quo
viz. impiis interfectis, novi substituerentur principes and Magistratus: nama
Deo sibi mandatum esse profitebatur (scil. Muncerus) ut sublatis illis
constitueret novos Ibid.
depose Prince and other Civil Magistrates, as they pretended they had
commission to kill them, and to constitute new ones in their stead as they
should think fit. Sathanas sub Evangelii praetextu multos hoc tempore
seditiosos and plane sanguinarios excitavit Doctores. Sleydan Comment: l. 5.
fol. 72. See more of their Doctrine l. 10. principio. and of their doings in
the following discourse of the Author of the same book.
Such seditious and sanguinary Doctors, as Luther called them, did Satan stir
up under the pretext of Evangelical liberty; a liberty which in them admitted
of no bounds, being like the etc. oath without banks, or bottom, of no rule
or order, being carried on with a wild and giddy violence; such as the great
and pernicious impostor of the world prompted them unto, though they vented
their diabolical illusions under the Title of Divine Revelations, as the
Prince of darkness made them believe, when he put on his holy day habit, the
appearance of an Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11. 14.

6. That the payment of Tithes where there are the fruits of the earth, and
increase of cattle, out of which they may be raised, is the most equitable way
and means of maintaining the Minister, since such a gain is not only
harmless, and without sin, for the manner of acquisition, (which we cannot
say of pensions and exhibitions made up out of trade or traffic) but such as
may be most permanent and constant, since whether the Tithe be less or more,
it is still proportionable to the other nine parts; and if the years be
plentiful, there is the more provision for housekeeping, if scarce, that part
though less is the more in price and worth, either for use in kind, or for
exchange for other commodities. Whereas a rate in money which is competent in
some places, and at some times, is incompetent in others, such is the change
both of moneys and necessaries bought with money. For money, the time was when
an ounce of silver now at 5. s. was valued but at 20. d. So in the Act of
Parliament in the third of Edward the first, Cokes Instit. part 2. p. 410. when
20 marks a year was enough honorably to maintain a Student at the Innes of
Court. Fortescue is his Commentary on the Laws of England, c. 49. p. 114. And
this was held so great a charge as was to be borne only by the sons of
Noblemen, and therefore they only, says the same Author, studied the Laws in
those Innes, Ibid. And of old the Revenues fit for a Knight was rated to 20. l.
a year, of a Baron to 400 marks a year, and of an Earl 400. l. a year: Cokes
Instit. l. 2. c. 3. Sect. 95. fol. 69. and Lindwood in his provincial
Constitutions notes upon the rate of a Vicarage (for such by the fraud and
rapine of the superior Popish Clergy Vitario perpetuum stipendium quinque
marcarum statuitur, nisi in partibus aliquibus Walliae ubi minore contenti
sintd. Lindwood constitut. l. 1. de ofsic. vicar. sol. 46. p. 2 col. 2. in
Textu and fol. 47. p. col. 1. Sed in glos. lit. g. Augmentatio facta est ad 8
Marcas, sed tamen alii qui non sunt contenti sine december Marcis; and revera 5
Marcae non sufficient ad hospitalitatem and alia Ibid. in glos. lit. g.
were many times deprived of Tithes, and put to pensions) that it was to be 5
marks in England, but in some parts of Wales they were content with less,
afterward their means was augmented to 8 marks a year, but some would not be
contented with less then 10 marks a year; and, indeed says the Gloss, 5
marks was too little for Hospitality, and other expenses; implying that 10
marks was sufficient for all occasions.

2 As for money, so for commodities to be bought with it, the prices have been
very various; In the Sea Polt Abridg. Edict. Londin. 1640. p. 11.
Statute entitled Assisa panis and cervisiae, made Anno 51 H. 3. and Anno Dom.
1266. the dearest rate for a quarter of wheat (which in the middle of the
Kingdom is a measure containing eight times four peckes, I render it by that
proportion, because it is more genearally known) was 12. s. the cheapest 1. s.
so that betwixt these two extremes the ordinary rate might be about 6. s. the
quarter. And for other provisions the rate set upon them in a dearth in the
Reign of Edward the second was this, for an ox fatted with grass fifteen
shillings, for one fatted with corn twenty shillings; the best cow twelve
shillings, a fat hog of two yeanes old three shillings; a fat sheep shorn
fourteen pence, with the fleece twenty pence; a fat goose two pence halfepenny,
a fat capon two pence halfepenny, a fat hen a penny, four pigeons a penny, so
that whosoever sold above should forfeit their ware to the King. Dan. Hist. l.
2. p. 209. And I well remember that not very many years ago there was a
controversy brought before the commissioners of charitable uses in Cheshire,
wherein was discovered the cheapnesse of things in former times: the case was
thus. There was a legacy of twenty marks given to the parish of Wood-church in
that County to buy oxen to till the ground of poor men, with which small sum
at the time of the donation, (about sevenscore years before) were bought no
fewer then twenty yoke of oxen; which because the poor people were not able so
to keep that they might be strong to labor, it was thought fit to sell them
and to buy in their stead as many milch kine as the money would reach unto,
which were to be hired at a low rate to such as were not able to buy such
cattle for themselves. But it is yet a cheaper price we read of in Edward the
first his days, when by Stat. Westminster. an ox was to be sold but at 5. s. so in
the 13th year of Edward the 1. cited in Cokes Instit. part 2. p. 410. How
rates are raised in the present age (whether by scarcity of things, or by the
increase of people, or multiplication of coin, or all) is not unknown to any,
and too much experimentally by many whose portion is too penurious for their
necessary expenses. Nor is this great difference of rates, either for money, or
for goods, brought to pass on the sudden, but raised by degrees; so that if
the rule of tithing should be laid down, the Ministers wages must be changed,
as Jacobs was in Labans service, many times over, which would be an intricate
trouble to proportion according to several variations of persons, and places;
to which inconvenience the maintenance by Tithes is not obnoxious; nor to any
other, which may be compared with such as will hardly be separated (if at all)
from the alienation of Tithes.

That if any innovation be made in this matter, and the people be displeased
with it, (as they will quickly be displeased with any thing which puts them to
cost) they will take the more boldness to contemn it, because it is new, and
for that it neither has, nor is like to have such a ratification of authority,
either divine, or humane, by constitution or prescription, as tithing has had;
no, though it should be supposed to last to the end of the world. For Tithes
were paid 1933 years, almost 2000 years before Christ; Salian Annal. Tom 1.
p. 251. nu. 41. and since Christ (excepting some times of persecution) for the
most part of sixteen hundred forty six years; and we cannot hope the
remaining age of the world will hold out half so long.

To these I could add diverse other considerations of importance, which cannot
be hid from the prudence of such a multitude of sage Counselors as that most
Honorable Senate the Parliament consists of; which makes me confident that
before they give assent to any such petitions as are put up against Tithes,
they will be pleased to hear what the Assembly of Divines can say in answer
to such objections, as are framed against them, upon pretense either of
Scripture or religious reason.

Animadversions upon the Petition of the Committee of Kent.
AGainst this, that which moved you to think the Parliament would take away
Tithes, was, that you have read in one of the news books, that the Knights
and Gentlemen of Kent presented a petition to the Honorable House of Commons,
against the payment of Tithes unto Ministers, and that they received thanks
from the Speaker in the name of the House for that service, and that it is held
fit to be a leading case for all other Counties of the Kingdom.

You must beware how you believe the news books, for they are many times
ignorantly and inconsiderately erroneous, or fallaciously false, out of an ill
affection to some, and apparent partiality to others.

For the Petition it self, 1. It comes not as from the Knights and Gentlemen
of that County in common, (who I am credibly informed are not very well pleased
with it) but from the Committee of Kent, who (if they be like the Committees in
many places) are not all of them men of sound, and orthodox Judgment, neither
for matter of Tithes, nor for diverse other Tenets of Religion.

2. Howsoever they profess a good meaning to establish a sufficient
maintenance for godly and well deserving Ministers; a very good meaning to
extend it so far as to succor their widows and fatherless children, as we
see by the 8th proposition of their new project. It will be a problem (which
the present age perhaps will not be able to resolve) who the Trusties in after
times will accept for such Ministers; although they may have cause to suspect
that some part of Kent for the present is not so reformed as it should be;
Anabaptists and other sectaries having misled many into adverse principles, not
only to Tithes, but to other matters of moment, concerning man's duty both of
the first and second Table.

3. For their exceptions against the received maintenance by Tithes they say
first, in general, That they bewail the sad condition of the Country, in
respect of the uncertain floting, and miserable condition of the Ministry,
occasioned by the very nature, manner, and adjuncts of the way of Tithes; which
the experience of thus many ages does plainly evince to be miserably attended
with these ensuing mischiefs.

To which I answer;

That the miserable and floting condition of the Ministry proceeds not from the
nature, manner or adjuncts of their subsistence by way of Tithes; nor does the
experience of thus many ages (that is, of the precedent ages hitherto) evince
so much; for God (who is omniscient, and therefore cannot but foresee all
subsequent inconveniences for many hundred years to come) established that
means to be a standing and settled maintenance for his service; and the misery
of the Ministry proceeds not from the nature or manner of Tithes (which to
affirm may seem to coast too near their conceit who imagine God to be the
author of sin) but from the ill consciences of men, who make no scruple to
rob God of his right, Malach. 3. (for Tithes are his portion, Levit. 27. 30.)
and Ministers may suffer very much in the present age, because there be many
Anabaptisticall sectaries (from which Kent is not more free, but as some say,
more infected then some other Counties) who take up importunate clamours
against Tithes as Antichristian and Jewish; and there will be the more by the
countenance they may have from such a petition; and such petitioners, because
diverse of them are of good reputation, not only for wealth, but for their
wisdom and learning well affected to Religion and the Parliament; and I
believe it the rather, because some godly ministers have expressed their
approbation both of it and them, though therein I conceive they showed more of
the simplicity of the dove then of the wisdom of the serpent; for albeit
their meaning might be so to gather the Tithes, and to put them into such
hands, as might be rather for the Ministers ease then for their loss, no man
can prophecy that so good a spirit will descend upon their successors, nor how
cross they may prove to such a Christian Intention.

2. For the particular exceptions, they say; first, That for the nature Petit.
of this subsistence it is a very mystery, and secret, not easily without much
art and industry attained unto; namely for the Minister to know his dues
demandable, or the parishioners their dues payable; whence arises that
multitude of scandalous and vexatious suites and brables betwixt Ministers and
people, which does fill all the Courts at Westminster, and other the
Justice-sittings in the Country likewise with causes in this kind.

In this charge there be two particulars contained, first, of the difficulty of
knowing the right of Tithes; secondly, of the vexatious suites raised betwixt
pastors and people upon that ground.

For the first, It is a very strange mystery, that after so many hundred years
of Tithing it should not yet be known what it is; but I doubt not but in this
case the right is better known unto Ministers that should receive Tithes, then
acknowledged by the people that ought to pay them; And how can they set up
their new design upon the old foundation of Tithing, as they project it, if it
cannot be known what is the Ministers demandable due, what the peoples payable
duty: that model is more like to be a mystery which they propound, since it
was never heard of in this Kingdom until they had devised it; and as like it
is to prove a misery to Ministers, if their portion should come into no better
hands then most of theirs, who have petitioned against Tithes since this
Session of the Parliament.

And secondly, for the multitude of scandalous and vexatious suites, they make
no more against the Right of Tithes, then against borrowing and lending, buying
and selling, letting of leases, settling inheritances, Joyntures, etc. upon
which titles are set the greatest number of suites; and for suites for Tithes
if the law allow them a right, it allows them a remedy to recover that right;
and for the suites that were occasioned thereby, they are neither so many as is
here presented, nor so scandalous for the Ministers part, for they may be
imputed to the old avarice of worldly minded men, who being of a contrary mind
to the Apostle, think it an hard bargain to exchange their carnal for the
Ministers spiritual things; but principally to the new principles and
practices of such unreasonable reformers, as imagine they are never far
enough removed from one extreme until they arrive at the other, accounting
all superstitious in point of Tithing, that are not sacrilegious.

2. For the manner of it, respecting either the collecting or payment Petit.
of Tithes, it is a mutual scourge in the hand of Ministers and people each to
other, if either or both (as too often it happens) prove covetous or cross.

If it be a mutual scourge, it would well become the wisdom Answ.
of these Committee Men to enquire where the right is, and who does the wrong,
and to project a way how the wrongdoer may be made to do right and to give due
satisfaction to such as suffer under an undeserved scourge, and I hope when our
reformation is grown up to such a competent degree of strength and stature as
that it may quit the service of Country Committees, there will be no more cause
of such a complaint then for many hundred years heretofore there has been.

3. For its adjuncts (that is of the maintenance by Tithes) the Petit.
mischiefs of them will appear innumerable, if the pregnancy of only one be
but considered; namely, in the unreasonable proportion of livings, or values of
Churches to which they are belonging, whence ariso these inseparable evils.

By what newfound Logic will you frame such an Induction, Answ.
as from one particular to infer innumerable mischiefs, particularly from
the disproportion of livings? You seem to think otherwise, where you say in
your 8th proposition, that in the distribution of the revenues for Ministers
regard must be had to the desert of the person, his family, and charge; if so,
certainly there is a great disproportion in deserts; and for charge it is
considerable, not only for the greatness of a Ministers family, but for the
dearnesse of his education; some have spent many years, and a large patrimony
in the University, to make them fit for the Ministry; and should not they be
supplied with a more liberal allowance ( caeteris paribus) then those who have
been at little expense both of time and estate to be duly qualified for such a
calling? If the proportion of parts, and pains, of charge both Academicall,
and Oeconomicall, be duly weighed, there will be many more livings found too
little then too great for a Ministers maintenance; especially if you will allow
him a Library (such as a learned Knight thought necessary for a Minister) of
600. l. value. But if the proportion be unreasonable, must Tithes be supplanted
and their ancient Tenure abolished for such a disproportion? must the
foundation be dug up because the building is too high? may not a tree, whose
branches are too luxuriant, be lopped, and left entire in the body and root?
when a man's beard is too long, will you cut off his chinne? that out of doubt
were an unreasonable reformation.

4. From this unreasonable proportion, you say, arise these unseparable evils:
1 That most unworthy persons, who by favor Petit.
or friendship or any sinister ways can get into the greatest livings, being
once invested with a legal right of freehold for their lives, securely sleece
the flock, and feed themselves without fear or care, more then to keep
themselves without the compass of a sequestration, whilst others both painful
and conscionable both serve starve.

This is not (as you call it) an unseparable evil from the proportion you
speak of; for there be some men who have Answ.
had, and at this present have great livings, not by any sinister ways, but by
such favor and friendship as is ingenuous, and just, and who keep as great a
distance from desert of sequestration as any Committee man does within the
County wherein they live. And if they carry themselves so as to be without
fear and care, and without the compass of a sequestration, in these
inquisitive and accusative times, they are more to be countenanced and
encouraged then many of those who are professed adversaries to them. But the
matter, it seems, that troubles you is, that they are invested with a legal
right of freehold for their lives, and if they have such a right, and walk so
warily as to keep out of the reach of a just sequestration, why should they not
enjoy it? would you have all to be betrusted to the discretion and conscience
of your arbitrary Committees? Truly Gentelemen, we are afraid to trust you so
far, as to give up such a certain title as formerly and anciently
established upon the Incumbent by the fundamental Laws of the Land, as the
right of any person to his Temporal estate, and to stand to your arbitrary
dispensations for our livelihood; lest Laban-like you should change our wages
ten times: and if your petition should take place, it might prove of very ill
consequence in another generation, were you never so well minded, and it may be
sooner (in the next succession:) for if the Trustees should be either proud or
covetous, or profane or licentious, heretical, or schismatic, the best
Mininisters might happily be the worst dealt withal; and the right of
receiving Tithes taken out of their hands might put them into the passive
condition of silly and impotent wards under subtle and domineering Tutors or
Guardians, in name such, but indeed nothing less then assertors and defenders
of their rights, as Tutors and Guardians ought to be. And that our fear and
jealousy is not without cause in respect of Trustees and Committeemen, nor so
much of you in particular, of some of whom we have heard and believe much good,
as of such as may have as great authority without so good an intention, we
shall give you our ground out of the observation and complaint of witnesses
above exception, viz. the well affected freemen and covenant-engaged Citizens
of the City of London, in their humble representation to the right Honorable
the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, in these words. And here we may
not omit to hint unto your Honors the exorbitant practices of many Committees
and Committee Men, who have such an influence by means of their authority upon
the people, they being at their wills and in their power to do them a
displeasure, that they dare not do otherwise, then obey their unlawful
commands, without the inevitable hazard of their peace and safety; through
which means tyranny is exercised by one fellow-subject upon another, and
justice and equity cannot enter. The cries of all sorts of people through the
land are grown so loud against the people of this vocation and profession, by
reason of those grievous oppressions that are continually acted by them, that
in tenderness of affection toward our brethren, not being ignorant or
insensible: of our own sufferings in this kind, and the great dishonor
accrewing to the Parliament thereby, that we cannot but be earnest suitors to
your mercy and justice that such may be dissolved.

2. For obtainment of these livings we see such sordid compliances Petit.
with such persons as have the fattest benefices (as they count and call them)
in their dispose; such artifices in contriving, making, and coloring over
Simoniacall and sinful bargains, compacts, and matches, such chopping of
Churches, and restless change of places, till they get into the easiest and
warmest: and other such like practices not to be named, nor yet to be prevented
or removed, otherwise then by plucking up the very root which naturally
brancheth out it self into these foresaid mischiefs, so obstructive and
destructive to all reformation.

Here is a great deal of aggravating rhetoric against the greatness Answ.
of Church Livings. But why should all this evil be imagined rather of
Ministers fat benefices as you say they are called, then of great and gainful
offices in the State? Is there not more care had, and more strict trial taken
of Ministers sincerity and integrity then of secular officers? surely we are
bound in charity to expect a more reformed Ministry, then we have had, who
will rather say unto a Simoniacall patron as Peter to Simon Magus, Thy money
perish with thee, Acts 8. 20. then be Levies to such a Simeon in making a base
and corrupt contract for a benefice. And for that you say, that such practices
are not to be prevented or removed, otherwise then by plucking up the very
root, which naturally brancheth it self out into these foresaid mischiefs,
so obstructive and destructive to all religion. Whether you mean Tithes to be
this root, or the disproportion of Benefices, or the right of patronage and
protection, I cannot tell, but sure I am, that the Apostle calls covetousness
the root of all evil, and so the root of that evil which sometimes passes
betwixt a Patron and his Chaplain: and may as frequently, and with as much
injury be sound betwixt some Committee Men and Trustees and the Ministers of
their choice, as any other. But as I am confident that there will be an
amendment on the Ministers part, by the regular way of the Parliaments
reformation, according to the directions of ordination of Ministers already
printed and accordingly practiced, so will it be not only possible, but easy
for the State to find out a fit means to prevent prevarication on the part of
the Patron; but if Tithes be removed from their ancient foundation, and left
loose to the disposal of Trustees or Committee Men, they will be a more ready
prey for the covetous into whose hands they may come, and from whose hands
perhaps they cannot without great difficulty be redeemed.

Lastly, in the close of this Petition, the Petitioners show great care that
the Ministers may be freed from the encumbrance of Tithes, to serve the Lord
without distraction, and to give themselves to the Word of God and Prayer, and
to be only employed to make ready a people prepared for the Lord; And so they
may do if they be maintained by Tithes; for that means of maintenance gives a
man occasion of more and better acquaintance with the particular disposition of
his people, and it is his part to be diligent to know the state of his flock,
Prove. 27. 23. And for that trouble which may be thought inconsistent with the
Calling of a Minister, if his means be sufficient, he may have a servant to
take it from him, and ease him of it. I know a Minister whose Benefice was a
Vicarage, and his Parish so large, that it was 11 miles in length, and of a
proportionable breadth, yet did it not put him to the expense of one day in a
year to compound for, or gather in his dispersed portion.

Now for the success and acceptance of the Petition in the Honorable House of
Commons, to which it was presented; if such an innovation had been granted for
that County, it had been fitter to have been made a Sibboleth, for that cauthe
or angle of the Kingdom (for so the word Kent signifies) as their custom of
Gavelkind is a custom anciently observed in Kent, whereby the land of the
father is equally divided among all his sons, or the land of a brother equally
divided among his brethren, if he have no issue of his own, this was so common
a custom as appears by the Stat. in the 18. year of H. 6. ca. 1. that there
were not above 30 or 40 persons in Kent* that held by any other tenure; but
Anuo 31 H. 8. ca. 3. many Gentlemen upon Petition got an alteration thereof.
Gavelkind, then to be made a president or pattern of conformity to other parts
of the Kingdom, as the News-Book of the same week prescribed that to his
Reader.

But the answer of the worthy Senate was such as may further confirm us in our
confidence, that they will still continue to be gracious Patrons of the
maintenance of Ministers, and that they will be more ready to ratify precedent
Statutes and their own Ordinance made in that behalf, then to dissettle their
tenure which is founded upon them, and to make Ministers arbitrary Pensioners
to such as may be so far swayed by misprision of judgment, or personal
dis-affection, as to deal most penuriously with those, who being truly valued
(without erroneous mistaking or injurious misliking) may both by the eminence
of their parts, and their faithfulness in their places, deserve the most
ample, and most honorable Revenue. I will give you their answer in their own
words, which are most authentic, they are these.

M. Speaker by order of the House of Commons did give the Petitioners (the
Committee of Kent) thanks for their former services, and took notice of their
good affections to the Public; and did acquaint them, That the great
businesses of the Kingdom are now instant and pressing upon them, and that
they will take the Petition into consideration in due time, and that in the
mean time they take care that Tithes may be paid according to Law.

But there are some in the Parliament that hold the maintenance Object.
of Ministers by Tithes to be Jewish and Popish, and therefore they will give
countenance to Petitions that are put up against them, and do what they can
under such titles to render them offensive to such as are truly religious,
especially to those who have most power to abolish them.

1. It may be there are some such, and if there be some such among Answ.
so many, it is neither to be thought strange, nor true, for such a number of
them as may be able to carry the cause against the continuance of Tithes.

2. For the term Jewish, it is mis-applyed against Tithes, as it was by the
Prelates of late, and is by the Anabaptists at the present against the Sabbath;
nor are they more Popish then Jewish; For the Papists, though their people pay
them, and their Priests receive them, yet they for the most part holding the^
to depend merely upon Ecclesiastical constitution, made no scruple of changing
them into secular titles or uses, as in Impropriations in the hands of Laymen,
and many other distributions made out of them several ways, without any
respect to the service of the Sanctuary. Nor is there any thing in the payment
and receiving of Tithes under the state of the Gospel, which may probably be
suspected to have any savor of Judaisme, or Popery, save only the payment of
Tenths by the Ministers to the King, as has been lately well observed by Mr L.
in his second Book against Mr S. I will set down his words, and seriously
commend them to the consideration of our religious Reformers; they are these,
in answer to Mr S. his Question.

Qu. What Smoke p. 25.
are the maintenance of Ministers by Tithes? Jewish and Popish undenyably.

Ans. How? Jewish and Popish undeniably? As undeniably as the Sabbath was
Jewish when the Prelates so called it, or the article of the Trinity Popish, as
Quod Ecclesiae resormatae adhuc in side Tinitatis cum Papistis conconveniret.
^ell. praesat. in lib. de Christo, Tom. 1. secund Controvers. general. p. 271.
Valentinus Gentilis took it, when he disliked the doctrine of the Reformed
Churches in that point, because they agreed with the Papists therein. You are
grossly mistaken Sir in the tenure of Tithes, for though there be a clamor
taken up against them by such as make no scruple either of slander or of
sacrilege, and some would change the Ministers portion, which is their masters
wages for his own work, and reduce them to voluntary pensions of the people,
(because they would have a liberty to beggar them who will not humor them in
their fond and false opinions, and licentious practices, but oppose them as of
conscience they are bound to do) neither you, nor all your party can prove
them either Jewish or Popish, as they are allowed and received for the
maintenance of the Ministers of England. And because you are so confident in
your opinion against Tithes, and show your self to have a good opinion of Mr
Nigh, ( whom with Mr Goodwin Smoke p. 14.
you cite for a worthy saying touching the golden Ball of Government) I refer
you for satisfaction to him, who will tell you (as he has done diverse others
in my hearing) that Ministers of the Gospel may hold, and receive Tithes for
their maintenance by a right and title which is neither Jewish nor Popish, but
truly Christian; and there is nothing Jewish or Popish in Tithes, but the
assignation of the decimae decimarum, from the Numb. 18 28
Leviticall Priests to the high Priest, from the high Priest to the In veteri
lego primitiae debebantur sacerdotibus, decimae autem Levitis, and quia sub
sacerdotibus Levitae erant, Dominus mandavit ut ipsi loco decimarum solverent
summo sacerdoti decimam decimae, unde nunc eadem ratione tenentur Clerici summo
pontisici decimam dare si exigeret. Aquin. 22. q. 87. a. 4. ad 3. Soto 9. Inst.
q. 4. art. 4. ad. 3. Lo^in. in Number. 18. 28. p. 687.
Pope, and from the Pope to the King; when first Pope Urbane gave them to
Richard the second to aid him against Charles the French King, and others that
upheld Clement the seventh against him, as Polyd. Virg. Hist. l. 16.
Polydore Virgil relates. And King Henry the eighth taking from the Pope the
title of head of the Church to himself by Anno 26 H. 8. c. 1. Poult. Abridg. p.
561.
Act of Parliament, took from him the tenths, and other profits annexed to that
title, which were settled upon the Crown by Ibid. c. 2. p. 565.
Statute in the 26th year of Henry the 8. so that the Jewish high Priesthood
being expired, the papal Lordship abolished, the Tithes paid under those
titles, may be called Jewish and Popish, but not that which is assigned for the
maintenance of Ministers, because they are yet to do service to their Master,
and so to receive the maintenance of his allowance for his work; which
fellow servants cannot take upon them to take away without presumption; their
door-neighbor will not allow them a power to appoint the wages of their
servants, much less may they usurp upon the right of God, and his Ministers,
to alienate tithes from the support of his service and worship, for that is
rather Popish, as has before been observed.

Which being true and clear, (as touching the pedigree of such Tithes from the
high Priesthood of Aaron to the Independent Prelacy of the Pope, and from him
to the King, as by claim from the title, Head of the Church, translated from
the Miter to the Crown) it will not I conceive be thought congruous to the
Christian Reformation (the through Reformation professed by our worthy and
religious Rulers) that such Monuments of Superstition or Popery should be
removed, which were unprofitable, and that only retained (as a silver shrine
to Diana) which brings gain to the King or State, and puts the charge upon the
Ministers of the Gospel; who thereby (I may say it confidently for some whom I
know) are brought to this perplexed Dilemma, either to pay them with
reluctance, (as no less contrary to their consciences then to their
commodities) or to deny or withhold them with suspicion, or imputation of
avarice, or disobedience to lawful Authority.

But the Parliament likes not that Tithes should be proposed, Obj.
or pressed, as many Divines do, both in Pulpit, and from the Press, as of
divine right; which because they think to be wrong, they will rather reject
them, then ratify them under a title of so high a strain.

1. Not only Divines, but diverse Sir, Ed. Coke in his second Report in the
Archb: of Can. his case. s. 49. b. And so the Author of the foregoing learned
Work. Answ.
others (who are men of very eminent note) hold Tithes to be due by divine
right, and some of them have undertaken to prove them so, and to answer all
objections against them, which how far they have performed is left to the
judgment of indifferent Readers.

2. It is more like that (as both religion and reason will dictate unto them)
they will be the more wary how they take them away, lest if that tenure should
prove true, they should be found guilty of the sin of sacrilege, that they
should abolish them, and that they will seriously search and enquire into the
ground of that title, and while they are in doubt, that they will resolve of
the safest course, which is, not to repeal them; for as we must forbear to feed
of meats of which another says, that they are sacrificed to idols, 2 Cor. 10.
28. (for his sake that says it, though but a private Christian;) so if Divines
say, (and bring Scripture and reason for it) that Tithes are dedicated to God,
or by him assumed, first to himself, and then assigned or set over by him to
his servants, for his work in waiting on his worship, which must be maintained
to the worlds end, it will be rather a reason for them to support the tenure of
Tithes by their Parliamentary power, then any way to prompt or dispose them to
desert it, or to alienate their right from Ecclesiastical uses.

The fear of sacrilege has been of such force with some heathen Moralists, as
Plutarch observes in his Morals, that if they pulled down a house contiguous
to a temple, they would leave some of that part standing which was next unto
it, lest they should with it take away any part of the Temple it self. Wherein
if they showed any spice of superstition, it will be more capable of pardon, or
less liable to punishment at the hand of God, then we may expect if we proceed
hastily to lay violent hands upon any thing peculiarly entitled to his honor,
who is the author and giver of all things to all men.

2. If the plea of a divine right for Tithes (supposing it sets them up too
high) should incline to irritation in some to make opposition against them, why
should not the contrary tenet which peremptorily takes them down too low,
calling them Jewish, Antichristian, and Popish, and that undeniably, (as has
been said, but never can be proved) move others the rather to retain them, and
confirm them? chiefly the Parliament (whose authority is most engaged for their
justification) and especially since the servants of God have had possession of
them by so many laws, and so long a prescription; for according to the maxim
of the law, the possessors title is the best until he be Longa possessio
(sicut jus) parit jus possidendi and toll it actionem vero domino. Bract. l. 2.
fo. 52.
fairly gvicted out of it.

3. If the Parliament do not in their approbation of Tithes come up to the
tenure of divine right, they may yet be willing enough to establish them upon
other grounds, and leave Divines to the liberty of their judgment and
consciences to plead for them according to the principles of their own
profession, as in their Ordinances made for setting up of the Presbyterial
Government, though yet they be not satisfied of the claim of divine right for
it, they were pleased to authorize it by their Ordinance, and to require
Divines to prepare the people for the reception thereof by preaching of it, and
for it; so as both to clear it, and assure it (so far as they could) by the
sacred Scripture.

And on the other side while they approve it, though but by a civil assent,
(as to a prudentiall design, until they see more light, which they look for in
the Answer to their Queres proposed to the Assembly of Divines) the
Presbyterians who hold it in the highest esteem take none offense that they
proceed no farther, and profess themselves well satisfied with their civil
sanction; so one of the learned Commissioners of Scotland has said, in the
name of the rest, in these words, If they shall in a M. Gillespie his brotherly
examination of M. Colemans Sermon. p. 32, 33.
Parliamentary and Legislative way establish that thing, which is really, and
in it self agreeable to the Word of God, though they do not declare it to be
the will of Jesus Christ, they are satisfied.

Ob. If there were no purpose to put down Tithes by such as are in Authority,
how comes it to pass that the Anabaptists are more bold in London to take up
a public contestation against them, then the Presbyterians to make apology
for them? for did not one Mr B. C. an Anabaptist manage a dispute against Mr W.
I. of Chr. and after that undertake another upon the same argument against M.
I. Cr. and offered to proceed in it against all opposition, which M. Cr. durst
not do, upon pretense of a prohibition from authority?

Ans. 1. It is no strange thing for men who have a bad cause to set a good face
on it, and to make out with boldness and confidence what is wanting in truth
of judgment, and strength of argument; this is observed of the Papists by a
judicious Author, Sir Ed: Sands Europ. Specul. p. 85.
whom he shows to have been forward in the offers of disputation, with
iterated and importunate suits for public audience and judgment. And
Bellarmine reports out of Surius, that Io* Cochleus a great Zealot for the
Papacy, offered to dispute with Obtulit se ad disputandum cum quovis Lutherano
sub poena capit is si in probationibus defecisset. Bell. de Eccles. Script. p.
423.
any Lutheran upon peril of his life, if he failed in the proof of his part of
the Question.

2. For the boldness of the Anabaptists at this time, and in this Cause, and
this City, there may be diverse conjectural reasons in particular given thereof,
besides the general already observed; as,

1. Because they advance in their hopes of a toleration of their Sect; and to
promote that hope they have been so ready to engage in military service, with a
design no doubt to get that liberty by force (if they be able) which by favor
of authority they cannot obtain.

2. For this matter of Tithes, they might be more forward to oppose their
tenure, because it is a very popular and plausible argument, wherein they might
have the good wills of the people, that they might prevail, and their conceits
that they did so, (though they did not) because they would be very apt to
believe Quod valde volumus facile ^redimus.
what they vehemently desire may come to pass; and it is not to be doubted but
a dram of seeming probability will prevail more with most worldlings to spare
their purses, then an ounce of sound reason to put them to charges.

3. They might take some encouragement to dispute against Tithes in this City,
because there is a project to change the maintenance of the Ministers set on
foot by many worthy, and well-minded Citizens, which yet in truth makes nothing
for the Anabaptists opinion, who would have Ministers maintained by mere
benevolence; for the Citizens, as they intend a more liberal allowance then
the former, (since they see many of their Churches are destitute of Ministers,
because their Ministers have been destitute of means) so they mean that it
shall be certain, settled by Authority, and not left arbitrary to the courtesy
of men.

3. For the two disputes, the one managed betwixt M. W. I. and M. B. C. the
other purposed betwixt M. I. Cr. and the same B. C. but disappointed, it makes
nothing at all for the taking away of Tithes; For as touching the former, they
who were possessed with prejudice, or corrupted with covetousness against the
truth, were much confirmed in the lawfulness of such rates as are paid in
London under the title of Tithes, though indeed they are not Tithes, and of
such only was the debate at that time.

For the intended debate which was to be touching the divine right of Tithes,
though some godly and prudent men thought it should not have been taken in hand
without the warrant of public authority, yet they made no doubt but that the
truth of the cause, or ability of the man, who undertook the defense of it
against M. C. would prevail unto victory. But for the disappointment, it was by
the warrant of the Lord Major of the City, to them both, interdicting the
dispute, which was both without M. I. Cr. his knowledge, and against his good
will; yet he obeyed the prohibition, and when his Antagonist insisted, and
urged the performance of what was agreed upon, notwithstanding the contrary
command of the Lord Major, his answer was, that it was agreeable to the
Anabaptists principles to disobey Authority, but not according to the
principles of Presbyterians. And left B. C. should take it for a token of
distrust in his cause, and make it an occasion of vainglory, either against
the cause or person of M. I. Cr. he proposed the printing of M. B. C. his
arguments against Tithes, and engaged himself to answer them in print, and so
to refer both to the judgment of al unbyassed Readers, which was the best way
to give clear and full satisfaction to such as doubt on which side the truth is
swayed by the most authentic testimony and soundest reasons.

It is no part of my task for the present to argue farther for Tithes, then may
answer the doubt you have proposed to me, which is, of the Parliaments purpose
and proceedings touching the establishing, or abolishing of them.

Animadversions upon the late Pamphlet entitled, The Countries plea against
Tithes.
YEt that you may not be scrupled in conscience (as you were in conceit) by a
new petty Pamphlet against payment of Tithes, which perhaps may come to your
hands; I will give you some animadversions upon it; which may also be of use to
others as well as to you. The title of the Book is, The Countries plea against
Tithes, with this addition, A Declaration sent to diverse eminent Ministers in
several parishes of this Kingdom, proving by Gods word and moral reason,
that Tithes are not due to the Ministers of the Gospel; and that the Law for
Tithes was a Leviticall Law, and to endure no longer then the Leviticall
Priesthood did, etc.

Wherein the Authors say much in the outside, but make no answerable proof in
the inside of the Book. They direct it in the Title page as a Declaration to
diverse worthy Ministers in the Kingdom, and in the beginning of the body of
the Book they present it as a joint Declaration of the people of several
parishes for their opinion concerning Tithes, as a Reply to certain papers
from some Ministers, pretending to prove Tithes due by authority of Scripture.
It had been fair dealing if they had printed those papers of the Ministers,
that it might appear how well they had answered them.

But for the confident contradiction of the Divine right they allege,

1. The novelty of them in the Christian state. 2. The ceremoniality of them,
as being merely Leviticall. 3. The inequality of them in several respects. 4.
The trouble of them to the Minister.
For the first; they refer the original of them under the Gospel, for the
author, to Pope Vrbane; for the time, to the three hundredth year after
Christ's ascension; and for proof of both, they cite Origin, Cyprian, and
Gregory, at large without any particular quotation to find what they cite:
until which time, say they, there was community of all things among Christians.

But first, they should tell us which Urban it was, (who they say began to
bring Tithes into use for the maintenance of the Ministry) for there were 8 of
that Name, and of those 8 (if Origin be a witness of it) it must be Urban the
first, Anno 227 who sat but 6 years, and 7 months, and there was not another
Pope called Urban until the year 1087. which was long after the latest of
those three, viz. Gregory, (whether they mean Greg. Nazianz. or Greg. Nyssen,
or Gregory surnamed,) the Great, Bishop of Rome; and Origin testified so much
of Tithes recalled by Pope Urban, their original must be ancienter then 300
years after the ascenson; for that Urban lived not beyond the year 234, and
Origin flourished Anno 226. and if Tithes began when Christians gave over the
community of goods, as these men say p. 2. in the name of Tertullian, but bring
no proof of it, then had Ministers a propriety in Tithes as soon as others had
a propiety of estate; and sooner it could not be. And that which caused this
community, the persecution of the Church (which reached to his age: for the
Tom. 1. Council. p. 104.
next predecessor to that Urban, Calixtus was a Martyr) might very well cause a
suspension of Tithes for all that time.

2. For the tenure of Tithes; there be 3 disputable opinions: Decimae sunt pura
eleemosyna, and parochiani possunt propter peccata suorum praelatorum, ad
libitum suum auserre eas. Council. Constant. Session. 8. Tom. 7. Council. p. 1016
col. 2. Artic. 18.
1 Whether they be Moral; 2 whether Judicial; 3 whether Ceremonial, (there
is a fourth conceit that they are mere Alms, which is imputed to Wickleff in
the 8 session of the council of Constance; but that admits of no dispute since
it is repugnant to all appearance of reason.) 1 Some hold them Moral, as those
Ministers whom these men pretend to answer; most of the Canonists, Marc. Anton.
de Dom. de Rep. Eccl. l. 9. c. 2. Zepperus in Explic. legum forens. Mes. c. 10.
and many English Divines.

2. Some hold them Judicial, as Bell. lib de Cler. c. 25.

3. Some Ceremonial, as these parishioners do. There is the least reason for
this last opinion. For Tithes were taken as a tribute by God himself as the
chief Lord of all the earth, Levit. 27. 30. whereby he is acknowledged giver
of all; and that it is in his power to curse the earth with barrenness, and to
starve the creatures that live upon it; and this is true of all ages, and
therefore we read of payment of Tithes by Abraham, Genesis 14. 2. Heb. 7. 4. and
vowing of Tithes by Jacob, before the Leviticall Priesthood was established,
Genesis 28. 22.

But sacrifices, say they, are ancienter then Tithes, and were long Object.
before the Ceremonial Law was ordained, yet they are not to be continued in
the time of the Gospel.

True, because they were types of future things to be exhibited Answ.
in the New Testament, but Tithes have no typical intimation in their
institution or use, being set apart by God for himself, and given by him as
the wages to his servants for doing his work; which he assigned to the Levites
for their time, and made them suitable to their state by peculiar ordinances, as
Number. 18. 26, 27. etc. Levit. 25. 3. 4. 5. which expired with the Priesthood,
though Tithes in general did not; and therefore such particulars are no more
to be urged against that maintenance of Ministers in the New Testament, then
the Jewish observations of the Sabbath against the keeping of a Christian
Sabbath at this day.

3. For that they say of inequality in respect of impropriations, p. 6. in
respect of tradesmen in Towns and Cities, who gain more then farmers and pay
no Tithes, p. 9. and in respect of the loss which may befall the farmer, when
he has not increase to answer his cost and labor, Ibid.

For the two first, it is worthy consideration of those who are in authority
how to reduce them to more equality. For the third; the exception lies no more
against Tithes now, then in the time when they acknowledge them most in force;
and when it proves an ill year with the plowman, it will be well for him to
consider whether his unconscionablenesse in Tithes have not procured a curse
upon his portion, according to the commination in the third of Malac. 8. 9.

And lastly, for the trouble of the Minister; 1 If he have but a little Tithe,
it will be no great trouble for him to order it, especially since he may
lawfully exchange it into money. 2. If he have a great Tithe, it will bear the
charge of a servant to ease him of the trouble. And 3. If this inconvenience
could not be avoided, (as well it may) there would follow far greater upon
the taking away Tithes, such as before we have observed.

With these exceptions against this revenue of Tithes they have delivered
something worthy the acceptance of Ministers, which is p. 5. 6. It is the
desire, say they, of al Gods people (and so it ought to be) that the Ministers
of the Gospel should have a sufficient maintenance allowed them, nay not only
a sufficient maintenance, but an abundant, a large and rich maintenance, such a
maintenance as they may live liberally without any other employment but the
Ministry; Nor is it fit or becoming Christians that their Minister should
live in a mean condition either of diet or clothing, but as he is more
excellent in calling, so ought he to have a more large and better maintenance
in those respects then others, for he feeding the souls with spiritual
things, the word of God, the people ought to feed his body liberally with their
base temporal things: and in the next page say they; And is it not a shame for
a rich and flourishing commonwealth to have a poor and bare Ministry, either
in the general, or in some particulars? and yet into such a condition have
Impropriations brought the Ministry of this commonwealth in very many places.

They conclude with an address to the high court of Parliament for a
reformation in this particular of Tithes, p. 10. and herein we are content to
meet them at the bar of that most wise, prous, and impartial Judicatory of
the Kingdom, who, as they have, so we doubt not but they will ratify the
ancient Statutes, and their own late Ordinance concerning Tithes; and
whatsoever their title be in respect of religion, the people may (though
ignorant zelots hold, and covetous worldlings pretend they may not) pay them
with good conscience, for the State may impose them for the maintenance of the
Ministry, as well as they may impose the 20 part, or any other part they
please, to maintain a just war, or to pay the debts of the Kingdom; and
others may conscientiously submit to such impositions; and hereto the most
learned Divines of the reformed Churches do agree, (though the most of them,
as they are mistaken in the true doctrine of the Sabbath, so are they also in
this question of Tithes) for albeit they maintain their Ministers while they
live, and provide for their widows and fatherless children, when they are
dead, Cujus leg^s (scil politicae) vi nec ipsi sideles reformai^ denegant
solvere decimas, in regnis illis, in quibus subjiciuntur Principibus qui illas
lege solvendas sanciunt; qua ratione etiam a theologis responsum fuit nonnullis
qui scrupulo conscientiae se teneri praetendebant, ne pontificiis
ecclesiasticis solverent decimas, qui Idololatriae sunt ministri. D. Rivet.
Exercit. in Genes. Exercit. 80. p. 389. col. 2.
yet they resolve it lawful to pay the 10th to the popish priests, though they
officiate in an Idolatrous service, upon the command of the Prince, or State
under which they live.

This may suffice for this little Treatise, which, though little, if it had not
been less in weight then in length, I would not have been so observant of the
importunity of the Printers calling for my paper, as to dispatch mine
animadversions upon it in the short interim of one night, betwixt rising from
supper and reposing for sleep, which yet had been too much if most readers
were not too readily prepared to entertain any Text that makes for their
commodity, whether by acquiring advantage, or sparing expenses.

Now for your secondary doubt concerning the disposal of your son, give me
leave, Sir, to give you my sense fully and freely in the case.

1. I see by you and him (which I am sorry to observe, yet I fear it is like
to prove too true in all ages) that if there be not sufficient and certain
means allotted to the laborers in the Lords harvest, he is like to have but a
few workmen to undertake it, and go through with it; therefore those that
Julianlike, take away the hire of spiritual laborers, make way, as much as in
them lies, for the marring of the harvest; for either there will be a want of
workmen, or of such sufficiency in them as may make the work to prosper in
their hands: hence is the miserable condition of the Greek Church, living (if
not languishing) under the dominion of the Turks, where their Clergy as they
are the meanest sort of men, (like Ieroboams Priests, who though they were to
serve in the house of high places, were the lowest of the people, 1 Kings 12.
31.) so are they as despicable for their ignorance and mean qualifications
every way as for their poverty, G. Sandys his Travailes l. 1. p. 77.
having no schools of learning among them, and therefore more like either to
poison or famish the souls committed to their charge, then to feed and nourish
them with a competent measure of the sincere milk of the Word, that they may
grow thereby.

2. But I fear no such failing of maintenance for Ministers among us, as may
occasion such a discouragement to parents that they should not be willing to
dispose of their children in that calling, for fear they should serve Christ
upon such poor terms Vineent. Charter. de Imag. Deor.
as the Priests of Isis did that heathen goddess, who were not allowed a new
suite until the old was worn to rags.

3. Yet if that were true which you read in the weekly pamphlets, or which
you had by report, of the likelihood of putting down Tithes by the Parliament,
I must tell you plainly as your friend, I like not your wavering touching the
disposal of your son; for if he be furnished with personal abilities for
the service of the Sanctuary, if he be (as I hope he is) a man of holy life and
conversation, if he find himself inwardly moved by the holy Ghost to enter
into that holy function, it will be a greater sacrilege in you then robbing of
the Church of so much Tithe as would maintain him, to divert him from the
service of Christ, and salvation of souls, through distrust of the divine
providence for his support. And therefore,

4. If I conceived you to be so carnal a father (but I dare not think you are
such a one) I should turn my speech from you to your son, had I opportunity
to speak with him, and exhort Licet in limine pater jaceat, per calcatum perge
patrem siccis oculis ad vexillum crucis evola. Hieron. ad Heliodor. Tom. 1. p.
2. Genus pietatis est in hac re crudelem esse. Ibid.
him not only to serve Christ, but to suffer for him, in the words of Hierom
to Heliodorus, rather to tread upon you, if you should lie as a block in his
way, then to make a stop, or to retire from following after Christ, though in
zeal and haste he should overtake the Cross; for in such a case it is a kind
of piety (says he) to show cruelty toward our chiefest friends.

Thus, as my little leisure would allow me, I have endeavored to satisfy your
desire in resolving your doubt, and I hope that I have written will reach a
little further then you thought of, even to the settling of your resolution to
dedicate your son to the service of our Savior; and to serve him upon such
terms whatsoever they be, as the Divine providence in the condition of the
times shall put upon him, and so you have my advice, and you shall have my
prayers for you and yours.

FINIS.

