DE SEPULTURA.

By Sr HENRY SPELMAN, KNIGHT.



LONDON, Printed by ROBERT YOUNG, and are to be sold by Matthew Walbancke and
William Coke. Anno 1641.

DE SEPULTURA.
AS it is a work of the Law of Nature and of Nations, of humane and divine
Law, to bury the Dead* so it is to administer that which necessarily conduces
to it, the Place and Office of Burial. Genesis 4. 11. Lucan speaking to Caesar
touching them he left slain in Pharsal. lib. 7. pa. 7. 161. Nil agis hac ira,
tabesne cadavera solvat, An rogus, haud refert; placido natura receptat Cuncta
sinu, finemque sui sibi corpora debent. So likewise that of Mecaenas -- Sepulit
natura relictos.
If man were so impious as not to afford it, the earth to his shame will do
it: she will open the pores of her body, and take in the blood; she will send
forth her children, the worms, to bring in the flesh of their brother; and with
her mantle, the grass, as with a windingsheet, she will enfold the bones and
bury all together in her own bosom. Men (in passion) refuse oftentimes to do
it to their enemies, to wicked persons, and to notorious offenders; but she,
as a natural mother that can forget none of her children, does thus for them
all both good and bad; teaching us thereby* what we should do for our
brethren, and branding those with impiety that answer with Cain, Am I my
brothers keeper?

The drift of my speech tends to the reproof of a custom grown up amongst
us Christians, not heard of, I suppose, among the Barbarians, Selling of graves
and the duty of burial; wherein I desire a little liberty to express my
self somewhat at large, as being one of the motives that led me the rather
to this discourse.

There seems if not a warrant, yet a president for it in the book of
Genesis, Chap. 23. where Ephron sells a burying place to Abraham, but St.
Jerome censureth Ephron very hardly touching that matter, even as though he
had committed some point of Symonle, or of great impiety; and says, that for
this taking of money for the burying place, O, the letter of perfection was
struck out of his name, and that in stead of Ephron, which signifies perfect,
he was afterward called Ephran, that is unperfect. The Scripture I confess
makes no such mention, nor Josephus, nor any other ancient that I can find: I
blame not therefore Calvin that he accepts it not, but for that he
sleighteth that noble Father so lightly as to term it a very toy. I hold
Calvin much inferior to Meras nugas.
Austen, yet Austen professed himself inferior to Jerome: what warrant Jerome
had for it I know not, all men take him for no Imposter; I suppose (and so
might Calvin) that he had it from the Rabbis, because he entitleth that
book of his Quaestiones et traditiones hebraica in Genesin: but all* are not
of Calvin's mind, many of the Fathers and Councels do well accept it.

For my own part, I incline with Calvin to the excusing of Ephron; for both he
and the Hethites, as though it were against nature to take any thing for
burying of the dead in their soil, gave Abraham free liberty, not only to
bury, but to do it where he would, even in the chiefest of their Sepulchers.
This contented not Abraham, he would not only have usufructum rei, the
fruition of burial, but dominium loci, the inheritance of the soil itself.
To sell this I should think it lawful, though not the other in any case:
lawful to sell the Patronage of a Church, not the Presentation, Institution,
or Induction. Pretium loci in quo humand^^ F. de relig. and sumpt. funeral.
funeris.
est, a man may take by the civil law, but there was a necessity that Abraham
must have the very soil proper and solely to himself: for the circumcised
might neither dead nor alive mingle with the uncircumcised, as at this day the
Christians not with Infidels, the Faithful not with Heretics or
Excommunicate persons. In this also Ephron was content to satisfy Abraham, and
whereas he requested no more then the cave of Meschepelah, Ephron not only
granted him the cave, but the whole field also wherein the cave was, and that as
a free gift, if Abraham would so accept it; but Abraham refusing to have it by
gift, bought the whole field and by right of appendencie had the cave with it.
Nothing in all this do I see but nobleness and bounty in Ephron, nor any just
impediment why he might not at first have demanded the price of the field*
much less why he might not take it, being pressed upon him, as well as
Araunah took more money of David for the threshing floor, where he was to
build an Altar and to sacrifice unto God. All this notwithstanding, because the
scope of the money taken by Ephron was for burial of the body that then wanted
it, and not for the soil of the field, but for the Sepulcher, as Saint Stephen
testifies, Jerome Act. 7. 16.
utterly condemns it, and the rather (perhaps) for that Adam and Eve were
said to be buried there, for of such monuments he was somewhat curious.

Yet did he not so much reprove this taking by Ephron, as the vice and sin
of our time in requiring and exacting money for burial, which beginning then
to creep into the world, gave the Church a just occasion both to censure and
condemn it by many Constitutions, Canons and Decrees; whereof I will recite
some, which I conceive are at this day in force (as touching the substance of
them) in our Church, though neglected and not observed by our Churchmen.

Nereida a noble woman complaining to Gregory Canon I. Lib. 7. Epist. 53. et
simile ibid. Epist. 4. ad Messalinum Episc.
the Great, that Januarius the Bishop of Sardin^ blushed not to require a
hundred shillings for the burial of her Daughter; Gregory by a decretall
Epistle to him, says, We have utterly forbidden this vice in our Church, and
do not suffer so bad a custom should in any case be usurped. If Ephron a
Pagan were so considerate as to refuse it, how much more ought we to do it
that are called Priests? We therefore admonish, that from henceforth none
attempt this vice of covetousness in any Churches. But if at any time you
permit any to be buried in your Church, and that his next kinsman or heirs
will of their own accord offer any thing for lights, we forbid* not that to
be taken, but to exact or ask any thing, we utterly forbid, lest that (which
were most irreligious) the Church peradventure might be said to be sold
(which God forbid,) and you also to seem glad of men's deaths, if you reap any
commodity out of their carcases.

But a blow or two could not kill this serpent, Canon II.
for iniquity has many heads. Some, as it seems, in the Council of
Tribury, Anno 899* made a question, utrum terra coemiteriata vendi posset pro
Sepultura? whether money might be taken for graves in the Churchyard? The
Council answered No. In Ecclesiastico namque etc* for it is written in
Ecclesiasticus, Deny not courtesy unto the dead, for we all shall dye: And
again, All things that are of earth, do return to earth. Earth, why sellest
thou earth? Remember that thou art earth, and shall go to earth, that thou
must dye, and that death is coming toward thee and lingereth not. Remember
that the earth is not man's; but, as the Psalmist says, The earth is the Lords,
and they that dwell therein. If thou sellest this earth, thou art guilty of
invading the goods of another. Thou have received it freely from God, give it
freely for his sake. We therefore absolutely forbid all Christian people to
sell earth for the dead, and to deny burial due unto them, unless the kindred
or friends of the dead person, in the name of the Lord, and for redemption of
his soul, will of their own accord give any thing.

The Council of Nans recited by Burchard, and Canon III.
the Council of Varens al Vasens delivered by Gratian, do both in the self
same words thus condemn it: Praecipiendum etc. It is to be commanded (say
they) according to the authority of the Canons, that for graves and the
burial of men no reward be exacted, unless he that is dead did whilst he
lived appoint somewhat of his goods to be given to the Church, in the yard
whereof he is buried: or that those to whom the bestowing of his Alms, after
his death, is committed, will out of their own accord give somewhat of his
goods; but nothing may in any case be exacted by the Priests there, or by them
that have the government of the place. It is also to be commanded according to
the Constitutions of our Elders, that none upon any case be buried in the
Church, but in the yard, porch, or vaults of the Church, etc.

The Council of Toures under Alexander III. cap. Canon IV.
Non satis, says, For Sepulture and for receiving Uncture and Oil, let no man
attempt to exact any kind of reward, nor to defend his offense therein by
color of any manner of custom; for the length of time does not diminish sins
but increases them.

It is true that all these were no more then* Provincial Synods and
Constitutions, yet their judgments did determine this point to be a grievous
sin, and seemed to be so orthodoxall, that they since are taken into the body
of the common Law, and now as powerful, general, and obligatory, as the other
parts thereof. But we will rise higher and see what general Councels have
conceived and decreed herein.

The twelfth general Council, wherein both Canon V.
the Churches, Greek and Latin, were assembled by the same Alexander at
Lateran in the year 1180. cap. Cum in Ecclesiae corpore, says, The buying and
selling that is reported to be in some Churches is too horrible; as that
somewhat is required for installing Bishops, Abbots, and all kind of
Ecclesiastical persons in their seats; for inducting Priests into their
Churches, and for sepulture and funeral rites, for benediction of the married
couple, and for other sacraments* verily many think it lawful, because they
suppose the law of custom has got authority by long continuance; not
considering that offenses are so much the more grievous, by how much the longer
they have ensnared the wicked soul of man. Therefore, lest these things should
be done hereafter, We straightly forbid any thing to be exacted either for
conducting of Ecclesiastical persons to their seats, or for Institutions of
Priests, or buryall of the dead, or benediction of them that marry, or for
other Sacraments, either conferring, or collated. But if any man shall presume
to do the contrary, let him know that he has his portion with Gehezi; that
is, that he stands accursed, and, as the gloss interprets it, that he is
a Symonist.

The next general Council, a very great one in Canon. VI. Circa an. 1198.
the same place, under Innocens the third, continues the same prohibition
touching buriallfees: but because the former bridled the Clergy in taking that
was not their due, this curbeth also the perverseness of the Laity, in
withholding their just duties: the words be these, Ad Apostolicam, etc. It is
common to the Apostolic ear by frequent relation, that some Clerks, for the
burial of the dead, and blessing the married couple, do exact and extort
money: and if it chance that their covetous desire be not satisfied, they
fraudulently allege some feigned impediment. On the other side, some laymen,
levened with heretical pravity, under the pretense of canonical piety, do
endeavor to break a laudable custom brought into the Church by the godly
devotion of the faithful. Hereupon we forbid all exactions to be made, and
command all godly customs to be observed; that Ecclesiastical Sacraments be
freely conferred: but that they which maliciously endeavor to change a laudable
custom, may upon knowledge of the matter be suppressed by the Bishop of the
place. Note, that the customs protected by this Canon must be godly and
laudable.

As for the Canon Abolendae, which aims Can. VII.
chiefly at those, who, like the Monks of Mount Pessulan, will not suffer the
ground to be broken before they be paid for the grave, I purposed to pass it
over, supposing none that serves in the house of God to be so covetous or
cautelous, as not to stay for his money till he had delivered his ware: But in
the mean time, a complaint was brought unto us of a Churchman (since
deceased) and his Clerk, that came together to the house of one of their
Parish, who was then newly dead, and speaking with the Executors, would not
suffer the body to be brought out of the house, till he had 14. l. paid to
him and the Parish Officers, according to a bill of particulars then showed
unto them: nor could the Executors compound with them for any abatement more
then ten shillings in the Clerks share, and paid them thereupon 13. l. 10. ^.

Against such, amongst other, is this Canon under the Rubric, Terra
caemiteriata pro sepultura vendi non debet, in these words, Abolendae
consuetudinis perversitas, etc. There is grown up (as is reported) a perverse
custom that must be abolished at Mount Pessulan, where they will not suffer
the grave to be dug open for them that die, till there be a certain price
for the ground, wherein they are to be buried, paid unto the Church. We
command, that you, being Bishop of the place, do prohibit the Clerks from
exacting any thing at all in this case. The complaint was for exacting of money
before the grave was opened, but the Canon forbids it both before and after.
Nota (says the Gloss) quod pro terra in qua sepeliendi sunt defuncti, nihil
est exigendum. Decretal. Gr. l. 3. Td. 39. de parochiis c. 13.

I might, as the phrase is, girando Canonum volumina, produce many other
Authorities whereby this sin is vehemently impugned and cried down: but I will
not plough with an Ox and an Ass together; I will not join those
Constitutions, which for the most part are National and Provincial, with
these I have recited, being general, either by their birth, as springing from
general Councels, or by adoption, as taken out of provincial Councels and
Decrees into the body of the Canon Law, and made thereby as general and
obligatory as the rest: for all these together, with all other parts of the
Canon Law, as they have been heretofore in use, and that are not repugnant to
the Laws and Religion of the Kingdom, or repealed by the Statutes 25. H. c.
8. 19. 27. H. 8. c. 15. 35. H. 8. c. 16. 3. Ed. 6. ca. 11.
of Hen. 8. or of later time against Papal usurpation, are still in force, as
I conceive, and as was lately seen in two great cases, wherein every corner of
the Canon Law, as well remote as obvious, ancient as the later, were searched
out either pro or contra. As for the 32. Commissioners that by the Sat. of 25.
H. 8. cap. 19. and 3. E. 6. c. 11. should have pruned the Canon Law, and cut
off the unnecessary branches, nothing A book was prepared, not finished or
established.
was done thereupon, so that it still remains as it was before. But admit
that neither these, nor other positive Constitutions extended to our Ministers,
will they not be a law unto themselves, and abstain from that which is
declared to be wicked and unjust by so many godly men, so many Fathers,
Councels, and Decrees of the Church?

Let us then consider the Councels and Canons that we have recited; and see
first, what opinion they have of money taken for burialls: and secondly, how
they censure and decree touching it.

First, for their opinion, they declare it to be a Can. I. Greg. ad Januar.
Regist. lib. 7. Epist. 55.
vice, a vice of covetousness, a bad custom, that may be said most
irreligious, as a selling of the Church, a cause of joy to the Parson when men
dye, and a reaping of commodity out of carcasses of the dead, and sorrow of the
living. 2. A discourtesie to the dead by him that must Can. II. Council. Tribur.
dye, a selling of earth by him that is earth, a selling of that is none of his
own, a selling of what was given freely to give freely, a denying of burial.
3. A thing too horrible, that brings the portion of Can. V. Council. general.
Literan.
Gehezi upon the offender, that is the brand of Simony, as the gloss
expounds it, a curse, an uncleanness, and cause of separation from common
society.
Lastly, as maladies are the most grievous and Can. VII. Council. Turon. Can. V.
Council. gener. Lateran. Can. VII. Decr. l. 3. and 28. c. 13.
contagious that continue longest: so they conclude this to be so much the
more grievous, by how much the longer it has continued; and declare it to be
abolendae consuetudinis perversitas, the perversity of a custom is to be
abolished.

I am loath to use these heavy terms of aggravation; yet they proceed not from
me, but from the Clergy themselves against the Clergy themselves, from the
body against a member, from the Fathers, the Doctors, the Decrees of the
Church, and great general Councels, against some private, particular and
incorrigible offenders.

The sum of their censure and decrees is this,

1. That nothing be exacted or required for any sepulture; which word the
gloss declares to Cap. Abolendae ver. Sepultura, col. 1207.
comprehend the ground or place of burial, and the ministry of the Priest or
Parson about the same. And in some of the Canons it is particularly so
expressed. 2. That all customs for such taking, are evil, impious, and void.
3. That the offense in taking is Simony. 4. That the cognizance thereof
belongs to the Bishop of the place. 5. That gifts of piety for use of the
Church, may notwithstanding be taken. 6. That none should be buried in the
body of the Church.
There is a fiction that Achelous fighting with Hercules, and not able to
resist his force, shifted himself into diverse forms, thereby to illude it. So
the Canonists try many evasions to help their Masters of the Clergy in this
point of taking, by distinguishing the places of burial, the persons that
take, the time of taking, and the manner of demanding.

For the place, they say there be three sorts, Lopurus, Of the place.
Locus religiosus, and Locus sacer: according to the civil Law, locus purus is
that which is more Locus purus.
secular ground, never used for burial, nor having any kind of consecration.
To this they say the Canons do not extend, for that it is some private Decr.
Greg. cap. Abolend. ver. Sepultur. And Great. Can. 12. q. 2.
man's; and the owner, if he will, may take money for a grave there; for, Nemo
tenetur de suo beneficium facere, No man is tied to give his ground to a
charitable use. Locus religiosus is that which is Locus religiosus.
assigned to some office of Religion, and nominately where the body of a dead
person has been buried. For by the very burial of that body, the nature of
the soil is changed from secular, and, in reverence of this new function,
counted to be religious; and now therefore by the Canons nothing may be taken
for any more graves there. Some such places (I suppose) are about this City
adjoining to Churchyards, for enlarging thereof, and some of them for which
the owners do take a yearly rent of the Parish that uses it, letting it unto
them to sow dead men's carcasses in, as it were to sow corn, and as though the
carcasses should grow up (like the fable of Cadmus) and bring them a crop to
pay the rent with. This the Canons do merely forbid, as does also the civil
Law, and Law of humanity, the Fathers, the Councels, and the opinion of S.
Jerome in the case of Ephron.

For mine own part, I take it to be a kind of usury to let that for money,
whereof the hirer can make no kind of profit. It may be said, that they might
have chosen, when they first hired it, whether they would use it so or no; and
it is true: but after the thing is done, and the place thereby become religious
ground by being made a burying place; now to let it in that kind, is (I say)
against the Canons. Locus sacratus is that which by the donation Locus sacratus.
of the owner is settled upon God and the Church for some divine and
Ecclesiastical service, and then consecrated thereto by the Bishop, is thereby
severed from humane property, as be our Churches and Churchyards; the mere
property whereof, which we call Fee-simple, is said to be in nubibus, and
abaiance, though the Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, for necessities sake, might
make a conveyance of them. But to dispose them, or any part of them contrary to
the will of the Donor, the nature of the gift, and the glory of him that is the
Supreme owner, (God Almighty) is by these Canons Simony, Sacrilege, and
extreme impiety. Hereof there must therefore be no buying or selling; and in
this, no doubt, the Canonists are right. Thus much for the place of Sepulture.

Touching the parties that take money for the office Of the parties.
or ministry of burial, they say that the Canons extend not universally to
all Clergy men, but to such only as are beneficed, or have pensions for doing
the Church duties, or serving the cure; not to those which are sine titulo,
sine salario, without benefice or stipend, and that they may therefore take
what they can get; for, It is not inconvenient Nec est inconveniens quod
Clericus locet operas suas, cum non habeat unde vivat. Decr. Gr. l. 5. 29. ver.
pro exequiis.
(says the Gloss) that a Clerk should sell his pains, if he have not
whereon else to live. The rest of the Clergy they leave under the Canons, yet
with such shelter, and so many starting holes, as the Canons may play upon
them, but not hurt them: For as time changes, so they change the case,
observing a difference in taking money before burial, and in taking after; to
take aforehand, they say, is utterly unlawful, for that it implies a buying
and selling by example of Tradesmen, who first take their money, and then
deliver their ware: but, expleto Non ergo prohibetur quam liberaliter oblat.
satis been possit recipi sine peccato, exclusa cupiditatis labe. Jo. de Athon,
tit. de Sacram.. 1. v. labe.
officio, when the duty is once performed, they may take what is voluntarily
given them, without danger of the Canons, which we shall further examine in
the next Paragraph. Yet mark in the mean time the tenor of the first Canon,
Quaesta est: Nereida complained that the Bishop velit exigere, would exact 100.
s. of her for the burial of her daughter; which complaint must needs be after
the burial, it being in Sardinia, and Saint Gregory writing from Rome, or
those parts; yet expleto officio, the burial being past, Gregory would suffer
nothing to be taken, no not upon voluntary gift to the use of the Bishop; but
for the public use of the Church, as for ligh^, etc. he allowed that to be
taken that was voluntarily offered, and no otherwise. So likewise does the
Canon, praecipiendum, or third Canon. The second Canon also gives liberty to
offer somewhat for the soul of him that is dead, but nothing to be given for
the grave, or burial service.

The manner of taking is of three sorts, by exaction, Of the manner.
demanding, and voluntary gift. Exaction is ordinarily conceived to be a
wringing of that is not due from the party, or of more then is due, like the
Monks of Mount Pessulan, to refuse burying of the body till they had their
pretended duty: or like them in the Canon ad Apostolicam, that allege fained
impediments and excuses to raise the market by delaying the burial: or when
the burial is past, like Januarius the Bishop of Sardinia, to urge and insist
upon the demand. These no doubt are sharp exactions; but the word includes
smoother courses: Tit. Symonia ca. firmit. verb. exigatur. lib. 4. Etymolog.
and division, juris universi exposit. John Calvin ab Cuble Lexic.
Lindewode expounds it to require or take a nolente, of him that would not
part with it. Calepine says, that Lactantius uses it for convenienter
postulare: John Bellonus, that exigere est petere, exactio est petitio, and
that the exactores tributorum were so called a petendis tributis, which the
Lexicon of the Civil and Canon Law does also deliver: So that to exact is not
only to wring it from the party, but to demand or require; and to demand or
require, is to exact. In this manner the fifth Canon either uses them
Synonimally, or complains of one abuse in the preamble, or provideth against
another in the decree. To put it out of doubt, the first Canon uses both the
words, Peti vero aliquid, aut exigi omnino prohibemus: We utterly forbid any
thing to be either asked or exacted: and it sets exigi in the later place,
as though exigere were less then petere; or, as Lactant. takes it,
convenienter postulare. Note also, that this Canon was made against asking or
exacting after the burial, as before we have touched.

All this notwithstanding, I must truly confess (for I deal with Argus and
Briarius, them that have all perspicuity and assistance) that there is no
express word in any of these Canons, against giving or taking simply, though I
think there be enough to satisfy indifferent judgments. Yet if it be a
defect in them, I have a help for it here at home in our own Provincial
Constitutions, where, in a Synod at Westminster, assembled by Richard
Archbishop of Canterbury, I find it thus decreed under the Rubric, Ne quid
exigatur pro Sacramentis Statuimus ergo ut de caetero.
conferendis Ca. Dictum est, etc. We therefore ordain, that from henceforth
neither for Ordination, nor for Chrisme, nor for Baptism, nor for extreme
unction, nor for Sepulture, nor for the Communion, nor for Dedication, any
thing be exacted, but that the gifts of Christ be given with free
dispensation, and let him that does the contrary be accursed. So that if they
must be given freely, nothing surely must be taken for them, either ex
obliquo, or by evasion.

It may be said, they require nothing by way of price for the ground or
Sepulture: for the fourth Canon is, ut nulla cujusquam pretii exactio
attentetur, but as a reward from the party by way of gratuity. Who knows not
that pretium signifies a reward, as well as a price? and for mine own part, I
doubt not but that the Canon does so intend it: yet, to clear the point, the
words of the third Canon are expressly, ut nihil muneris exigatur, that no
reward be required.

I suppose by this time the offenders in this kind have left the plain field
of the Canons, and taken themselves to their last hope and Castle of refuge,
Custom and prescription, where it now rests to beat them out. Every man
knows that evil customs are in their own nature to be abolished; and
those that be good, yet if there be a positive law against them, they are also
void. The nature of this custom by the collection we have made out of the
Canons, is not only declared to be excessively bad, but, by the great
general Council of Dateran, to be very horrible, and consequently to be
abolished; but being positively against the Canon, it is in ipso hoc directly
void; though there were no clause or provision in them so to denounce them, yet
ad majorem cautelam, the fourth and fifth Canons do expressly overthrow that
custom, and besides do brand it with this note of infamy, the elder the
worse, and the longer it has continued, the more grievous.

The Parsons have now a shrewd Crow to pull, for the Canonists themselves will
confess all this to be true. What then remains with Achelous, seu versare
dolis, seu certo occumbere? Corax must now help them with a quirke to cosen the
Canons, and to slide from them, or they are undone. Well, hear Jo. de Athon,
one of the pole-starres of our English Canonists; Let him (says he) that
asks any thing in this case, take heed to himself; for if he ask and take
it for his duty, or for the ground, or for sepulture, he is gone, for it is
Simony: And for proof thereof, all allege some of the Canons we have recited,
with diverse other, and the opinion of Hostiensis; and says further, that a
custom will then do him no good, as appears by the Canon of Otho, which he
is there in hand with, and that of non satis in the Extravagant, by us also
expressed etc. But (says he) if he demand it when his duty is done, in this
manner, for that every one that dies, or is installed, has used to give so
much to the Priest or Church, then he shall prevail, and does justly require
it. For confirmation hereof, he produces the resolution of Innocent* and
other Authorities: And that Hostiensis says infallibly, that this is true,
touching the duty of the Laity toward the Church; in so much, as though this
exhibition of the Lay men tends to the over-filling of the belly of the Clerks;
yet it may be demanded, as he notes in the Extravagants, Tit. Simony, ca.
Jacobus: And Athon says, That he believes it to be true, not respecting the
inordinate gluttony, but the right of the Church, alleging other Authorities
to confirm it. F. 1.

To the same purpose is the opinion of Lindewode, the other pole-starre of our
English Canonists, and with the same words in part. tit. Simonia, ca. 1.
Sepulture (says he) must not be sold, and ( citing 8. q. 2.. Item queritur
per Jo. and Co. ibi sequentibus, de sepult. ca. abolendae) says, that it
appears there in the text and gloss, that in a sacred place, as in a Church
or Churchyard, nothing must be required for sepulture, no nor yet for the
office of burial, as Bernard there notes. And this is true as touching his
office, because a Clerk by reason of his benefice is tied unto it. But it is
otherwise, if he be not tied thereto by reason of his Benefice, and so that
he does not contract to have it, for then it is Simony; (Extrav. eod. tit. ca.
in tantum, secundum Hostiens. and ca. non satis) yet the Gloss says, in the
end of the said chapter, abolendae, that though Clerks may not require any
thing for such sepulture, yet the Laity may be compelled to observe godly and
laudable customs. And mark, according to the note of Hostiensis, in the same
Chapter, That he that requires to have the custom performed to him, must
take heed to himself; for if he demand it for the ground, or for his duty,
he is down, and it profits him nothing to allege a custom (ut dicto
capite abolendae:) But if he says that for every dead body so much has been
usually given to the Priest, or to the Church, then he shall obtain it: as in
ca. ad Apostolicam Extrav. eod. and vide gloss. hic similem 13. q. 2.. Item
quaeritur. Linw. fo. 201.

Here is a left hand way to slip by all the Canons, let us consider it. May the
Parsons frame their custom as they list? Is it like a Proteus, or Lesbian
Ruler? Are they not tied to the matter of fact, to the manner and form of
payment? Are Mood and Figure only University observations? Let them be well
advised in laying their customs so, lest the Jury find an Ignoramus. It has
fallen upon me to be an unworthy member of that most noble and most gracious
Commission of exacted fees and innovated offices, and thereby to have notice by
certificate of diverse Parsons, Vicars, and chief Parishioners of most of the
greatest Parishes of London, yet none of them hitherto (to my remembrance) have
made any such claim, nor know I how they should prove it if they did.

I will stir no coals, nor prosecute this point any further, for the duty,
love, honor, and great observation I bear unto them; but I entreat, with
vehemence, that both they and the rest of their coat will think seriously of
it, and if not always, yet when in their Sermons they justly fall upon the
oppressions, extortions, raising of rents, etc. by Landlords and laymen. For
this bird of theirs is a winged sin, hatched of late within this City, but
crept already into the neighbor Towns, and will shortly fly (if the wings be
not clipped in time) over all the Kingdom. Oh, let not that of Jeromy be once
spoken of this noble City, From the Prophets Cap. 23. 15.
of Jerusalem is wickedness gone forth into all the Land.

As this sin, and the Canons lie sore upon the Ministers, for taking money
for graves in the Chancell, and for their pains in burying the corpse
wheresoever: so do they upon some other, who little dream of it, the
Churchwardens of Parishes that sell graves in the Church and Churchyard like
ware in their shop, and when they think fit, make laws in their Vestry for
raising the price, as they do in their Halls for the price of their ware. If
they look the third Canon, they shall find themselves contained there under a
fair style, Them that have the government of the place, (meaning, of the
Church, and Church yard, and Parish) so that though they be laymen, yet by
misusing the things of the Church, they fall into the same offense and penalty
respectively that Church men do* and have their portion assigned them with
G^^^zi, as in the fifth Canon. I have heard what some of them answer; That it
is no benefit to our selves, it is for the good of the Parish, for repairing
the Church, the Bells, the Steeple, to help out some extraordinary charge that
falls upon the Parish; and if some small matter be spent upon a Parish Audit,
or a Quest-house dinner, it is an Agape, or Feast of love, and no man will
grudge or repine at that, our Predecessors did it before our time, and our
Successors will do it when we are dead and gone. All is done by an assembly
of the Vestrie, by consent of the Masters and chief of the Parish subscribed,
and testified under their hands. Well, let their Vestrie on Gods name be a
Consistory for well ordering of the things of the Church, it is fit it should
be so; but let it not be a Parliament, that a dozen or sixteen private
persons (I will not meddle with their trade or quality) should change or
abrogate any superior Constitutions, much less those of Synods and general
Councels, nor to make orders to bind, like a law, the rest of the Parish that
consented not.

What they have used to do time out of mind, I call not into question; but
those Vestries that within these thirty years or thereabout, have left their
ancient form, supported by a lawful prescription, and contrived to themselves
a now society, power, and jurisdiction over the rest of the Parish,
countenanced by an instrument from the Ordinary, under the Seal of his
Chancellor; and (as new things must have new names) are commonly styled
Selected (...). I ^^e the Bishops names are used in them, whether their assents
and knowledge, I am doubtful. I assure my self their Lordships would do
nothing against the Law, and I understand not by what Law they may at this day
erect such Societies, or endow them with such Authority as is pretended. But to
deal plainly, I think those Instruments confer more money upon the
Chancellors, then authority upon the Vestries; for (by those that I have seen)
the Bishop or Chancellor grants nothing to them, but relating that they have
considered the form of a Vestrie desired by some of the Parish, they allow,
approve, or confirm it, and yet no otherwise then (with a Quantum in nobis
est) as far forth as lawfully they may, and no otherwise. Nor have they this
shadow of authority otherwise then upon condition, that they shall do nothing
that may trench upon the jurisdiction or profit of the Ecclesiastical Court.
What have they now for their money? Or more (in effect) then if a private man
had granted them as much? No doubt, many of the wise Parishioners do perceive
it, and some Parishes have renounced it, and are turned back to their ancient
Vestrie: yet neither of them keep their bounds; for the one and the other take
upon them not only to make orders in the nature of by. Laws to bind their
Parishioners, but to set and raise fees and duties of the Church, and
Church Officers at their pleasure, as appears by many Tables produced before
us. But see what they have gotten that claim their fees or duties by such
Vestry Orders, or unlawful Authority: for prescription will not now help them,
in so much as the original of their fees appears to be by the Table, and the
Table cannot defend them, for that the Authors of it had no authority to make
such assessements, and so consequently they can neither justify the clayming
of their fees or duties, either by the one or other; and the Vestrymen perhaps
may be in danger of an unlawful Assembly to change Laws, or to have their
offense strained very high, if severity should examine it.

Give me leave to present to you what I find in a Vestrie-Constitution lately
made, and subscribed by the Parson and Churchwardens, 24. Nov. 1627.
with twenty three more of that Assembly, confirmed by the Bishop, approved by
his Chancellor, declared to be a laudable custom of that Parish, and in
testimony thereof entered (as a solemn Act) in the principal Registry of the
Lord Bishop of the Diocese; and finally, ratified with Dat. 25. April. 1628.
the Chancellours hand and Seal of Office: I may say, vidi, puduitque videre.
But hear the paroels only touching the Parson and Churchwardens for the
point in hand.

ss d Whosoever will be buried in the Chancell, shall pay to the Parson as
shall be agreed. -- -- For interring the Corpse, -- 10 -- 0 In the Isles of the
Chancell.
To the Churchwardens for the ground, -- 26 -- 8 To the Parson for interring
the Corpse, -- 6 -- 8 In the Body of the Church.
ss d To the Churchwardens for the ground, -- 20 -- 0 To the Parson for
interring the Corpse, -- 6 -- 8 In the Churchyard.
ss d ss d To the Parson for interring the Corpse, -- coffined, 2 -- 8
uncoffined, 1 -- 4 To him in like manner for every child under seven years,
-- coffined, 2 -- 8 uncoffined, 1 -- 4

All these double of every Stranger.

I meddle not with the Constitutions of 4. L. to the Parson for a Pew in the
Chancell, nor of 15. ss. 20. ss. 3. L. 3. L. 10. ss. for places and Pewes in
other parts. But these and many other of the like sort fall in one Certificate.
In another Parish I find six shillings eight pence to the Parson for the duty
of burial in the Church, when himself does it not, but his Curate, who for
his pains has by the same Certificate ten shillings more, besides other ten
shillings for a Sermon (though there be none.)

But to go a little back to the first demand, touching burying in the
Chancell, which is not definite in quoto, but positive ex imperio, that
whosoever will be buried there, shall pay to the Parson as shall be agreed.

It is to be noted, that here is no custom, and consequently then, whereas
the Parson thinks the advantage lies on his side, to take what he list, he
is now excluded by all the Canons from taking any thing at all: For the buckler
that should defend them is the Canon Ad Apostolicam, and the breadth of that
extends no further then to protect them that fight under a Custom, which
also must be pious and laudable, otherwise it covers not any. And
consequently, whilst they stand upon terms, and allege the Chancell to be
their free hold, and that they may as freely dispose it at their pleasure, as
Laymen may of their lands, they fall into the foul pit of Simony, if they
were looked after.

The grave is the only inheritance that we are certainly born to, the
inheritance which our Grandmother the earth has left to descend in Gavelkinde
among all her children: Shall one enter, and hold another out, or drive him to
pay a fine pro adeunda haereditate, as they say in the feodall Law, or pro
ingressu habendo, as we in the common Law? Is our tenure base like a copyhold
ad voluntatem Domini, and not rather noble by francke Almoigne, free from all
payments and services? How do Apoc. 14. 13.
the dead rest from their labor, if they be vexed with payments? How go they
to their grave in peace, if they pay for their peace? Laborat aere alieno qui
debito tenetur, and his peace is not worth thanks, if he must pay for it: He
pays for his peace, if he pays for the place where his peace cannot
otherwise be had: He pays for his rest, if he cannot enjoy it without
payment: He pays for his Inheritance if he cannot enter into it without a
fine pro ingressu; his inheritance settled upon him by the great Charter,
Terram dedit filiis hominum: A royal gift, but as it is used, male collocatum,
ill distributed. The poor man (alas) has nothing of all this for his portion
but the grave, and may not now have that, unless he pay for it. Well, To whom
should he pay? Reason answers, If to any, to the owner of the soil. True,
But the owner of the soil was the Founder of the Church, and he, out of
piety, zeal, and charity, gave the Church freely for Prayer, the Churchyard
freely for Burial, absque ullo retenemento, without any rent, any service, any
reservation. Nor could he (if he would) have done otherwise, for the Canons
would not suffer him: Nor though he were the absolute owner, yet if he had
reserved but a pepper corn out of a grave, it had been not only void, but
execrable. A pepper corn? what talk we of a pepper corn? no ground in the
Kingdom is now sold so dear as a grave. That poor little Cabinet, that is
not commonly above five foot long, and a foot and half in breadth, where
there is no room to stir either hand or foot, and the roof, as Saint
Bernard says, lies so low, as it touches the nose, this silly Cabinet is
sometimes in the Churchyard sold to the poorest man for sixteen pence,
sometimes for two shillings eight pence, sometimes three shillings, sometimes
six shillings; in the Church it self at ten shillings, twenty shillings,
forty shillings, three pound, four pound, etc. in the Chancell; at twenty
shillings, forty shillings, three pound, four pound, five pound, yea, ten
pound: and yet the purchaser has no assurance of it, but is constrained to
hold ad voluntatem Domini, or as a Tenant for seven or ten years, within which
term he is oftentimes cast out, and another put into his room, and no Writ
of Quare ejecit infra terminum lies for him. Shall I tell what I was ashamed
to hear? A grave or burying place let to farm at twenty shillings a year,
the rent duly paid for diverse years, and being then behind, the Parson
threatened to uncase the corpse by pulling down the Monument if it were not
satisfied; and shame was so far from him, as he spared not to defend it even
before the Commissioners: To whom it was likewise testified, that another had
made forty pound of one grave in ten years, by ten pound at a time; Strange
things to me, what to others I know not, but I suppose, cinctutis non exaudita
Cethegis; the oldest man living has not heard the like. Is it not time that
his Majesty should do as he does, that like Josias he should reform the
Temple, the House of God? God be blessed that put it in his heart, and grant
him well to finish the work in hand, being so noble, so pious, and so full of
necessity.

I said the Church was given freely by the Founder for Prayer, and the
Churchyard freely for Burial; what reason can then be alleged, why the dead
should rather pay for going into the grave, then the living do for going into
the Church? Or why do not the living pay as well for the one, as the dead for
the other. Alas, mortuo leoni and lepores insultant, a little child may pull a
dead lion by the beard, but the least dog alive will turn again upon the
tallest man. I have here a fair occasion to speak of another great abuse, the
extreme exacting money for pewes; but I will hold me to the matter in hand,
and for a conclusion, give me leave to upbraid our Ministers with that Iliad.
7. page 128.
golden Edict of Agamemnon in Homer touching the slaughtered Trojans, his
enemies.

(...). Turnus in Vir. Aen. 10. uses the like courtesy in burying his enemy
Pallas. Quisquis honos famuli, quicquid solamen humandi, Largior -- And it is
said that the Turks in this point cry out upon us Christians.

(...)
I will that naught be taken for the grave;
But that the dead shall freely burial have.
O shame to our religion that heathens and soldiers should be more gracious to
their enemies, then a Christian Minister to his friends and brethren. But,
ferrea nunc aetas, etc.

I am now led, where I was loath to come, to show the nature and penalty of
this sin. But that niceness is too late, since Jo. de Athon, Hostiensis,
diverse Canons, and some other former passages have already so manifestly
discovered it to be Simony, Decr. Greg. lib. 3. cap. 6.
under which title it therefore stands ranked in the books of Canon Law with
this censure and penalty, sicut simoniaca pestis, etc. as that pestilent
disease of Simony does exceed in greatness all other diseases, so immediately
as soon as the signs thereof shall appear by the relation of any person, it
ought to be cast out, and banished from the house of God; So odious is the
contagion thereof in the Canon Law, as it receives all criminous and infamous
persons to become accusers, even the bondsman against his Lord. It induces
suspension, Ibid. c. seq.
irregularitie, excommunication, curses, deprivation, etc. many penalties not
put in execution.

The cognizance and reformation thereof, as of all other enormities in Church
and Churchmen, were anciently in the Clergy themselves; till King Henry the
second perceiving that many horrible crimes committed by Clerks were either
smoothered up in secret, or smoothed over upon examination with some slight
punishment; (for nothing in the Canon Law is mortal) he therefore obtained in
the great Council of Clarendon, to have them tried for Capital matters before
his secular Judges, which first cut the ham-strings of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, and became a perpetual president for the laiming of it afterward
in other members: for hereupon the succeeding Parliaments from time to time, as
they found the Clergy either sleeping or exorbitant in using their
Jurisdiction, pulled somewhat a Consistorio Cleri ad Praetorium Regis, from the
Canon Law to the Common Law; and by little and little have brought the great
sea of their old authority to a narrower compass; which, if my Lords the
Bishops look not the better to, will (I fear) be yet contracted and
diminished. They are not ignorant what has been attempted against them in this
kind in Queen Elizabeth's time and since, and that there be about four
hundred persons which observe their courses very strictly. Their Lordships
trust their Chancellor, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and Officialls with the
Canonical government of their flocks, and these, in many places, desiring
money rather then amendment, do so shave and pelt the people, that the cry
thereof is very grievous, and will (no doubt) produce some other reformation,
if it be not (as I said) helped by themselves in time.

They were wont to limit their own fees and the fees of their officers in the
Provincial Synods, as appears by diverse of them. But their Successors kept
them so badly, that although the Synod Steph. Mepham. Archiep. Cancer. Jo.
Stratford in Synod. London.
of London in the year 1342. had given a good smart allowance for the probate
and business of a testament, as twenty shillings at least, of the money of
that time for every hundred pound of the Inventory: yet the market by Henry the
eighth his time was grown to that height, that a thousand marks were said to
be exacted for the probate business of one man's testament (Sir William
Comptons by name;) which gave the Parliament in the twenty second of the same
King such discontent, as they would trust the Clergy no longer to be their own
Carvers, but made a special Statute See Hollinsh p. 911.
in that point to bridle their exactions: And so likewise about Mortuaries and
Corpse* present.

Now the authority they had is gone by their submission, Anno 25. Hen. 8. and
the Statute thereupon then made: So as at this day they have no authority,
either by Diocesan or Provincial Synods, to set any fees but in their
Convocation by assent and confirmation of his Majesty under the great Seal.
In which course none have been taxed since the said Statute, till 27. Eliz. and
then none touching An. 1584.
any other then officers of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and Courts, not
Parsons, Vicars, Ministers, Churchwardens etc. And not otherwise also in the
Constitutions of the Synod of London, 25. Octobr. 39. Eliz. and Jac. 1. where
the Lord An. 1597. cap. 135
Archbishop of Canterbury has power given him to determine of some
questionable fees touching the said officers, but noe farther; so that the
rates and taxes of fees of Parsons, Vicars, Ministers, Churchwardens, and the
like, which I have often seen to be countenanced and authorized by the Ordinary
of the Diocese, his Chancellor, or other officers under their hand and Seal
(as far as my understanding can discover) are without sufficient warrant, and
against the Law.

What fees the Parson may take.
But when all is done, it must not be forgotten that somewhat doubtless may be
due unto the Parson upon the buryall of the dead, for why else should diverse
Canons provide that the bodies of those which dye, be not carried to burial
out of their Parish, lest the Priest should thereby lose what is due unto him.

And though the Canon ad Apostolicam forbid exacting of money for burials, yet
it preserves godly and laudable customs in that kind, and prescribes a
course for suppressing their malice that shall attempt to break them. De corona
milit. cap. 3. 13. 8.
Tertullian makes often mention of oblations for them, not only at the time
they dye, but in their Anniversaries; and particularly of husbands for their
wives. So does De castit ^u^la. lib. 3. Epist. 6. lib. 4. Ep. 5.
Cyprian in diverse passages, calling them sometimes oblations, sometimes
Sacrific^a; and speaking of oblations, says, that the Ministers had an
allowance out of them for their maintenance. lib. 1. Epist. 7.
Hospinian therefore is deceived, that supposes them to have had their growth
under ^^b. de Orig. templorum. Act. 87. 6.
Gregory the Great. Apollonius in his book against the Montanists, says, that
Montanus sub nomine oblationum, muneta artificiosus accepit. Hist. trip. lib.
5. cap. 16. But it is said that the Franciscan and Dominican Friars, about 550.
years since, invented to get money by persuading the people the burial in
Churches and the nearer the Altar was much the better.
But in this, doubtless, he is not deceived, that Priests and Monks, leading
the people on in this Superstition of prayers and oblations for the dead,
raised thereby an excessive benefit to themselves. For they made hereby the
place of burial, which was public, to become their own in private; and
then, selling it for money, show themselves more impious then the barbarous
Ephron, that freely offered Abraham his burial field.

It is now therefore to be considered, which be those laudable customs that
may come within the protection of this Canon: for they doubtless are
inexpugnable though not easily to be expressed, for that they may differ
according as devotion has begotten them in any place or Parish. But be they
what they may (I labor not on that;) my drist is only to show that they must
not be those which are now in use, to take money for the grave or office of
burial; for these cannot be said to be godly or laudable customs, since so
many Canons have declared them to be vicious, impious, injurious, irreligious,
too too horrible, and the more grievous by their longer custom and
continuance, and therefore damneth and annulleth them by express words, how
ancient or how general soever they be.

If you will put me to name some such custom as may seem laudable and
Canonical, I will present you with that which Hostiensis, Athon, and Lindewode
deliver upon their credit to be authentical in the Parish, where it has been
so used; viz. That for every one that dies there, so much has usually been
given unto the Priest or Church. This they say will hold out water; but, as I
said before, I fear me none of our Parsons can maintain it in this form.
Another is that we call a Mortuarie; which was thus paid: The Lord of the fee
had the best beast of the defunct by way of an Heriot, for the support of his
body against secular enemies; and the Parson of the Parish had the second as a
Mortuarie for defending his soul against his spiritual Lib. 1. tit. de
consuet. c. 1. Lindew. 161. in gloss. fo. 15.
adversaries. I know the Provincial, and Lindmode following it, do say that
the Mortuary wasgiven in recompense of personal tithes forgotten or omitted;
but, under correction, I doubt of that; because, that in the ancient Formularie
of wills, and by the Canon of the Synod of Exeter, it is expressly directed,
that in all of them, there shall be an especial Legacy of some what to the
Parson for tithes and oblations forgotten or pretermitted; and if a Mortuary
were for the some reason, then had the Parson in many places two several
recompenses for one and the same thing. It were very unreasonable also that a
poor man having nothing tythable but three horses, should give the second of
them to the Parson for tithes omitted, when he whose tithes are worth 40. or
50. pounds a year gives no more; nor is it like an Heriot, which by contract
between the Lord and Tenant was reserved upon the original grant. But the
Statute of 21. Hen. 8. cap. 6. has turned these kind of Mortuaries into
certain sums of money, according to the value and estate of the Parishioner
deceasing, and forbids any thing to be otherwise taken either for Mortuarie
or Corpse present (which I conceive to be, when the corpse is carried either
thorough or into another Parish) then where it died.

Other customs there may be also, which the Canon accompteth laudable; as
where money was anciently given for lights in the Church, or for praying for
the soul of the deceased. The Parson it may be does enjoy it at this day not
mentioning the original, and so it behooveth him to do, lest the King be
entitled to it by the Statute of Superstitions uses. And it may be that the
money now paid for graves, was anciently the same that was given for praying
for the soul of the dead. For Mr. Fox reciting some Laws of Canutus, has
this for one; Pecunia sepulturae, justum est, ut aperta terra page 165.
reddatur: Si aliquod corpus a sua parochia deferatur in aliam, pecunia
sepulturae etc. In english (says he) It is meet and right, that in funerals
money be given for opening the earth: If any body or corse be carried from his
own Parish into another, the money of the burial shall pertain by the Law to
his own Parish Church.

This Law comes home to the point in hand, and makes very materially for the
Parson, and therefore I blame them not if they lay good hold on it as a warrant
of antiquity, to show both their right and their custom. But you must know,
that this Law was not written originally in Latin, but in Saxon: And that the
Translatour has not delivered it faithfully.

Canuti LL. Eccles. cap. 13.
The Saxon is this: and salsceat is rihtoest that man symle geleft a oet
opoenum graefe. and gif man oenig lic os riht gerist seire elleshoere lege
geloeste man one saelsceat sa theoh into am mynrte the hit to hynde; that is,
It is just that the soule-shott (or money given for praying for the soul) be
always paid at opening of the grave: And if the corpse be buried elsewhere then
in its own Parish, yet let the souleshott be paid to the Church, to which it
belongs. It is taken verbatim out of the Synod of E^nham, holden by Alpheage
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Wulstan Archbishop of York, about the year
1009. in the time of King Etheldred, and now in a secular Parliament (as I may
call it) confirmed by Canutus. But the old Latin manuscript copy of that Synod
clears the question, in these words: Cap. 14. Munera nec non defunctorum
animabus congruentia puteo impendantur aperto; Let the gifts also that are
given for the behoof of souls of the dead be paid (or delivered) at the
opening of the grave. This Canon neither commands any thing to be paid for
the grave, nor yet for the soul, but only limiteth the time when that which
is given for the soul should be paid. He therefore that translated Canutus
Laws out of Saxon, did not truly express saulesceat by pecunia sepulturae,
nor Mr Lambard (who rather affected eloquence then propriety) by pecunia
sepulchralis: But Mr Fox more unfaithfully by englishing the Latin. It is meet
and right that in Funerals money be given for opening the earth, as though the
Law required that money should be paid for the grave, whereas that it speaks
of, was only for praying for the soul, which by the Canons might lawfully be
taken, and is that, which they also intend should be paid unto the Parish
Church of the deceased, when the body is elsewhere buried; for so an ancient
paraphrasticall copy of Canutus Laws does express it: Si quis corpus parentis
aut amici sui ex propria parochia alias portare ad sepeliendum voluerit, faciat
prius certitudinem parochiae ad quam pertinet, scilicet redditus quod Angli
saulesceat vocant, quod recte persolvi debet ad apertum sepulchrum.

Now it appears how this grave-silver or money for graves grew up to be
taken. It was first given for praying for souls and such like, but that being
abolished and given to the King, the Parsons it seems take it for the grave.
And to say what I think, do now take that which was given for praying for the
soul, under their fee for their office of burying the Corpse, and this for the
grave besides, for they take them both. But I say no more.

This Tract was written Anno 1630.
FINIS.

