THE Lord Chancellor's SPEECH UPON THE Lord Treasurer's Taking his OATH IN THE
EXCHEQUER, The Fifth of December, 1672.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1672

THE Lord Chancellor's SPEECH Upon the Lord Treasurer's taking his Oath in the
Exchequer the Fifth of December, 1672.
My Lord Treasurer,
THe Kings Most Excellent Majesty knowing your Integrity, Abilities and
Experience in his Affairs, and particularly those of His Treasury, has thought
fit to make choice of you to be His Lord High Treasurer of England; And what
necessarily accompanies that Place, has by His Letters Patents under the Great
Seal, made you also Treasurer of His Exchequer.

The Lord High Treasurer of England's Office, is held by the Kings delivery of
the White Staff; The Treasurers of the Exchequer has ever been held by Letters
Patents; And is that by which your Lordship is more immediately Entitled, to be
a Chief Judge of this Court.

It were too nice and tedious, and peradventure too Formal, to give an account
of the several distinct Powers of these two Offices; Reason, and the length of
Time has now so Woven them together; But as they are both in your Lordship, I
may justly say you are in a Place of the very first Rank, as to Dignity, Power,
Trust, and Influence of Affairs. A Place that requires such a Man as our Great
Masters Wisdom has found for it: From whose natural temper we may expect
Courage, Quickness, and Resolution; From whose Education, Wisdom and
Experience; And from whose Extraction, that Noble and Illustrious House of the
Cliffords, an Heroic Mind, a Large Soul, and an Unshaken Fidelity to the Crown.

My Lord, It Is a great Honor, much beyond even the place it self, that you are
Chosen to it by this King, who, without flattery I may say, is as great a
Master in the Knowledge of Men and Things, as this or any other Age has
produced; And let me say farther, it is not only your Honor, that you are
Chosen by Him; but it is your Safety too, that you have Him to Serve: with whom
no subtle Insinuations of any near Him, nor the aspiring Interest of a
Favorite, shall ever prevail against those that serve Him well. Nor can His
Servants fear to be Sacrificed to the Malice, Fury, or Mistake of a more
swelling popular greatness. A Prince under whom the Unfortunate fall gently. A
Prince, in a word, that best of all Mankind, deserves the Title of Deliciae
Humani generis.

My Lord, I will not hold you long, for you have a Journey to go. After you
have taken your Oath, and your Place in this Court, you are, according to
ancient Custom, to Visit all the Offices in the Upper and Lower Exchequer, And
therefore let me end with this Wish, or rather Prophecy. That you may exceed
all your Predecessors in this Place: The Abilities and Fidelity of the Renowned
Lord Burleigh; The Sagacity, Quickness and great Dispatch of his Son the Lord
Salisbury; And the Uprightness, Integrity and Wisdom of that great Man that
went last before you, the Earl of Southampton.

FINIS.

