SCRIPTURE VINDICATED From the Mis-apprehensions, Mis-interpretations, and
Mis-applications of Mr STEPHEN MARSHALL, In his Sermon Preached before the
Commons House of PARLIAMENT, Feb. 23. 1641. and published by Order of that
House. ALSO A Military Sermon, WHEREIN By the Word of God, the nature and
disposition of a Rebel is discovered, and the Kings true Soldier described
and characterized.

By EDWARD SYMMONS, Chaplain to the Lifeguard of the Prince of Wales.

OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the University. 1645.

TO THE HONORABLE MEMBERS OF THE COMMONS House assembled at OXFORD.
Honorable Senators,
I Do here most humbly present uncovered to your judicious view, a Sermon once
Preached, and afterward dedicated to your selves at Westminster: as it was at
first an unhappy mean, to provoke diverse (then of your society) to set their
feet in paths of blood: so if now it shall help to a fuller sight, of the
greatness of that mercy, which preserved your selves from so great a danger, I
have also my option. There be Mysteries of Iniquity as well as of Godliness, a
Ministers duty is to discover both; our Savior revealed Satan when he spoke by
Peter's tongue, and thereby taught us to detect him, when he comes in the shape
of an Angel of light; (as his custom is to do, when he is endeavoring most
mischief against Church or State) the most eminent, popular, and well-guifted
men, have always been his instruments to pervert the Truth, and to break the
Peace; he does but actum agere in these times; omne malum ab Ecclesia, was true
of old, and is so still: They were Churchmen to whom that Rebel Rodolphus
spoke, (when lying on his deathbed he showed his right hand cut off in fight
against his Sovereign: This (says he) is that right hand, wherewith I vowed
my faith unto the Emperor, now is the same become a witness of my breach of
fidelity, and traitorous attempts against my Sovereign by your instigation.
They were also Churchmen that stirred up to the Barrons wars, in the days
of our Henry 3. and enjoined the Earl of Leicester in remissione peccatorum,
ut causam illam (meaning his Rebellion) usque ad mortem assumeret, asserting,
pacem Ecclesiae Anglicanae nun quam sine gladio materiali posse firmari. Our
age (alas) has been too fruitful in such Churchmen; and they in such
Assertions; but the Apostle prophesying of such says, that their folly shall
be manifested unto all; and to this purpose (right Noble and Worthy) are my
poor endeavors in this following discourse, I humbly beg, that your
favorable acceptance; may make the same in some sort valuable: it tends to
Peace, and you are Councillors of Peace, to a King of Peace, no way delighting
in blood, rather wishing with Theodosius, se potuisse mortuos a morte revocare.
Indeed He is our Theodosius, Gods gift to us; and you are his Theodosii, God's
gifts to him: and as such, we (his inferior Loyal Subjects) do most
sincerely honor you. And be confident (Grave Senators) what ever has been
suggested heretofore (by any of those Boutefeu's,) that assisting him the
Anointed of the Lord, and true possessor of the mild and gracious spirit of
the Lord, you do most really and truly help the Lord himself: and if your care
shall add some further edge to His most pious Orders, and Proclamations
against Swearing, and Profaning Gods Name and Word; and for the more strict
observing the Lords day, and days of Fasting (appointed by His Majesty, yet
much neglected in His Quarters;) you shall fit a people for the Lord, to show
mercy upon, and to restore that peace unto, which you labor for: yea, and
thereby not only your Consultations, but your Persons, shall continually be
attended with Gods blessing; and your Names had with Posterity in an
everlasting joyful remembrance; for this Honor have all his Saints. And that
the same may be an unseperable portion to every of you, is, and shall be the
constant, and earnest prayer of

Your humble Se^^^^^ EDWARD SYM^^^^
November. 30. 1644.
The Preface to the Readers.
CHRISTIAN READERS,
I Here offer to your conscientious view, the Vindication of three or four
Texts of Scripture, from the abuse that is offered unto them, by that once
faithful Expounder, and fruitful Preacher of Gods Word, Master Stephen
Marshall, Minister of Finching^ield in Essex: A man indeed whom (in my
apprehension), before his unhappy engagement in this unnatural and black
Rebellion, envy it self (though sometime busy in her attempts against him,)
was not able to stain or blemish, either for matters of life or doctrine. The
occasion of this mine undertaking against him herein was this.

About Easter last, 1644. I did visit in the Prison at Shrewsbury some
Prisoners, that had been taken at the Castle of Brampton Bryan, belonging to
Sir Robert Harly in Hereford-shire: and questioning them about their taking up
of Arms against their Sovereign, they answered me, that they took up Arms
against Antichrist, and Popery; for (said they) it is prophesied in the
Revelation, that the Whore of Babylon shall be destroyed with fire and sword,
and what do you know, but this is the time of her ruin, and that we are the
men that must help to pull her down. I answered that the Revelation tells us,
that it is the work of Kings (signified by those ten Horns, Rev. 17.12.16) to
pull down the whore of Babylon, to hate her, to make her naked, and to burn
her with fire. But as for them, they (in my apprehension) labored to keep up
the whore of Babylon, that she might not fall, by their endeavoring to pull
down Kings, who were appointed of God to pull down her: they replied, that
it is said in the Revelation, that the People, the Multitude and Nations should
also pull her down: but I reading the verse out of one of their Bibles, showed
them their mistake, that the People, Multitude and Nations, (which are called
Waters, Rev. 17.15.) were those whom the Whore did sit upon, and as it were did
brood under her, that is, she did rule over them, had them under their
obedience, insomuch that they might rather be said to submit unto her, then to
pull her down.

But what (said they) do you think, that Kings alone, without the help of ^he
people shall pull her down? I answered no, nor yet the People without their
Ki^gs, who are appointed of God; to lead them thereunto, and in whose power
alone it is, to Authorize people to be active and assistant in such a
business. And then I informed them further, of their mistake in another
particular, namely in thinking Popery (which they fancied they fought against,)
to be that whore of Babylon, which in the Revelation is threatened to be
destroyed with fire and sword; for that Antichrist and whore of Babylon, which
was to be destroyed with such weapons, dwelt at Rome, and not here in England:
and it was the very Roman feat or City which was to be so abolished; and not
the Romish faith, or Popish Religion; the sword of Christ's mouth, (which is the
word of God) is the only weapons ordained to destroy that; nor should that be
quite abolished from the earth (as Learned Divines did hold) till the coming
of Christ himself: they told me that all the true godly Divines in England
(amongst whom they named in special M. Marshall were of their opinion, that
Antichrist was here in England as well as at Rome, and that the Bishops were
Antichrist, and all that did endeavor to support them, were popishly affected,
Babilonish and Antichristian too, yea many professed Papists were in our
Armies, who (they said) did fight against Christ and Protestant Religion, and
therefore they thought, they were bound in Conscience to fight against them,
and us that took part with them, and in so doing, they did but help God against
his Enemies. I urged them to show what call or warrant they had so to do,
being not Authorized by the King, they seemed to infer a threefold call or
Warrant. 1. The Command of the Parliament. 2. The Example of all Godly and
powerful Ministers, leading, encourageing, and stirring them up thereunto. And
3. The Motion of Gods spirit in all Gods people, provoking them all with one
mind, to undertake the same business: and to confirm all this, they
alleged that place, Judge. 5. Curse ye Meroz, Curse ye her inhabitants with a
bitter Curse, because they came not to help the Lord against the mighty. And
that place, Ier. 48. Cursed be he that witholds his hand from blood. And that
in Psa. 137. Blessed is he that dasheth the Children of Babylon against the
stones. And do not you think (say they) if the Papists prevail but they will
destroy all us? do you think they fight for the Protestant Religion? I answered
no, I did not believe they did, nor did they pretend any such thing, but only
to aid their natural Liege Lord the King against those that wronged him, as
in duty (being his Subjects) they were bound to do: I did not deny but they
might secretly aim at their own ends too, as the King of Ashur did, when he
was doing the work of God, Esaias. 10. But God who ruled the world, and always
defended his true Church, would not suffer them to pursue their own ends, any
further then should make for his own praise and his peoples good. Then I
endeavored to show them, that those Scriptures which they alleged were
misapplyed by them, and did rather make against them; but they took me off,
from that discourse, with Mr Marshalls application of them: M. Marshall (said
they) does apply them as we do, in a Sermon (Preached before the Parliament)
which we had at Brampton: I told them that (surely) they were mistaken in M.
Marshall* for though some Weavers and Taylers, and Tinkers and Pedlers, and
such like, who were suffered to preach, did abuse and pervert Gods word to
their own purposes, yet M. Marshall (who was one whom my self knew better then
they did, I was persuaded had more wisdom, learning, and honesty then so to
do: and much other discourse to this purpose we had together, insomuch that
at last they desired me, that I would come again unto them, and pray with
them: but my occasions carried me out of the Town on the morrow, that I could
see them no more.

Now behold, about the end of July, or beginning of August after, I fortuned to
be in a Booksellers shop in Ludlow, where I chanced to see a Sermon of M.
Marshalls upon that Text, Iud. 5.23. Curse ye Meroz, etc. which I had either
not seen before, or not sufficiently observed; wherefore reading the same, that
discourse which I had with the forementioned Prisoners, came into my mind; and
I did conclude, that this was the very Sermon, which they had alleged unto
me, in their own defense: wherefore having by experience seen in part, what
damage thereby was already done, to simple people; and believing that others
of the like rank and quality, in other places, might be by the same as much
misled; I did apprehend my self (in the accidental meeting with this Sermon,
after such my forementioned discourse) to be called by a special Providence to
set pen to paper, to vindicate the Scriptures of God; and did think it my
duty, and that I was bound in Conscience, (being a Minister of God) to warn
all men of the danger, and to discover the snare, which is laid to catch and
draw them into ways of Blood and murder. It is true M. Marshall is my dear
friend, yet Gods truth is more dear unto me, yea the least title of that (I
hope) I shall ever esteem more precious, then all the friends in the world,
opposed unto it. And I know M. Marshall is an able man, and my self weak in
compare with him, yet in the cause of God, I am not afraid to take up the
Buckler against him. I have been bold once already, even to provoke him into
the public lists, for to justify his new and most ungospellike way; but his
Conscience or his Courage would not serve him to answer my letter; and
therefore I hope that grace is not quite extinguished in him: perhaps (through
Gods blessing) if this ensuing discourse come to his hand, he may see more of
his error, and of the hurt he has done thereby to others; and so maybe
awakened to glorify God, and his truth by a self denying recantation: my
humble prayers, are and shall be to God for him, that he may so do; And I
desire of you all (Christian Readers) that you would join with me in the same
prayer for him: and also that God would molli^ie, and sanctify the spirits of
all those of M. Marshals faction, who have brought these lamentable miseries
upon this now most woeful Nation, that they might at length smite their own
breasts, and cry, O what have we done.

And thou, O great and mighty Majesty of Heaven and Earth, who alone can open
the ears of the deaf, and the eyes of the blind; cause thou these men to
hear that cry of blood in their own souls, which themselves have shed; and to
see those calamities with watery eyes, which themselves have occasioned, charge
thou upon their Consciences that high disgrace, which they have put upon the
meek and loving Gospel of thy dear Son. And thou, O Son of God, whose
Gospel it is, defend the honor of the same, and make us all to behave our
selves, worthy the still enjoyment of it, even for thine own merit and mercy
sake.

Amen, Amen.
SCRIPTURE VINDICATED from the Misapprehensions, Misinterpretations, and
mis-applications of Mr Stephen Marshall in his Sermon Preached before the
Commons House of PARLIAMENT: Feb. 23. 1641. upon that Text in Judges 5.23.
Curse ye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse ye bitterly the Inhabitants
thereof, because they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the mighty. THis Text, as with Mr Marshall, so with the rest of the
Ministers of his party, is of great use and estimation: I believe scarce any of
them, but have Preached upon it, at least have often quoted it, or rather
misconstrued it, to their own purposes: but how improper a Theme it is, for
their cause, for these times, and specially for a Fast day, when Mr Marshall
discoursed upon it, shall in part be discovered in these following lines.

The God of all grace and truth, guide my heart and pen by his holy spirit,
that I may write with that meekness, as becomes a Minister of Christ to use,
in dealing with a lapsed Brother; and with that fervor also, as beseems him
that is zealous for Gods Word and Honor; that the seduced may be reclaimed
from erroneous paths, and the upright strengthened in their Loyal way; to the
Gospells glory, and the salvation of Souls; and tha^ for my dear Lord and
Masters sake Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

SECTION, I. Wherein are discovered Mr Marshalls Mis-apprehensions.
WHen Mr Marshall by way of introduction has discovered the scope of the
Chapter, and in special of this verse, he comes to show: first, how suitable
(to his apprehension) the text is to his present occasion: then, he devides,
and (after his manner interprets the same; and lastly, he raises or concludes
upon his main doctrine: I shall follow him throughout in his own method and way:

First for the sutablenesse: he says, the Text or Theme is suitable, and
exceeding seasonable: in respect 1 Of the times wherein we live. 2 Of the
temper of most people. 3 Of the occasion of that days meeting. 4ly and
specially, in respect of that Honorable Assembly.


I shall be bold to show how M. Marshall is mistaken in all these particulars:

1. It is seasonable (says he) to the times wherein we live, when abundance of
mighty Enemies rise up against the Lord and against his Church. Now in this I
suppose M. Marshall forgot himself, for these times wherein we live, are times
of the Gospel, and therefore are, or should be times of blessing, whereas the
Text, is a Text of the old time, a Text of cursing. And indeed although
abundance of mighty enemies do rise up against the Lord, and against his
Church, yet Christ in the Gospel, did not leave his Church either precept or
example, to curse her enemies; no nor the enemies of the Lord himself: but he
has left both precept and example directly to the contrary.

1. Precept. Mat. 5.43, 44, 45. etc. He speaks not only to them there present,
but to his whole Church; and what he then spoke was to endure for ever, and to
be a rule to her throughout all ages, in cases of this nature: His command is,
that she should bless and not curse, yea that she should bless them that
curse her: the words are these, you have heard that it has been said (namely
in old time) thou shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy; but I say unto
you (says Christ) love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, pray for them that despightfully use you, and persecute
you, that you may be, (or may approve your selves to be) the Children of your
Father which is in Heaven, for he deals thus with those that be his enemies,
he makes the Sun to shine, and his rain to fall, both upon the evil and upon
the good, if you love them only that love you, or salute your brethren only
(those of your own opinion, of your own side or faction) what do you more then
the Publicans or Heathens do, who have no acquaintance with God, with Christ,
or with his Gospel) be you therefore perfect as your heavenly father is
perfect: as if he had said, it becomes you, that profess your selves to be
mine, to endeavor after more then an Heathenish perfection, it is an Heavenly
perfection, which you must strive for; and to obtain this, you must leave the
practices of old time, which were to hate and curse your Enemies, and you must
practice the clean contrary.

And for the better understanding of this, let me here by the way, mind the
World again, of what I have already informed her in my Treatise of The right
nature and temper of the spirit of the Gospel: viz. that there is a great
difference between the Ancient times, those before Christ, and those since his
coming, not in respect of time, it self; (for that is always the same) but in
respect of the coming of Christ; who brought with him a new spirit, which both
must and does manifest it self in all his true servants.

The former times, might happily be times for cursing and revenge; times of death
and terror; Gods name then by which he was known and called, was Deus ultionum
the God of Revenge, Psalm. 94.1.
for as such a one, he was pleased then oft-times to discover himself: Adam
having sinned, was presently cast out of Paradise. Corah, and his companions
having Rebelled, vengeance speedily laid hold upon them, Meroz having faulted
was presently Cursed; but by the coming of Christ, the times were changed to be
times of mercy and favor, times of grace and pity, of patience and
forbearance, of life and Salvation; and God from thence forth was called by a
new name: 2. Cor. 1.3.
scil. Pater misericordiarum, and Deus consolationum, the Father of mercies and
God of consolation, and as such a one he declares himself, he dealt more
forbearingly with Corazin and Bethsaida, then formerly he had done with Sodom
and Gomorrah: and Paul then Saul, went breathing out threatenings against Gods
Saints, yet mercy reached him; Mary Magdalen and the Thief were great sinners,
yet vengeance did not overwhelme them; yea many of those that crucified Christ,
were not taken away as they deserved; (but being afterward converted by Peter's
Sermon, Act. 2.) tasted mercy: Had Meroz been standing in the days of the
Gospel (in Christ's time,) and had failed in her duty, as she here did, she
should not presently have been laden with a Curse; but rather reprooved and
admonished of her Error, and had time granted her to repent in: and therefore
though this Text of M. Marshall, might happily have been seasonable, for the old
times, to be preached to the Captains and Leaders of the Lords Hosts (as he
calls those that he preached it unto;) yet it does not follow that it is a like
seasonable now. For by the coming of Christ (I say) there was a change made in
the times, and so ought there to be in men, in their thoughts, words and
carriages; yea and in their preaching too, in which there must Consideration be
had to times and seasons.

But I return, and will second that Precept of our Savior, with the Testimony
of his two great Apostles St Peter and S. Paul, both Preachers in the time of
the Gospel; and both endued with the Spirit and mind of Christ: first S.
Peter 1. Pet. 3.9. render not evil for evil, or railing for railing, but
contrariwise blessing, 1. Pet. 3.9.
knowing that you are thereunto called, that you should inherit the blessing,
whence we learn, that men by the Gospel are called to Christianity, for this
very purpose, that they may show themselves to differ from all the world
beside, in blessing their Enemies, when they deserve it not; and by so doing
they do fit themselves to be Heirs of the blessing of God.

And then Saint Paul also, does urge this truth in such a way of enforcement,
with such a phrase, as may challenge our special note thereof, Romans 12.14.
Bless them that persecute you, Bless (I say) and Curse not, the charge is
doubled, yea trebled, in a direct oppo^ition unto that seasonablenesse which M.
Marshall fancies. And let not any object that these Evangelicall precepts, do
only concern our carriages toward our own personal Enemies, and not
toward those that are the Enemies of Christ, and his Church; for I conceive
that Persecutors of Christians, raylers, and those that offer wrong, or render
evil to others, are no friends of Christ; and besides as our Savior told us
(in the place before quoted) it is the condition of God our Heavenly Father
(whom we must endeavor to be like, to do good to the unthankefull, and to the
Evil; and such sure are his Enemies, whom he does not look, we should use
worse then himself does: we must not think to be more righteous, or zealous
then he; nor must we begin our vomit, or Execrations, before God begins his:
for indeed the Church her self (as M. Perkins infers) has only power to
pronounce him accursed, whom God first accurseth: and the Apostle, Gal. 1.8, 9.
tells us twice over, for our better observance, and remembrance, what kind of
man that is, who is under the Anathema of the Lord: even he that preaches
another Gospel, or any other Doctrine for Gospel contrary to that, of Peace,
and Love, and Patience and Obedience, which himself had Preached: If any man
(says he) Preach unto you; any other Gospel, (or any thing else for Gospel)
then what we have preached, let him be accursed: it concerns M. Marshall
therefore to consider of himself and of his Doctrine: But this for Precept.

2. The example of our Savior speaks as home, to our purpose against Mr
Marshalls judgment; as his Precepts have done: when himself was here upon the
Earth, and had abundance of Enemies, and those mighty ones too, who did rise
against him: the Text says: Herod, Pontius Pilat, with the Gentiles, Acts.
4.22.
and People of Israel were all gathered together, (and did rise like one man)
against the Lord Christ: yet we do not read of one Curse that he bestowed upon
them; much less did he throw out any Curses against Peter, and the rest of the
Apostles, that forswore him, and fled away from him, and did not help him
(their Lord and Master) against the mighty: no, but he prayed both for the one,
and for the other: yea for his most deadly Enemies, he powered forth a
supplication, Father forgive them: and at another time, it is said he grieved or
mourned for the hardness of their hearts, Mark. 3.5.
it is not said he cursed them because of their hard-heartednesse. Nay which (of
all) is most worthy of Mr Marshalls observation, is that place, Luke 9.55.56.
when the two Desciples James and John began to be of Mr Marshalls mind, and
would have been fetching some Curse from Heaven, upon those unkind Samaritans,
who behaved themselves so like Enemies unto their Master: Christ himself would
not suffer them, but turned (says the Text) and rebuked them, saying, you know
not of what Spirit you are of: for the Son of man came not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them, as if he had said, to curse or to mischief men, is
not a work suitable to persons, of your Spirits, or of your Calling; or to
the^e times; you are Ministers of the Gospel, my Disciples and these are times
of the Gospel, times of blessing, and you must do only that which suits with
my Spirit, and with the end of my coming, and which becomes the Gospel: And
whereas those two Desciples* did think they had a warrant from Elias Example
for that motion of theirs, as happily M. Marshall did think he had from that of
Deborah and Barack, for his urging of this Text; yet our Savior informs them,
that his coming into the World, had put all examples of that kind out of date;
what was lawful in Elias time, is not equally so at this present: yea surely,
we may conclude from those words of Christ to his two Disciples. 1. That all
motions and Doctrines, which do not suit with the end of Christ's coming, are
sinful motions, and sinful Doctrines; and such are all those that do not
tend to Peace and mercy, to the blessing, and salvation of men. And 2ly. we may
learn too: that all we who live under the Gospel, must mind and speak,
Preach and do, only that which suites with the spirit of the Gospel: and
therefore look how far M. Marshalls Text does dissent from the end of
Christ's coming, and from the gentleness of the Spirit of the Gospel; so
far is it from being seasonable in these times: so that the ground of M.
Marshalls mistake in this particular was, he did not consider the Change of the
Times; but no marvel of it, for we see two great Apostles were once in the
same Error.

2ly. Mr Marshall says, his Text is seasonable, in respect of the temper of
most people, who generally mind their own things, and not the things of
Christ. But is it seasonable therefore to curse them? Will that make them mind
their own things less and Christ's more? I apprehend otherwise, and that from
a three fold Argument: one from Scripture, another from natural reason, and a
third from sensible experience.

1. Scripture teaches the contrary. The Apostle in that very Chapter ( Phil.
2.) whence that phrase is borrowed by Mr Marshall, gives no such warrant; but
rather if we mark him does teach men, to mind their own things less, Ver. 3,
4 etc.
and the things of Christ more, by laying down before them the example of
Christ's great love to mankind; his Humility and sufferings in their behalf; by
showing how he denied himself and his own glory, to procure their
advancement; and from hence he provokes men to be like him, in discovering the
same mind, and affection to be in themselves toward him, and v. 14. and 15. he
exhorts them, to do all things without murmurings and disputings, surely then
without Cursings, and he gives this reason, that you may be blameless and
harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a froward and
perverse Generation; for the gaining and winning of them, inferring that if
they should do otherwise, if they should curse those that were not of their
own side, and temper; they being of a perverse and crooked disposition, would
return like for like, yea and speak evil of God whose Children they
professed themselves to be, and so there would be nothing but disputings and
quarrellings, fightings and shedding of one another blood, even as there is
now in this Land amongst us.

So in another place it is said that the Servant of God, (who would win others
to mind the things of God) must not strive, (much less curse) but be gentle
unto all men, apt to teach patient, 2. Tim. 2.24.25.
in meekness instructing them that be contrary minded, (and that oppose
themselves,) trying if God will (as peradventure that way he will) give them
repentance to acknowledge the truth, and so be recovered out of the Devils
snare, (wherein doublesse all they are entangled that mind their own things,
more then the things of Christ.) In those purer times, this was the only way
which Gods Ministers took, to alter men's minds and tempers: we beseech you
(says the Apostle) to be reconciled to God, 2. Cor. 5.19, 20.
nay God by us beseeches you: God himself the person offended, seeks and
prays to be reconciled with his Enemies; even as our gracious King has done
to be at peace with them, that have so highly abused him. The Prophet Hosea
forespeaking of these times, Hos. 11.4.2.14.
tells us, that God would draw people to himself with the Chains of Love, he
would take them aside and speak friendly to them, pardon their iniquity, cover
their sins, and so allure them in a gentle way, to mind him more, and
themselves less. And shall any pretender for God or Christ, think harshnesse
and cursing a better way, or mean to effect the same thing.

2. Natural Reason persuades the contrary. He that knows whereof man is made,
and what is in man, and is the searcher of his Heart, yea and the changer of it
too, Reason says, can best of all direct in the way to alter the same. Besides
if it be true (which the Apostle says) that the preaching of the Law does put
us out of frame and temper, Romans 7.
by means of sin that dwells in us, which becomes thereby more outrageous:
then Reason suggests that much more will the preaching of Curses, do the same
thing. Again that course which is not availeable, to draw one man to another,
between whom there is a lesser distance; can never be Effectual to draw men
to God, between whom the distance is far greater. That which cannot provoke
us to love our Neighbors as our selves, or to mind his things as our own, can
never prevail, to stir us up to love God better then our selves, and to mind
the things of Christ above our own: Reason teaches all this. I confess these
harsh Themes or Texts, may be suitable enough (as they may be handled,) to
drive people out of themselves, and to make them mind their own affairs but
little, but how they should drive any nearer unto God (unless by accident,) or
cause them to set their affections on things above, my Reason cannot apprehend;
our blessed Savior would not go in Mr Marshalls way, when he dealt with Judas
the Traitor; for when that Apostate desciple, (for his worldly advantage sake)
went (as a Chaplain) with the Soldiers to apprehend his Lord and Sovereign:
Christ did not at that time, fall to curse him, for minding his money more, then
his Master, his gain, more then his Conscience; but with a mild Compellation,
does insinuate unto him, how he covered a most foul Treason under a fair
pretense: friend (says he) betrayest thou the Son of Man with a kiss: which
very manner of speech, without all question, did so work upon the Spirit of
the Traitor afterward, that he never joyed in his money more; but ere long,
brings it back to the Close Committee, and there he leaves it; confessing that
he had betrayed Innocent Blood: now surely by the consent even of Reason, this
course which Christ took, is most seasonable to the temper of those people
that mind their own things most, if we would work in them a sight of their
Error, and not that which M. Marshall seems to fancy. Which also

3. Experience it self contradicts: M. Marshall teaches us in the 6th Page
of his Sermon, that to Curse is, maledicere verbo malefacere re, to speak
evil, to revile, to reproach, to wish mischief unto, to do any evil against
a man, to execute indeed (to the utmost of power) what one would wish in word:
(in brief, it is to deal with a man as M. Marshalls Faction have ^ince dealt
with the King* and with the Queen.) But did ever any one read, or hear, or by
experience see, any man that was yet a stranger to God, or to Religion,
converted by these means? How this Generation of New Reformers, are like to
prevail for Christ, in this their way, let all men judge according to
observation.

It is most true, they have not failed in any one of M. Marshalls particulars,
in their endeavors with the Queen, they have spoken evil of her, reviled
her, reproached her, slandered her, robbed her, spoiled her, shot at her,
persecuted and hunted her out of the Kingdom, done her all the mischief both
in word and deed, which was in their power to do; and sorry they were, that
their power was not answerable to their will, to have proceeded farther in
their evils against her: and all this was to bring her into love with the
Protestant Religion, which they (most scandalously and falsely) say, themselves
are of: though indeed of all Religions in the world the true Protestant
Religion, does most of all, oppose and contradict such ways and courses: and
they are the greatest Enemies that ever the Protestant Religion had; thus to
slander and disgrace the same: yea they have occasioned hereby, many unhallowed
men and women, to blaspheme our holy Profession, and to commend of that of the
Adversaries of Rome: the Pope had never such an Harvest in England this
foureskore years put altogether, as he has had in these four years last
past, or since these men have managed the Militia. This experience does teach
us; and on the other side the same Mistrisse does assure us, that the only way
to work an Evangelicall temper, in those that differ from us; is to make unto
them a presentation of Christ's Example, in our teaching, to discover his
Conditions in our behaviors, to manifest his meekness, and affability in our
speeches; which course indeed does mightily calm the rage of sin, and
extinguish the heat of it: yea it tames the heart of a sinner, captivates his
spirit, and after a manner inforceth him to mind his own things less, and the
things of Christ more. O had our New Reformers but gone this way to work, I
dare boldly say they might have done God much service, but their pleading for
the Militia, was a plain disclaiming of this way of Christ. And thus we see
from Scripture, Reason, and Experience, that M. Marshall is as much mistaken in
the seasonablenesse of his Text in the second respect, as in the former: and I
suppose the ground of his mistake is this, he did not sufficiently consider of
peoples tempers and dispositions.

3ly. Mr Marshall says: His Text is seasonable to the occasion of this days
meeting, which is purposely for the help of the Lord, and his cause and people
now distressed in Ireland: So that he conceives it seasonable (as I apprehend
him) in respect of the day, or the duty thereon to be performed: yet the
pretended occasion of that days meeting, (as I take it) was to pray and not to
curse. I did never read, that bitter cursing was ever enjoined as any part, of
the duty of a fast day; and therefore no marvel if the fruits of such fasting
days, have proved so bitter to the whole Nation.

I have heard both M. Marshall, and other Ministers of that Faction at some
fifty or sixty miles distance, inveigh most bitterly against the Cavaleers for
their Cursing and Swearing: the report whereof (doubtless) they did receive
from some good hand; for to my grief and sorrow I find, that notwithstanding
his Majesty's Military Articles, and frequent Proclamations to the contrary,
many that have Relation to his Armies, are most extremely given over to that
hellish sin; for in that particular they rather choose to follow M. Marshalls
doctrine, then that of their own Ministers, who dislike the same: they think
they may practice Cursing, as lawfully as he preach it: though I believe, they
mistake him therein; for he would have only those of his own side, to whom he
preaches, to practice the same; and not the Cavaleers, to whom it does not
belong; (nor indeed in respect of their cause so well become): But such is man's
nature, Nittimur in vetitum: in ways of sin, one will strive to out go
another: And let M. Marshall say what he can, the Cavaleers will account those
in Rebellion against the King, as worthy of Curses, as they on the other side
can account them.

But this I must say of the Cavaleers, I could never observe any of them so
transcendently bold, as to fancy, they did help God, or his cause by their
Cursing; nor yet to profess publicly, that the Fast day was a day seasonable
for the practice thereof; nor dare we who are Ministers among them, teach any
such doctrine, for we have not so learned Christ: no but let M. Marshall and
all his side know; that we think, we are bound in Conscience upon the Fast
days, to discover the horrid nature of the sin of Swearing, and of Cursing
others, even to the faces of those we conceive guilty of it; endeavoring
thereby to humble their souls for it: And we pray our selves and teach others,
that it is the duty of Christians to pray for all, and to curse none: no not
those that are for the present Enemies to God, or to themselves; who thirst for
the ruin of Christ's Gospel, and of the defender and Professors of it; we
hope and pray, for their Conversions, for we know not, but God may call them at
the eleventh hour: only we pray that their mischievous imaginations against
the Lord, and against his Anointed, and servants, may never prosper; that
their Hypocrisy may be discovered; that so the simple well meaning People may
no longer be deluded by them, we pray, Fill their faces with shame of their
own doings, that they may seek thy Name O Lord. We conceive that cursing of
others, on the Fast day, would rather appear to be an act of Pride in us, and
of self justification: then of self condemnation, which is the proper act of
a Fast day: we hope that those Prayers which we put up for our bloodthirsty
Enemies, as they are most self denying, so are they most suitable to the work
of Humiliation; and if they prove not effectual in their behalf, for whom
they are made, yet in the end they will (through Gods gracious acceptance by
Christ's means) prove most beneficial and comfortable to our selves: And we
think we help the Lord and his cause best; when we walk only in that way,
which himself does lead us in, and wherein his cause always at the last, has
best thrived and prospered: and that has been not the high way of Cursing and
self advancing, but the low way of praying and self denying; yea we apprehend
that it is the strength of God alone, that must pull down his Enemies, and
maintain his own cause, which he will undoubtedly do, by some means, or
other, when his wronged and afflicted people are fit for mercy and deliverance,
and are brought to kiss the rod which beats them; and this we tell them they
shall do, when they leave cursing their Enemies, and with appeasednesse of
Spirit can pray for them: this is the doctrine which we Preach unto them, to be
practiced on the Fast day, and on every day, and I beseech God give to every
one of the Kings Subjects, and People, grace to follow it.

We read, Ezekiel. 22.30. That in a time of general Calamity, God says, that he
sought for a man, to make up the Hedge, and stand in the gap before him, that
he might not destroy the Land, but he found none. Had God looked for Cursers,
or if they could have done the deed; doubtless he might in those days, as
well as now, have found many; (for it is an easier thing to nature, and more
common to curse Enemies, then to pray for them,) but he looked for a man that
should act Moses part, who stood in the breach, and prayed for them, and so was
a means to preserve them. Exodus 32.10. -- 14. etc.
The Story it self is worth our observance; God offered to make Moses a great
man, yea a mighty Nation: if he would but give him leave, to destroy those
rebellious Israelites (who sure were Gods Enemies, for He does not use to
destroy his friends:) But Moses would not yield, though he might have come to
great preferment by it. Had he been of M. Marshalls mind, he would have thought
it his duty, not only to have left praying for them, (whereby he held Gods
hands)* but also to have fell a revileing, reproaching, and doing them all the
mischief that possibly he could, and so have helped the Lord, more quickly to
have destroyed them: But surely that self denying course of Moses, was more
acceptable and pleasing to God, then this other of Mr Marshall would have been.
And I believe (for my part) that God on the Fast days, (when we meet
together, to help him and his cause,) does expect from us even such like
prayers as Moses offered; and does look that we his Ministers should call upon
people, in that way and manner to afford their assistance: and I verily
believe; had M. Marshall and all the Ministers on his side so done, the
distressed people in Ireland (which he seems so specially to commiserate,) had
been better helped, then they have been: for let us but consider, a little by
the way, (more fully to evidence M. Marshalls mistake,) what great benefit this
Cursing doctrine has reached out to the afflicted Protestants in that Kingdom.

Soon after the Preaching of this Sermon (which was Feb. 23. 1641.) The
predominant part of his Auditory, (their hearts being thereby fitted and
prepared to Cruelty,) fell to put the same in practice: for hereupon the lands
of that Nation were exposed to sale, by an Ordinance of the House, and ^ome of
the Members (who it seems had drank down a larger draught of his doctrine then
the rest) would have had it also decreed, that the Irish should be rooted out
from being a Nation, they should all be put to the sword, that so their very
name might be had no more in remembrance, for this indeed according to M.
Marshall's phrase and instruction (page 5.) was fully to curse them, vehemently
to curse them, and never to leave cursing them, even to annihilate them by
cursing them, whereupon the Popish Irish fearing to be quite outgone in cruelty
by these new Reformers, grew desperate indeed, and most outragiously
mischievous against the English Nation; and against all that professed the
Protestant Religion. And verily I do believe, that God was so highly
displeased with those bloody purposes, those over-harsh decrees, those cursing
doctrines, so contrary to the Gospel, from men professing the same; that he
did for these things sake, suffer those wild and savage Irish, to be more
prevalent in that Kingdom: and should I be in the case of those, that either
Preached such doctrines; or had vented such cruel purposes; or had laid out,
any money for Irish lands; or had been a means any way to provoke that people to
be so outragiously desperate* and destructive as they have been; I believe my
Conscience would tell me, that God would lay to my charge, the guilt of that
Protestant English blood there shed, and the King might justly lay unto me, the
loss of those his Subjects; and I should always think, that blood would
pursue me, because I had not hated blood.

And hereby the way also, let me suggest two things: a Caveat and an
observation.

1. A Caveat to all my countrymen of England of what side or faction soever,
who begin now to be as bold with the lands and Estates, of some in their own
Nation; as three years ago they were with those of the Irish, both in buying
and selling; the Buyers I would have but remember, Ireland, and think that by
their good Bargains there, God did foreadmonish them, to beware how they
venture here. And the sellers I would have them remember Felton (that killed
the Duke of Buckingham,) and withal, that their own Orders and doings, have
taught men to make no scruple of shedding blood: It Is no wisdom to put great
spirits upon desperate courses, the Bear will more willingly Hazard his life,
then part with his skin to make good the word of the Hunter.

2. An observation: from the progress of men in ways of blood, quam tument
gustato sanguine fauces, how dangerous the taste of blood is, it makes even a
sheep grow wolfeish: si torrida parvus venit in ora cruor, itur in omne nefas,
they that were lately accounted the persecuted flock of Christ, having lapt a
little of the blood of an Enemy, how extremely on the sudden do they thirst
for the blood of their friends? they who at first devoured in their
expectations, the lands of Strangers, and panted after the destruction of the
Popish Irish; how greedy are they now become, of the estates of their own
Countrymen, and thirsty after the ruin of the Protestant English. -- inter
mensasque torosque
Quae modo complexu foverunt pectora caedunt.
Whom lately they at bed and board,
Did brotherly embrace,
They now do slay, with murdering sword,
And Brotherhood deface.
And yet I know it is the opinion of some; that this Effusion of English Blood
was primum intention, the first thing in the intentions of these unnatural
men; and the Irish Combustions were only raised as a mist, to cloud their
purpose at home, that honest Eyes might not discern it; for (notwithstanding
M. Marshalls phrase, to help the distressed people in Ireland) it is too well
known, that the present prevailing Faction amongst those whom in the next words
he calls, the Captains and Leaders of the Lords Host: were not only
neglective themselves, in affording aid, but also obstructive to his sacred
Majesty, who (in pity to those poor distressed) would have ventured his
Royal Person, to have carried comfort to them: so irksome was it to his Pious
Soul, to hear, that any of his Subjects, should want that protection, which
throughout the time of his sole Government, they so happily had enjoyed.

Sod latebat Anguis in Herba, there was a pad in the Straw, which every one did
not then see; the maine design or work to be done, was, to destroy the
Government of Gods Church, and to overthrow Monarchy in this Kingdom; and to
effect this, the Shipping and Militia of the Kingdom, must be griped into
their hands; to which purpose, there was to be aliquid apparens, above board,
to gain some belief to Iealousies and Fears: and therefore knowing the
discontentments, and disposition of the Irish Nation, they cut of their
Governors Head; and did providently forbear to send any other to succeed him;
that so they might render to them, an advantage to rebel, and to themselves a
fair pretense to be possessed of the Men, Monyes, and Ammunition of this
Kingdom. Which when they had got, Ireland is neglected, the poor distressed
people there are massacred, the Subsidies given for their aid, and the
Contribution gathered for their relief, is employed another way; many of our
gallant men who at first went thither to their help, for want of timely
supplies are slain, (for had they lived a while longer, 'twas feared they
might have done their King too much good service at their own home,) and the
rest of the Armies there abiding, were well nigh famished for want of
maintenance; which they could not obtain at last, but upon condition, they
would first subscribe, to a kind of new dependence upon these new State men;
and two of the Members of the House of Commons, are sent over to require it of
them.

And here for the Confirmation of this Opinion, let me declare by the way two
things, which I shall desire the judicious Reader seriously to think upon; and
let him conclude from the same, what his own Reason and Conscience shall
suggest.

1. What I have understood of His Majesty's Princely care and wisdom to
prevent those Irish miseries; had that Kingdom been so happy as to have tasted
the fruits thereof. When they had cut off Strafford's Head, the King
providently foreseeing, that those forces raised there, by the said Earl, (for
his assistance in the Northern expedition,) if they continued together, (being
Irish and Papists) might be mischievous in that Kingdom, after their
Governors death, (who had he lived, was both able and ready enough to have
kept them under from Rebelling:) therefore his Majesty ordered, they should be
sent out from thence, and had granted their service to the Ambassadors of
Portugal and Spain, soliciting the same at that time, in the behalf of their
several Princes: in which particular, had not His Majesty been crossed; it had
been impossible in human reason, there should have been any such sudden
Combustions raised in Ireland: whereas on the other side, they remaining there
in a body; it was most likely (in all probability) they would act those evils,
which now woeful experience can best declare. But the prevailing party at
Westminster, (who must be called the Saviors and Conservators of Kingdoms)
would by no means, suffer the King to enjoy the freedom of his personal
will; (for indeed, so they might have missed of their maine design in
England:) and therefore pretending Iealousies and Fears, kept them still at
home to make (as appears by the effect,) a distressed Church and People in
Ireland, and to do greater mischief then at that time could be feared.

2. What my self received from the lips of a dying man; who was a Commander,
and present in Dublin, when those two Emissaries (forementioned,) came thither
to seduce the Armies from their Loyalty: who when they had by their cunning
pretenses, got the subscription of so many, as (in their own conceits) the
work was even done; they began somewhat perkely, to discover themselves, and
their cankred intentions in their prate one night at supper: one of them
saying, that now all Nations, began to be weary of Monarchy: and did groan
under the yoke thereof. Which expression that very Gentleman (from whose mouth
I had it) extremely disgusting, (being ingenious and loyal,) in the heat of
his valor, starts up, and says; none but Villains and Traitors were weary of
it, or would offer to affirm any such thing: (which was most truly spoken, if
applied to them that were bred under a Monarch, and had sworn Allegiance to
him:) and thereupon this gallant Spirit, with another true Englishman like
himself; perceiving that their drift in requiring subscription, was only to
get the Army engaged with their Faction, to destroy Monarchy, and their
natural Liege Lord; commanded those Members, to reproduce presently the book
of Subscriptions; (each of them threatening otherwise to cut one of their
throats:) which when they had again laid hands upon, they rent it all in
pieces; and so those two Factors of mischief, having an end put to their work
in that Kingdom, came running home in a fear, to their own Center at
Westminster again. But these by the way. I return to M. Marshall.

Now I have given an hint how seasonable indeed his Text was to the purposes of
some of his Auditors, and how useful his doctrine has since been in their
practice of it, not to help, but to mischief the Lord, and his cause, and his
distressed people in Ireland: but that it should be seasonable in that respect
(which he affirms) viz. to the occasion of that days meeting, which was to
fast and pray, (as was pretended) I cannot yet perceive; surely therefore M.
Marshall was mistaken in that apprehension also, and the ground of his mistake
might be, he did not sufficiently remember, what was the duty of the day; I
come now to the fourth respect.

4ly. But to me (says Mr Marshall) it seems most of all seasonable, for this
present Honorable Assembly, who all should be as the Lord, their Horses as his
Horses, their Chariots as his Chariots, they being all called to be Captains
and Leaders of the Lords Host: thus it seems to M. Marshall; but all men are
not consenting with him in this particular neither: for to me it seems
otherwise. I apprehend, that therefore this Cursing Tex^, was not so seasonable
to that Assembly, because they should all be as the Lord, who is gracious and
merciful of tender pity, and great kindness, doing good, even to the
unthankefull and to the evil: in all which conditions only, men are bidden to
be like him, and not in any act of severity, or of Cursing: for though God has
power to curse, yet that men have any warrant to follow him in so doing, I
apprehend not, save only in that cas^ I mentioned before from Gal. 1.8 9. Sure
those whom we imagine to be like the Lord, we should provoke to no more, then
what we would provoke the Lord himself unto; and dares any man provoke the
Lord to curse? none that truly knows him. I profess I cannot conceive for
what cause, M. Marshall should fancy his Text to be so seasonable to his
Auditory: were they not called together to be a blessing to this Nation? did
he know they would prove a Curse, and does he diet them accordingly? Himself
says, page 7. that Curses are Edge tools and dangerous to be meddled withal,
why then will he put them into their hands, whom he says are as the Lord? has
the Lord been wont to appear unto us with his hands full of Curses? sure never
till now, that he has made these the men of his hand, doubtless (therefore)
M. Marshall is somewhat mistaken in this particular also, and the ground of his
error may be, he did not aright consider what is the nature and disposition of
the Lord.

But M. Marshalls description, which he makes of his present Honorable
Assembly, is a matter that requires our special notice: they should all be as
the Lord, their Horses as his Horses, their Chariots as his Chariots, they
being all called to be Captains and Leaders of the Lords Host. The things that
he would infer from these words are these.

1. That all men should look upon the House of Commons (his present Auditory),
or rather upon the most active and prevailing part thereof: as upon the strong,
wise, and infallible God himself; and apprehend their requests as Commands,
for ever to be obeyed, without dispute, even so long as they shall continue to
propound them.

2. That all men should apprehend and believe, that side or Cause, which the
Commons House have, or shall engage themselves in; to be without further proof
the Lords side, and the Lords cause, yea though it be against Gods Anointed;
his worship, his Ministers, his word, and all the practice of all the godly, in
all Ages to this present.

3. That all who help^ and assist them, do help and assist the Lord, and what
ever is done, in the furtherance of their Cause, though never so much against
Piety and Justice, is done for the Lord, yea by the Lord; and all that do not
help them, and their Cause, are to be locked up under the Curse, as Enemies of
the Lord; and to be handled as such, themselves, and for their sakes, all that
belongs unto them, men, women and children; who are to be branded with the name
of Malignants, that is to say Devils, and no more pity or respect to be shown
unto them then is to be afforded to the Devil himself.

That this is M. Marshalls true meaning; I shall first evidence in part from
his own words; and then i will appeal to the people, whose judgment in these
days (specially in a thing of this nature) is the best evidence.

1. That all men should take them as the Lord, their word as his, their
requests as Commands, and always to be obeyed: His own expression to the
House of Commons, in the beginning of his Epistle Dedicatory, before his Sermon
does prove it. It is fit (says he) my obedience should last as long as your
Commands, (which therefore are supposed to be never errant) for so I have
always interpreted your requests and desires to be: we can say no otherwise to
God himself, and no question but M. Marshall would have all men, of his mind:
ergo.

2. That all men should believe and take their cause to be Gods, etc. is
evident in that he says, they are all called to be Leaders and Captains of
the Lords Host: called, that is, immediately by the Lord himself, as Deborah,
Barack, and the Judges of old were; by some special instinct and inspiration:
no other kind of call can he challenge for them: for the King by whom God
ordinarily calls, and makes Captains and Leaders of his Host, I am sure M.
Marshall himself will not say, did call them together, to do as they do, to
set his Kingdoms in a Combustion, but rather to confirm, and establish them
in a further Peace; not to raise Armies against his own Person, and express
Commands; but to consult together for the tranquillity, and safety of his
people. Now if they be such as M. Marshall intitles them, and so called, as he
(without any proof) supposes them, then it must needs follow that they, who
help them, help the Lord, and their cause, must be the cause of the Lord.

3. That all who do not help them and their cause, are to be accursed,
accounted of, and dealt withal as was expressed, the tenor of M. Marshalls
discourse upon his Text, in the proof of his doctrine, does suffici^ntly
declare, as I shall show when I come to note his Misapplications.

But further, that M. Marshalls meaning is the same, as was expressed, I do
appeal to the people; whose Evidence is as sufficient in this case as M.
Marshalls own. They will witness with me, that they do thus interpret and
understand him: as was apparent, not only by the Prisoners that were taken at
Brampton-Bryan Castle, (of whom is mention in the Preface to this discourse,)
but also by that extract of them, those miserable wretches, that were slain at
Hopton Castle: for they, while they maintained the same against the Kings
Soldiers, amongst other revileing and blasphemous expressions, some of them
would cry out: O you Rogues, you dogs, will you fight against the Lord,
against your redeemer: (which plainly infers, that it is a general position,
infused into them all, by their teachers, that their cause is the cause of God,
and they that oppose them, oppose the Lord) which blasphemous expression,
occasioned others as vile, from some of the prophaner sort of our men; (which
indeed I tremble to express;) and afterward when that Castle was taken, that
blasphemy of theirs, together with other opprobrious and reviling speeches, did
stir up that rage in the merciless Soldiers, which occasioned that barbarous,
and inhumane slaughter of those miserable men; for which my heart has often
bled in secret (as God knows); it being an Act, however deserved on the
sufferers part, yet too too cruelly inflicted by the Kings men: most
contradicting His Majesty's meek and gracious Spirit; of much disparage among
vulgar people to His righteous Cause; and most unbeseeming Christian Soldiers;
insomuch, that my prayer is, and shall ever be: good Lord smite the hearts of
the Actors in, and Consenters unto, that bloody Tragoedy with true remorse for
that their barbarous cruelty.

But here by the way, I would have all men note, the original cause of that
and such like deeds of barbarousnesse, and inhumanity: the Preachers of that
side infuse by their doctrines such blasphemous and bloody Principles, into
their men; who being of the common sort do think it part of their zeal; to
discover the same in words, as well as when they have power to perform it in
deeds; and thereby do exasperate the opposite party, to pay them home in their
own Coin; for they think they have as good grounds to reckon themselves to be
for the Lord, as the others have: and if to be bloody and cruel be the way to
show it, they can be as bloody as they; though I am sure, our men have not so
learned Christ from their teachers: but alas! the examples of others, though
deadly Enemies, will prevail more in matters of evil, then the precepts of
any (though of nearest friends) in matters of good.

And thus have we seen M. Marshalls mistakes, in the seasonablenesse of his
Text, insomuch, that I suppose it may be concluded, contrary to what he
fancyeth, that his Text was most unseasonable.

1. In respect of the times, being times of the Gospel, and so times of
Blessing and not of Cursing; of returning good for evil, and not on the
contrary; of overcoming both ours and Gods Enemies with our benefits and
Prayers.

2. In respect of the temper of most People, who (in these last and worst
days,) do generally mind their own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ,
to please their own humors, their own corruptions, (which are rather to curse
and wish hurt to others, then to dislike of such curses,) the things of Christ,
(his precepts his commands) are contrary to our selfish inclinations.

3. In respect to the occasion of the days meeting; which was (being a Fast
day) to humble themselves, for their former uncharitableness toward their
Brethren; to get their spirits meekned by Gods word, and so fitted to serve the
Lord in their callings; and to be assistant to his cause and people, by their
Prayers; which must proceed from hearts and mouths seasoned with Charity and
not with Cursing.

4. But specially it seems to be a Text most unseasonable to the Honorable
Assembly of Parliament; who all should be as the Lord, dealing out blessings to
this Nation, as the Lord does; and the rather because they were called together
for that purpose; and not to be a Curse unto us: they are called (says M.
Marshall) to be Captains and Leaders of the Lords Host; I suppose he means (or
should mean) under the Captain General Christ Jesus; and therefore it is fit
they should be conformable to his Orders; and to his Example, in all their
ways and Carriages; He was merciful, peaceable, and indulgent to his
inferiors, and so should these have been provoked by him to be: whereas to
Preach of Cursing to them, and so to imbittor their spirits, must needs be most
improper, and unseasonable, and the only way to make them unlike the Lord,
whose Leaders and Captains over us, they ought to be; I am sure, it has been a
mean to breed extreme disorders and confusions. And thus I have discovered M.
Marshalls Misapprehensions in the Choice of his Text, and so I end the first
Section.

SECTION, II. Wherein are discovered Mr Marshall's Misinterpretations.
I Shall now take a view also of his Interpretation of his Text, which follows
after his division of it, which is this.

In this Text (says he) which I call the doom of Meroz, are two things.

1. The Author of the doom, or Sentence: The Angel of the Lord. 2. The
sentence given against them, in the other words: wherein M. Marshall considers
their fault. They came not to help the Lord, considers their punishment, a
Curse and a bitter one. Curse ye bitterly, or in cursing, continue to curse
them, vehemently curse them, never leave Cursing them, thus M. Marshall: now
for the Interpretation.

1. The Author of the doom or sentence against Meroz; it was the Angel of the
Lord. M. Marshall does not determine, whether thereby is meant Deborah the
Prophetess, or Barack the General, or all that have divine inspiration (as he
speaks) only this he says, that the Curse came not from any private spirit,
as of Deborah, and Barack singly, but was by Divine Authority: and herein he
speaks the truth: And I wish that all who are prodigal of their Curses, in
these days: would be sure before they scatter or shoot them, that they had
also a divine Authority.

But the things which M. Marshall hereby would hint unto us, are these.

1. That a like divine Authority, or inspiration to Curse is have able in these
days, as in ancient times: for else this Text could not in his own conceit be
seasonable.

2. That many have, (or are endued with) divine inspiration: for his phrase all
that have does infer that many have.

3. That though the Curse, that comes from the Prophet alone, or the General
alone, may be liable to be suspected: as the fruit of a private spirit; yet if
the same also proceed from the many, from the people, specially in their
abstract or representative body, the House of Commons, or the prevalent part
there, who are vox populi; then it must be accounted vox Dei, and of divine
Authority; what ever they breath forth, (though the same that Saul did, when he
persecuted the Church of God) must be believed to be by divine inspiration.
This we shall further evidence anon from Mr Marshalls own words upon another
occasion.

2. Meroz or the people cursed: M. Marshall concludes they were Jews, of the
same Country, and Religion with Deborah and Baracke, by whom they were (says
he) probably called to lend their assistance; being as near the enemies danger
as the rest, and because they were such ill neighbors and would not afford
their assistance, they had an Heavier doom laid upon them, then any other; and
indeed (I add) deservedly: for should any City, or Town, or County, upon a
like call, from him that is supreme Judge or Governor under God (as Deborah,
and Barack at that time were,) refuse to lend their cheerful, and Loyal
assistance; they deserve an heavy censure, and to have an heavy mulct laid upon
them: but M. Marshall has a further insinuation which we shall discover by and
by.

3. Curse them: The word signifies (says he) maledicere verbo, maleface^^ re,
to speak evil of them, to revile them, to reproach them, to wish mischief to
them, to do any evil against them, to execute indeed, what they would wish in
words so to order them, that they may be barren and desolate, as a wilderness,
that they may wither away, and be as houses and walls without foundations.

4. By the mighty: he ^aies first (and that truly) is meant literally King
Iabin and his General Sisera: but then he str^tches, (coming nearer to his
purpose) and says: But in Gods intent the mighty are all, of what rank or
quality soever, who are Eminent in wisdom, strength, Authority, or Riches, and
manage an ill cause against the Lord, or against his Church: which may (happily)
be true in thesi: though not in M. Marshalls Hypothesi: for he supposes that
to be an ill cause, without dispute, which his side opposes, and those who
oppose that or them, to be the opposers of the Lord, and of his Church: so that
in brief M. Marshall would have the words to be understood thus:

All Englishmen and Common people, that will not aid the Parliament, or the
House of Commons, when they call, against all men, whom they are pleased to
account Gods Enemies, and managers of an ill cause; who are first the King,
with the General of his Armies: then all his Nobles, Gentry, and others of
what rank or quality soever; that are eminent in wisdom, Strength, Authority,
or Riches, that do assist and aid him (us their duty is to do, being his
sworn subjects) against them: are to be ill spoken of reviled, reproached, and
have all the mischief done them, which men whose mouths are full of cursings,
and ill speeches, are able to wish them; yea to be so handled, that they may
wither away, and never thrive more; they must, like briars and thorns, be
plucked up by the roots, they and their children; that their names might be had
no more in remembrance; even because they came not to help the Lord: that is,
the House of Commons, or the prevailing party there; who are all as the Lord
(as wise and as infallible as he) being all called to be, Leaders and Captains
of the Lords Host, but do rather choose to manage that, which they (the
Parliament) judge to be evil, and against God, his Church and People.

This is that which M. Marshall would insinuate to be the meaning of Gods
spirit in this his Text; and thus do the vulgar sort of his Faction understand
the same; as appears by their calling themselves Gods own people; and their
cause Gods cause, and the opposers of themselves and it, fighters against the
Lord and his Church. Their Armies they call Gods Host. And (as M. Marshall
does) the House of Commons, the Captains and Leaders of it; and all that side
not with them, they account and call Malignants: and think they do but their
duty (according to M. Marshalls doctrine) to reproach and revile them, to rob
them, and to shed their blood.

But I affirm it is possible that both M. Marshall and they too, may err in
the ground of their Hypothesis; in the foundation of that good opinion, which
they have of themselves, and of their cause: which is only, the judgment of
their own side, or of their infallible Parliament: for men have always been
wont to be too partial to themselves, when they have been their own Judges.
The Arrians were once the only Orthodox Christians if their own words might
be taken, and those that joined not to them were Gods Enemies, and as such to
be used: the Donatists another while cried out in their own behalf, that
themselves were only Gods people, and those who opposed them, opposed Christ.
And the Papists have a long time, said the same thing concerning their own
cause, and Church; and such has been the fancy of all Heretics, and
Schismatick^, in the world, in their own behalfes: But if Gods Holy word might
be admitted Judge in this case, I dare boldly affirm, that some of them (who
by Mr Marshall and his Faction) are accounted Managers of the ill cause; and
(according to his doctrine) are reproached with the names of Malignants,
Devils and Dogs; would undertake with the hazard of their lives; to prove,
that cause, which they maintain, suffer in, and are persecuted for, (by them,
who ingrosse to themselves the name only of Gods people) to be that cause
which Scripture warranteth.

But neither the Arrians, nor Papists, nor any other the Enemies of G^ds truth,
when they had once got the Militia, or power into their hands, would ever
refer themselves or cause to Scripture. No more now will these men: the Arm
of flesh indeed, (now they are possessours of it) is more suitable to their
purpose to defend them. And truly to all them who are not extremely blinded,
this is a most convincing Argument, that the cause which M. Marshall, and his
Faction, call good, is stark naught, because it shuns the light; they dare not
bring it to a public disputation; good Gold would endure the fire, and a good
Cause would loose nothing by a trial.

And indeed for M. Marshall since his whole endeavors are to promote that
cause; I wonder (knowing his ancient ingenuity) that he should ^ot bring so
much as one Argument, to evidence the goodness of it; can he think the matter
so unquestionable, that it needs no proving? or that all men look with his
Eyes, and have captivated their faith and judgments to the censure of the
Parliament, as himself has done? must a thing of necessity be true or false
as the Parliament judges? because they say their own cause is good, and the
Kings bad, themselves are in the right, and he in the wrong, must it therefore
by all men, (without Haesitation) be so taken? must all men build upon M.
Marshalls foundation, and walk by that unwarrantable rule, which he has
chosen to walk by? there is no reason he should expect it.

And now least any should think, that I mistake M. Marshall, I will Evidence
that he does fancy his Parliament to be infallible, and that he has submitted
his own faith and judgment to its determination. I will to this purpose, give
you his own words, in a certain Letter of his, to a namelesse Friend; (it was
written in vindication of himself, from the imputation of madness, and
published to the world in Midsommer moon last year, 1643.) In which after he
had handled his case of Divinity, (as he calls it) and proved (as himself
fancieth) the lawfulness of resisting the Supreme Magistrate, though most
poorly indeed, and most unlike his former self, (as all who knew him may
easily judge,) He comes, Page 22. to a second case: which he calls matter of
fact: and therein (forgetful of himself and of that Scripture: Thou shall not
speak evil of the Ruler of the People) he falls foul upon the King: and
(like a mad man indeed) lays load upon his Sovereign: saying, that His
Majesty being seduced by wicked Council, did levy War against his
Parliament. He means at that time, (for of then he speaks) when the
Parliament raised their first Army; which, he says, was only in their own
defense: and it was at that present, when the King had neither Men, nor Arms,
nor Ships left him, nor scarce money to buy himself and Children bread; for
they had robbed and cheated him of all. And therefore well may the question be
asked M. Marshall, what Evidence there was of the Kings leavying War; and I
believe his Conscience expected the same, and thereupon provided his Answer
ready, in the same place; which sure himself thinks abundantly full, and able
to give all men satisfaction, my great Evidence, says he, is, the Parliament
judges so. It Is worth our observation; no evidence he had of any word or Act
of Hostility on the Kings part: for this, he says, was his great Evidence, a
greater then which he could not show; nor needs he, as himself supposes: for
he proceeds further, and says, the Judgment of a Parliament of England, was
never till now, questioned by a people of England. And yet we read of a
Parliament in England called the mad Parliament; and of another called the
wicked Parliament; and Posterity will find mention of a Bloody and deceitful
Parliament: the Judgment of the first of these, was surely questioned by some
people of England; when they entitled it an Assembly of Rebels: and so was the
wisdom of the second, when all the Laws made therein were afterward
annihilated: therefore I may much more truly affirm; that a King of England,
never received so much prejudice, and unchristian usage as now, by any
Parliament in England. But the man goe^ on still, to amplify the Supremacy and
infallibility of his present Parliament, and adde^: wisemen say (and so does
he) that a Parliament of England, ('it is this he means) is like Saint Paul's
spiritual man, (as Satan is to an Angel of light) who judges all and
himself is judged of none. O I would to God, it were not only like, but
endued with the same spirit, that St Paul's spiritual man is endued withal,
for then I am sure it would be less bloody and more obedient.

But here by the way, we may conjecture, that M. Marshall will never hence
forth find fault with the Popish Collyer for blindly believing as the Church
believes; who thinks it his own duty, to believe as the Parliament Judges.
And here also let us note the reason, which too few observe, why he and others
of that side, do conceive, as appears by their practice, that telling of
untruths, breaking of Oaths, resisting and defaming the King, shedding of
innocent blood, and such like things are in these days (if some men commit
them) no sins: this doubtless is their great Evidence. The Parliament
judges so.

But seeing we have heard M. Marshall thus far; let us listen to him a little
further. The Judgment of his Parliament, is not only a sufficient ground for
his Faith, but for his practice also. For he proceeds in his discourse; and
from the supposed infallibility and Supremacy of his Parliament, makes this
Collary: And therefore if I should give none other account of mine entering upon
my office in the Army, (which was not to fight, or to meddle in the Council of
War, but only to teach them, how to behave themselves, according to the
word, that God might be with them) should I (I say) give no other account, but
the determination of that wise Assembly, I should be acquitted by indifferent
men: Indeed they must be very indifferent men that will acquit him; indifferent
for honesty and discretion; indifferent whether they ^peake truly or falsely;
rightly or wrongfully; indifferent whether they speak like wisemen or like
fools: such kind of indifferent men, will likely enough indeed acquit M.
Marshall, but for other kind of men, I believe they would have acquitted him
better; if when he entered upon his office in the Army, he had been preaching
Peace and obedience to his Parish and Charge at Finchingfield.

But that passage of M. Marshall is worthy our further observance, that he
says, His entering upon his Office in the Army was not to fight or to meddle in
the Council of War, etc. They that knew M. Marshall in former times; how
sensible he was wont to be in his discourses; how true in his words; and how
careful, that his actions shall not interfere with his sayings; may be ready
to think that (notwithstanding, his endeavors to free himself from the
imputation of madness) either he had some strain of distraction, when he
wrote this; or that the sin of Rebellion like the witchcraft of Circe, had
transformed him into another Creature.

For was it not to fight? why then did he (who was wont like a Minister of
Christ, to think himself sufficiently armed with Gods word and spirit)
Soldier like, get him a Buffe Coat, and ride from his home with his Sword and
Pistolls, to the admiration of many his former peaceable acquaintance; who
took him till then, for a man of another spirit? it should seem by this, that
when he entered his Office in the Army, he had a purpose to fight. Nay, I have
heard some of his friends, ( Clergy men of that Faction) whether truly or
falsely, I cannot tell, glory much in his activity and valor that way; How
like a Courageous Captain, he went before the Soldiers into the Field;
encouraged them by his own example to the Battle; yea brought up the Rere,
Charged himself at Edgehill: some say, he gathered up the Bullets in his Hat,
in the time of the fight, and brought them to the Soldiers to shoot again:
though I confess I have heard others say, that when he and the rest of the
Ministers of that side, had set their Christian Countrymen together by the
ears, themselves got up upon an Hill a mile or two off, whence with their
Prospective glasses, they beheld them fighting; till being discovered by a
Party of the Kings that made toward them, they made use of their Horse heels,
and deviding themselves, rid several ways, but met all at Warwick Castle
before the next morning.

But why not to fight? was it because fighting is unlawful for a Minister of
the Gospel to practice? why then, is not exasperateing and provoking others to
fight unlawful too? does not the Scripture inhibit Ministers to be stirrers up
of others to strife and ^ontention, as well as to be strikers themselves? ought
they not to be perswaders to Peace as well as keepers of it? But because M.
Marshall says it was not to fight. I would ask whether he intended not, when
he entered upon his Office in the Army, to p^actise hi^ own Doctrine; now his
Doctrine (as we have heard) is, maledicere verbo, malefacere re, to speak evil
(of those that be not on his side) to revile, to reproach them, to do any
evil against them, to execute indeed, what one would wish in word. Now if M.
Marshall entered his Office in the Army, to practice this Doctrine, then sure to
fight, for most men do interpret, that to do any evil against others, to
execute indeed what one can wish in words, no less then to fight with them,
yea and to kill them too, if they can get them at the advantage.

But (he says) as he entered his office not to fight, so not to meddle in the
Council of War. Yet I could name Ministers of his ^ide, that have had a
great stroke, yea and the bloudiest stroke too in that Council; and M.
Marshall may think it a great neglect of himself, if his Council should not
be asked, and taken in a business of that nature as well as others. But
suppose M. Marshall in his private spirit, should scruple to have any thing to
do in the Council of blood: yet how if his Parliament (which like S. Paul's
spiritual man judges all, and it self is judged of none,) shall
notwithstanding the late Act against the Clergies meddling in Civil affairs,
judge it lawful, and fit; that M. Marshall shall give his advice in the
Council of War, and thereupon shall request the sa^e of him. I hope he will
be as good as his word; and still interpret their requests, Commands, and hold
it fit his obedience should last as long as their proposalls: be they never so
large or so unlawful.

But M. Marshall tells us also, that his entering upon his office in the Army
was only to teach them, how to behave themselves according to the word, that
is to say: of the Parliament, according to their Ordinances and Declarations;
which Commanded to kill, slay and destroy all that should oppose them. I see
not how he can mean according to the word of God: for then he should have
taught them to put up their swords, and told them (as Christ Peter) that he who
smites with the sword (viz: without or against authority) shall perish by the
sword. He should with S. Paul have taught, avenge not your selves but bless
them that persecute you, bless and curse not. He should with the wise Preacher
have councelled them, to keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of
their Oath of Allegiance, which they have taken in the name and presence of
God. He should with S. Peter have urged subjection for the Lords sake, to the
King the supreme Magistrate under God, and with David he should have
proclaimed, that he who lifts up his hand against Gods Anointed, cannot be
guiltless. He should have said to his Countrymen as Moses did to the two
striving Israelites, why do you contend? you are brethren: he should have cried
with that great Apostle, study to be quiet, and as much as in you lies (if it
be possible) live peaceably with all men. Had M. Marshall taught them behavior
according to Gods Word; he should have taught them such doctrines as these, or
at least he should have preachd such duties to them as John Baptist did to the
Soldiers, Luke 3. do violence to no man, etc. but has he and the rest of his
Brethren done so? whence then is this complaining in our streets, of Houses,
Horses, and Men Plundered by the Parliament side? whence that lamentable crying
of desolate women and children, exposed to nakedness, hunger and all misery?
whence that captivity of peaceable men, because supposed rich or Loyal? whence
these high abuses by Soldiers of that party to Ministers and Churches? How
many of these have they most wickedly defaced, most brutishly defiled, and most
irreligiously thrown down to the ground? and though Gods judgments, have
fallen upon some while they have bin acting these vilanies, yet have the rest
persisted in their way: if M. Marshall entered his Office in the Army, to teach
the Soldiers to behave themselves according to the word of God, why has he
not taught them better? why has he not at least stopped them in the Commission
of these things? why has he not taken the hint from some of Gods judgments
upon the actors, to apply their sin upon the Consciences of others, as
formerly he was wont to do upon smaller evidence? is he so taken up in his
thoughts with the misbehaviour of the Cavileeres, that he can see none of these
miscarriages in his own party; or are they no miscarriages, because they do
them? surely M. Marshall has not discharged himself in that particular, for
which he entered his Office, if by the word he means Gods word; or else, he is
less persuasive and powerful in his teaching, then he was wont to be; indeed
(being so far out of Christ's way, no marvel if God refuse to smile upon his
labors with a blessing as heretofore. But how mildely, and mercifully M.
Marshall does teach those of his Faction, and how according to the word to
behave themselves, we shall see hereafter in this his Sermon; and perhaps shall
think from what we shall therein find, that to behave themselves according to
the word, in his sense, is to justify themselves in their wicked ways, by
perverting, and abusing the word; for that is the thing which by his example,
he teaches in the same: and herein I confess he has been too unhappily
successful upon the weak spirits of the vulgar people. But I return from
his self to his Sermon.

Now by this digression we have seen from M. Marshalls own writeings; what is
the foundation of that good opinion, which himself, and these of his side have
of themselves, and of their cause, the Parliament judges so, which is also the
reason, why the King and all his friends, who are eminent in Wisdom,
Strength, Authority or Riches, must be believed to manage the ill Cause
against the Lord and against his Church, the Parliament judges so. And
therefore it is every man's duty, to speak evil of them, to reproach them, to
call them Papists and dogs, yea and to do any mischief to them in deed, that
can be wished in word, to seize upon their estates, and to slaughter their
bodies, for the Parliament judges so. Nor must any one doubt but in so doing
he helps the Lord against the mighty, for the Parliament judges so. And if
the Ministers on that side shall please to say, that they do not enter upon
their Office in the Army, to fight or to meddle in the Council of War, and
notwithstanding shall manibus pedibusque, with tooth and nail and tongue too;
stir as much, and more then any, against Law it self; yet it must be
apprehended that they do all things well, and as they should do; for the
Parliament judges so. And if in stead of teaching men to behave themselves
according to the word, they shall teach them to pervert the word, for the
justification of themselves in ways of wrong and blood, why this also is well
done, if the Parliament judges so. In a word telling of untruths, breaking of
oaths, resisting and defaming the King, shedding of innocent blood, and such
like things, (if these (...) whom the Parliament judges Gods people, do commit
them, to promote that which they call the Lords cause,) are no transgressions,
but acts of Religion, and zeal, for the Parliament judges so. This is the
great and undeniable evidence, the Parliament judges so. But let me tell all
men, that the judgment of God is greater then that of the Parliament, and he
knows all things, and will judge all men, with righteou^ judgment, even
these Parliament men themselves; whom ere long he shall fetch before his Bar
of Justice, their Militia, shall not hinder him therein, (as it does at this
present his vicegerent,) and to that great and dreadful Lord God, I leave
them; and return, to Mr Marshall, whose Misinterpretation of his Text we have
in part seen, and the ground thereof to be a false opinion of the infallibility
of judgment, in the Parliament: I shall still follow him. When he had in his
sense expounded his Text, he does note by the way some observations, before he
concludes upon his main doctrine, all which he should have done well, to have
quite omitted, or else in more full and clear terms, to have propounded
them; they are these in their order.

Although Gods people ((...)) must bless and not curse, ^. Obser.
yet in some cases, they may forsake mount Gerazim, and ascend mount Eball, and
there curse and curs^ bitterly.

Mr Marshall should have done well in a few words, to have noted what cases
those are: for people being naturally inclined rather to curse then bless, are
apt to be mistaken in thinking that to be a case, which is not: beside many
true Godly people, do think that in no case, they ought to curse in these
days; because the Spirit of the Gospel is no cursing spirit; nor are the
times of the Gospel, cursing times: and the doctrine of the Gospel is bless
and curse not, which they interpret in no case; therefore I say M. Marshall
should have done well to have set down his cases, which he would have excepted.

Although the Curse causeless shall not come, yet when Gods people according
to Gods direction, clave non errante do curse, 2. Obser.
their curse is like the flying roll, Zack. 5.3, 4. a consuming curse.

In this also Mr Marshall, should have done well, to have given some infallible
Rules, that people might know when they should curse, according to Gods
direction, clave non errante, for every man is ready to think himself a Pope;
and when ever, he has a provocation to curse, to think that he has that
clavem non errantem in his possession; though some Protestants question,
whether there be any such unerring Key, committed to any upon earth or no.

The mighty do frequently oppose the Lord; it is no new thing to find the
mighty in strength, the mighty in Authority, 3. Obser.
the mighty in wealth, the mighty in parts, in Learning and Council, to engage
all against the Lord his Church and cause.

Here also M. Marshall might have done well, to have distinguished upon the
Mighty; for those ignorant people that take M. Marshalls words for Scripture,
may perhaps misapply his meaning, and (from what they may learn in the next
observation,) when they see any one, of their own side grow mighty: above
others in ^uthority and wealth, by means of those estates of other men (which
they hope shortly to enjoy:) they may take upon them to murder them, and so
some of the Worthy Members, may chance to have their throats cut; because in
regard of their mightiness, they may be apprehended, likely to oppose the Lord
his Church and Cause, for the mighty do frequently do so, says M. Marshall:
Therefore had he said, some of the mighty, some of the wealthy do so; it had
been more safe, and more advisedly spoken: or had he used St Paul's modesty, and
sai^ not many Noble, not many Mighty, not many Learned do assist the Lord and
his cause, he had been less liable to misconstruction; for not many, does not
^xclude all, nor suggest a ^uspition of all, but yields to Gods praise, that
some of eminent rank in all Ages, have been friends and defenders of the
Church of God.

Indeed to that observation M. Marshall in some following words adds, and
that most truly, (for I will not omit the notice of any his truths, I had
rather pass by his errors, if not too palpable and detrimentall to the glory
and Church of God.) I say he adds there, that the Lambs followers and
servants, are oftentimes the poor and ofscouring of the world, i. e. so
accounted, and so content to be esteemed; they mind not great things to
themselves to the damage of others right, as to get the Militia of Kingdoms
into their hands; to domineere over their superiors; to dethrone Kings, that
themselves may reign; or to persecute the Anointed of the Lord, they
accounting themselves, the ofscouring of things, (according to others esteem of
them,) do know that their time of reigning is not yet, nor to be, in this
world, for Christ's Kingdom whereof they are heirs, lies not here below (as
himself has said,) therefore they look after no greater preferments, then are
suitable to themselves in their particular places and stations; the Lambs
followers and servants are Lambs too, it is against their natures to play the
Wolves; to thirst for the blood and ruin of others; maledicere verbo,
malefacere re, to curse, revile, reproach, to wish or do any kind of
mischief, were not the conditions of him, that was led like a sheep to the
slaughter, and therefore none of their conditions.

When the mighty of the world do oppose the Lord; Gods meanest servants must
not be afraid to oppose the mighty. 4. Obser.


This observation also of M. Marshall, would have been capable of a cleerer
understanding, if it had been a little fuller thus: when it is manifestly
evidenced by the word of God, that the mighty of the World do oppose the Lord,
Gods meanest servants having a lawful call from the supreme Magistrate, or
being Authorized and Commanded by him, unto whom they have sworn Allegiance,
must not be afraid or unwilling to oppose the mighty.

5. Obser.
Whosoever comes out to join their strength, and to give assistance to the
Lords people, the Lord does interpret them all, to give help and assistance to
himself.

Here M. Marshall is defective also, both in his explication, and expression,
for he should have unfolded who are Gods people, by some such evident marks,
and notes, as that ignorant and well meaning men, might not be mistaken in
affording their assistance: we read in the Gospel of some that should come in
these last days in sheeps clothing, who within would be ravening wolves; and
that should be so cunning in their Hypocritical professions; that they should
deceive many, yea if possible the very elect: now if men should give their
assistance to these as to God's People, they should do much amiss.

Again, he should have added in Gods way, and said: who ever comes to give
assistance to the Lords people, in the Lords way, the Lord does interpret them
to give it to himself: for as when a Soldier yields his bodily assistance to
a Captain, but will not be ordered by him, to employ it in that way, which he
p^escribes; the Captain will no^ interpret him to be an helper, but an hinderer
rather: so if men do not help God in Gods way: wherein he expects and
Commands their assistance, they are not his assisters but his hindere^s. Now
Gods way wherein he expects assistance from men, is the same that Christ
himself went in, (who was the greatest helper and Honourer of God the Father,
that ever was:) and it was the Humble low way, the selfe-denying way, the
patient submissive way: not the high lofty, insulting way, not the domineering
way, which the flesh affects, not the way of Rebellion, of lying or of blood:
but of obedience, truth and Peace.

And thus I have been bold a little to clear M. Marshalls observations, that
the vulgar may more rightly understand them; not but that I know he was able to
have done it himself: only, when he Preached this Sermon, he begun to be
engaged in this new cause; and happily his misguided zeal, and desire was so
eager to get abettors thereunto; that he was less faithful at the present in
the work of God, then indeed was fitting; or then I hope he will hereafter be,
when God in mercy, shall set him free again, from this bloody, and unlucky
engagement.

And now I come to consider of his main doctrine, which (with confidence) he
does propound, after the uttering his unperfect notes, and it is in these words.

All people are Blessed or Cursed* as they do or do not, join their
strength, and give their best assistance, to the Lords people against their
Enemies.

Were it with M. Marshall as in times past; he would scarcely yield, this
doctrine, in these terms, to be by rule of Logic, deducible from this text:
for though from Generals, particulars may be safely drawn, yet from a
particular or indefinite expression, to conclude an universal proposition, is
not so natural: what does competere alicui, to some people in specie; may not
competere omni, to all in genere; and again what does competere omni, man not
semper always, or at all times; for the change of times and seasons, may
occasion that doom or Curse, which was imputeable to many heretofore, to be
less appliable now.

Beside it is the judgment of some learned men, that the speeches in Scripture
spoken unto, or written of, some then alive, if they receive any specification
from them to whom directed, or of whom spoken; ought not to be propounded or
applied, by us Ministers, as ^poken to or of all men at all times: now it
cannot be denied, but these words of the Text, have a special relation to
Meroz, and may be said to receive specification from it: therefore I think had
M. Marshall advised well with himself, the doctrine arising naturally from the
same, should rather have been expressed in these words.

Meroz or the Inhabitants thereof did deserve a bitter Curse, because they came
not to help the Lord against his Enemies.

And then it might have been informed by way of use, and Application: that all
people, who stand in the same dependence, as Menoz did, and are guilty of her
fault, do deserve the like Curse, as was laid upon her: But then indeed the
dependence that meroz stood in, (as well as her fault) should have been more
fully declared, in the interpretation of the words; which (with M. Marshalls
favor) I conceive should have been in this manner rather.

He calls the Text a Sentence against Meroz, so that in the words according
(almost) to his own method, here is 1. The Author of the Sentence. 2. The
people sentenced. 3. The sentence it self. 4. The crime or fault wherefore.


1. The Author of the Sentence, is the Angel of the Lord, by whom is to be
understood, one that has power to Curse, and to authorize others so to do:
for the Proposition is imperative, Curse ye Meroz, says the Angel of the
Lord. One therefore it must be, that has divine Authority (as M. Marshall
well) that is; he must be a Superior, for such only have Authority from God,
to bless or curse: Heb. 7.7.
without controversy (says the Apostle) the less is blessed of the greater.
Not the greater of the less: now Fathers had always this power, given them of
the Lord, as their natural prerogative, and paternall right, to bless or
curse their Children: and we see often by experience; that the Parents
blessing, or curse upon the Child, is confirmed by God: And we all know, that
Kings or Supreme Magistrates, are Patres Patriae, and in respect of their
places, have power of blessing or cursing others, conferred upon the^ by the
Lord; and what they do in this kind, or authorize to be done, upon right and
just causes, is done by paternall right and regal prerogative, and therefore
by divine Authority, and God will approve and second the same.

2. The people sentenced: they are the Inhabitants of Meroz, who as M. Marshall
says, were (by consent of all writers) Jews; and so must needs be Subjects in
the Commonwealth of Israel; and therefore in respect of that their
dependence, and relation, were bound to be assistant to the Supreme
Magistrate, whom God as their Sovereign or Captain General, did set over
them against his Enemies; specially being called thereto, as M. Marshall says,
in all probability Meroz wa^.

3. The Sentence it self is expressed in the word ( Curse them) which I dare
not interpret as M. Marshall does, to speak evil of them, to revile,
reproach, etc. for God allows no man to give ill language, when Michaell
disputed with the Devil about the body of Moses, he durst not give him any
railing speeches, as being unseemely for a servant of God to give: but curse
them, that is, punish them, as disloyal Subjects ought to be punished; who see
their Sovereign and public Father in danger, and do not afford him their
assistance: or curse them, i.e. let the frown of the Prince be toward them,
let his high displeasure rise against them; or let him, in such a case, as he
is Pater Patriae, lay his curse upon them, and God will second it. For
undoubtedly the deserved curse of a Sovereign King, (however it is valued in
these days) shall and will prove as fatal, and heavy to Rebellious Subjects,
as ever that of a natural Father did to a Rebellious Child; as on the other
side, the blessing of a King, is as the blessing of a Father. Solomon says,
the wrath of a King is as the messenger of death (so to be apprehended,) and
the displeasure of a King as the roaring of a Lion, (as much to be feared,) but
his favor is as the dew upon the grass, (as comfortable a blessing) without
which the grass can never thrive, and as much to be desired.

4. The crime or fault, because they came not to h^lpe the Lord: that is, to
help their King, their Captain, or Supreme Judge, Deborah and Barack, whom
God had set over them, and in whose side the Lord was, as all loyal Subjects
and faithful Israelites did: Against the mighty, that is, against those strong
Rebels the Cananites; who ought to have lived in obedience to Israel, (being
conquered by Joshua) but were now grown mighty in strength; having by their
close and treacherous workings; gotten the Militia of the Kingdom into their
hands, for they had made themselves possessours of 900 Chariots of Iron,
whereby they mightily oppressed the Children of Israel, and from hence they
had the denomination of mighty in this Text, as may be collected from the
fourth verse of the former Chapter.

And that I take to be the true sense of the words: So that briefly I may say,
the Text is either a charge of Christ, the great Angel of the Lord to Supreme
Magistrates; (such as Deborah and Barack at that present were;) that they
should strictly punish, such their unfaithful Subjects, as do not assist them
or adhere unto them, (being called) in times of danger. Or it is a divine
Authorization of themselves to lay their curse upon such on such an occasion.

Or else it is the charge of Deborah and Barack, or of the Supreme Magistrate
under God (who in Scripture is entitled, the Angel of God,) unto his Officers,
authorizing them, to inflict punishment upon such offenders; and the true
Doctrine or conclusion from the Text, truly expounded is this.

Subjects may expect a blessing, or a curse, according as they do, or do not,
join their strength and best assistance, to help the King or Supreme
Magistrate against his Rebellious Subjects, when they grow mighty in strength
or in oppression.

Or because Gods people (if they be truly his) will always help Gods Vicegerent,
and M. Marshall best affects that expression, I will come as near him, even in
words as I can, and lay down the point thus,

People have cause to judge themselves under a curse, or under a blessing,
accordingly as they do, or do not, join their strength and best assistance
to the Lords people, against their Enemies, being lawfully called thereunto by
the Supreme Magistrate, to whom they have sworn and owe Allegiance.

And thus much for the rectifying of M. Marshalls interpretation of his Text,
and doctrine from the same. I now come to note his Misapplications of other
Scriptures, for the confirmation (as he takes it) of his doctrine.

SECTION, III. Wherein are showed Mr Marshalls Misapplications.
MAster Marshall (if we observe him) does prove his doctrine, after the same
fashion as he raised it: for as he drew his general from a particular, so he
proves his General by particulars, out of the same Chapter. I confess an
Argument, ab inductione singularium, is tolerable in some cases; but Logitians
(as I remember) do account that kind of Argumentation of all others, to be the
weakest.

But then for the further Confirmation thereof, in the next place, He says his
doctrine is most plain in many other Scriptures, I will (says he) cull out but
three among three hundred (which three we may suppose of all the three hundred,
are the chief and most pregnant,) whereof the first is from Ier. 48.10. we
will first see it, and then sift it: I will give you his very words, which are
these.

That whole Chapter contains the doom of Moab, Esa. 16.
Gods curse was now to be executed upon Moab, and you may read of Moab, that
God once sent to him, when his people were in distress, Let my outcasts dwell
with thee Moab, Verse. 3.
be thou a shelter to them in the time of a storm: But Moab was too proud, to
listen to Gods Council: Moab was always an ill Enemy to Israel, now God comes
to reckon with him for it, now the spoyler shall come upon all his Cities; and
to them that were to execute this vengeance of God against them, mark what a
charge is given in the tenth verse: Cursed is he that does the work of the
Lord negligently, Jer. 48.10.
or fraudulently or deceitfully, as the word signifies, now what was the work,
which was to be done, the next words will tell you: Cursed is every one that
withholds his hand from shedding of blood, the strangest reason of a Curse that
ever was read of: if ever a man might have pleaded (as Peter once) not so Lord,
I have not been accustomed to this, here were room for such a plea, when the
work was to go, and embrew his hands in the blood of men, to spill, and power
out the blood of Women and Children, like water in every street. But he is a
cursed man, that withholds his hand from this, or that shall do it
fraudulently, that is if he do it as Saul did against the Amalekites, kill
some and save some, if he go not through with his work, he is a cursed man,
when this is to be done upon Moab the Enemy of Gods Church. So that what ever
employment men are put to, they are cursed men, that take not part with God in
his work.

In this relation of M. Marshall we may note three things. 1. The sin of
Moab. 2. The Judgment to be inflicted upon Moab. 3. The charge of God to the
Executioners thereof, all which if we a little look into; we shall perceive,
whether the example runs Parallel with M. Marshalls pretended purpose, as he
would have it supposed.

1. The sin of Moab: was their ill-neighbourhood, they did not shelter Israel
in the day of their Calamity: for we must know; that the destruction of Judea
by the Chaldees, was some three year before that of Moab, and bordering upon
that Nation* many of the Jews fled thither for safety, (as many Loyal
English, being plundered and persecuted by M. Marshalls Faction, have lately
done, into some Counties of this Nation, where they have been strangers:) and
doubtless this was by Gods Council and Providence, to try their neighbourly
affections; and that the Moabites might have an advantage o^ occasion of doing
good by their Hospitality to Gods people, and therefore it is said, Esaias. 16.3.
Take Council, or be advised Moab, make thy self as a shadow of refreshing in
the midst of the noon day, (or heat of persecution,) hide the outcasts, bewray
not him that wandreth; let mine outcasts dwell with thee Moab, be thou a Covert
to them from the face of the spoyler. But the Moabites, were so far from
being friendly, that they played the Thieves with the poor Israelites, and
robbed them of that little they carried away with them, derided at their
miseries, and even skipt for joy at the mention of their calamity, is may be
noted from Ier. 48.27. and without question this was one of the sins, for
which God sent judgment upon Moab (as M. Marshall observes well;) and surely
her pride was another, for Esaias. 16.6. she was very proud, and haughty, full of
malice, and a great dissembler, a truster in lies Ier. 48.30. and in verse. 7.
and 14. of that Chapter it is intimated from whence it was, they were so proud,
viz. from their mightiness and strength for the War, their strong works and
Fortifications; and their plenty of treasures, which by right or wrong they had
gotten to themselves; many holds, store of Militia, much treasure, and much
people, many populous Towns and Cities were in the Association with them, and
under their commands, which are named in the same Chapter from verse. 20. ad 25.
and according to their strength and mightiness, was their height and pride,
their wrath and malice, these were Moabs sins.

2. The Judgment to be inflicted upon Moab, was (as M. Marshall will have it)
to be utterly spoiled, men women and Children, to have their blood powered out
in every street, to be dealt withal not as Saul dealt with the Amal^kites,
kill some and save some. but as the Irish should have been dealt withal, even
quite cut off from being a Nation: though I believe in this, M. Marshall
stretches beyond the mind and will of God, for in the last verse of Ier. 48.
there is a promise of God concerning Moab, to bring her Captivity back in the
latter days; (for of every Nation under Heaven, God would have some reserved
to serve and praise him:) But indeed the judgment upon Moab was such, and so
great, that the Prophet Jeremy, (being a man of another spirit then M. Marshall
is now grown to be) does take up a most bitter Lamentation for her, verse. 31,
32. in that Chapter. I will howl for Moab (says he) and mine heart shall
mourn for the men of Kirheres and Vine of Sibmah, I will weep for thee with
the weeping of Iazer, etc. Had M. Marshall been in Ieremies case; perhaps he
would have took occasion, to have paid Moab in her own Coin, and derided at
her miseries, as she had done before at those of the Jews; but the spirit of a
true Israelite, is always better and more compassionate then that of a Moabite.

3. But perhaps Mr Marshall may think, the severe charge which God gives
against Moab; may warrant the severity of his spirit in cases of this nature,
for it is sai^, verse. 10. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord
negligently, or deceitfully: Cursed be he that withholds his hand from blood,
in which charge (for so M. Marshall calls it,) we must consider two things.

1. Who were the Executioners employed by God to punish Moab. 2. The Charge it
self here laid upon them.
1. The Executioners of this punishment, were the Babilonians, an Heathen
Nation whom God used in that age, to punish the Inhabitants of the world for
their sins against him; but they (as I apprehend them) had no respect to God in
any thing they did* nor can M. Marshall prove, that their aims were to help
the Lord against the mighty, or against his Enemies; as he must do, if his
Allegation of their example in this place, be any thing to his present purpose:
But as God said of the Assyrian, Esaias. 10.5.6. (who was then the rod of his
anger,) I sent him against the people of my wrath and gave him a charge to take
the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like mire in the
streets, howbeit he thinks not so, that is, he has another intention, ends of
his own, even to cut down Nations not a few; to advance his own name and
greatness; even so, may it be said hereof the Chaldeans; God made them the rod
of his anger against Moab; and sent them to punish him for his sin against
God, and unneighbourlinesse toward his people; but they had no Eye to Gods
glory in the matter, they only looked upon themselves, and at their own ends;
perhaps, indeed they might be of M. Marshalls mind, to go through with the
work; to spare none, for says the Text, v. 2. they devised evil against
Moab, and said, come let us cut it off from being a Nation: but sure it was not
because God so commanded, but for their own security and advancement, and from
a delight which they might have in shedding blood.

2. Their Charge (for so Mr Marshall calls it) is in these words, Cursed is he
that does the work of the Lord negligently, or fraudulently, or deceitfully,
as the word signifies, Cursed is he that withholds his hand from blood: which
notwithstanding I rather take to be a general Declaration (by way of Caveat)
of that displeasure, which they shall feel from God; who shall either not at
all, or in a careless, and unfaithful manner, perform that work, or
business which God shall employ them about. Or if it must be applied in
particula^ to the Chaldeans, I should take it to be a prediction of that
punishment, which they should afterward taste, for their aiming at themselves,
in their dealings with the Moabites; as they we^e like the forementioned
Assyrians, in pursuing their own purposes; so should they be like them, in
reaping the fruit of their selfeish endeavors, in the conclusion; though
unawares to themselves, they had done the work of the Lord too, against the
people of Moab in the mean while; the words are in the present tense. Cursed
is He, to note the certainty of it, a form of speaking most usual in
Scripture predictions.

But because M. Marshall will have it a charge, let it so be: but then we must
suppose this charge was sent from the Lord, by some Prophet to the Chaldeans,
who thereby were made to unsterstand, (as Saul was by Samuel in the business
against Amaleck) that the work to punish Moab was Gods work; and that they
(the Chaldeans) were enabled and sent of God as his instruments, to perform
the same; and to revenge his quarrel, for their churlishness in not relieving
Gods people in distress: and that if they shall either, not do the work at
all; or whereas Gods will is that execution shall be done upon the Moabites; if
they shall only make slaves of them, as they had done of some other Nations;
or shall do the work carelessly, without respect to God or his Church and
cause, or shall do it deceitfully, to by ends and purposes: why they
themselves shall come under the same condition, and bear that curse, or
punishment, which they were charged to inflict on others. Thus it must be
supposed, if it be as M. Marshall will have it, a charge, and what then can be
concluded from it but only this.

1. That they who know themselves to be particularly appointed of God to put
offenders to death, if they shall neglect to perform their office in that way
or manner as they are Commanded, shall suffer the like punishment themselves.

2. That they who undertake to do the work of God, being lawfully called or
appointed thereunto; and shall do it negligently, or fraudulently in a
careless way, or deceitful manner, are liable to the Curse, and displeasure
of God. For example.

Th^s^ men whom God calls by their oath of Allegiance, or by the Kings mandate,
oh* Otheers or Soldiers in His Majesty's Cause (which I shall show a^on is the
right cause and the cause of God) if they shall be negligent an^ careless, (as
too many of them are) and shall be drinking or sleeping, when they should be
watching and studying to prevent the Enemy: these men deserve the high
dis^leasure of the King, and are undoubtedly under the Curse and wrath of God.

Or to come nearer to M. Marshall: The Commons House or any Members of the
same, whom God calls by the Kings writ, to consult about the Peace of the
Kingdom; (which is the work of God, who is the God of Peace) and to reform
abuses in Church and Commonwealth: which also is the Lords work; if they or
any of them shall deal deceitfully, betraying the trust which the King has
imposed in them; and pursue only their own ends, and sinister respects; mind
only their own greatness, and expose the King and Kingdom to War and
ruin, do the devils work (for so is the work of strife;) these men deserve
the Kings curse, and are undoubtedly under the Curse of God: this is all that
can be inferred from the words, and which they do properly confirm unto us,
taking them in Mr Marshalls own apprehension, as a Charge.

And now let us consider, how this Scripture does make for M. Marshalls turn:
His aims are not (as you may observe) to show that Moab was under this Curse,
for not helping and comforting the people of God, in the day of their Calamity:
(which indeed had been nearer to his purpose) but to show that the Chaldeans
were liable to the Curse, if they did not do the work of the Lord against
Moab, for so himself says, He is a cursed man that withholds his hands from
pouring out the blood of Men, Women and Children, like water in the streets,
when this is to done upon Moab the Enemy of Gods Church: this being fore
observed. I do conclude, that if M. Marshall can evidence from Scripture these
three particulars:

1. That the Chaldeans or Babilonians, were informed by some Prophet, (as Saul
was by Samuel in the matter of Amalecke,) that they were to undertake the
punishing of Moab, as the Lo^ds work^, and to aim only at helping him, and his
Church th^reby.

2. That those whom he would have now to act the Babilonians part, have as good
a war^ant, (from this place of Scripture) to ^mbrew their hands, in the blood
of them that are not of their own faction, as the Chaldeans had to shed the
blood of the Moabites.

3. That the particular Charge, (for so he calls it) which was here given
against Heathenish Moab, is apply^ble against a Christian people in these
times; and that those whom he would have to drink of Moabs cup, are guilty of
Moabs sins.

If M. Marshall (I say) can evidence these particulars, then may this
Scripture, from Ier. 48.10. alleged by him, be in some sort suitable for his
purpose. But if he cannot prove all these, nor perhaps any one of these
particulars; I wish my friend, would take notice of this his impertinency and
Misapplication of this Scripture. And like a good Minister of Jesus Christ,
inform the seduced vulgar, by way of a selfe-denying recantation; that though
the Chaldeans were charged under the penalty of a Curse, to shed the blood of
the Moabites; yet it is no good consequent to say, that Gods people also, have a
like charge under a like penalty, to shed the blood of their Christian
Brethren, and Contrymen, because they are not altogether of their opinion.

And the rather to induce M. Marshall to this, let him by the way consider;
that if (as the common people understand him) the King and those that take part
with him, must needs be the Moabites; and every of themselves liable to Gods
curse, if they forbear to do the work of God upon them; that is, if they be
not zealous to shed their blood: why then, those who think and call themselves
Gods People, must of necessity, yield themselves to be Babilonians, at least
while they are in execution of this bloody business, or else the Parallel
neither is, nor can be perfect: I would have this particular remembered against
we come to the next Scripture.

But before I leave this, let me ask my friend M. Marshall a question: How if
it should be proved, that his own faction have acted Moabs part, and been ill
neighbour^ to People in distress; and these not strangers, as Israel was to
Moab, but of their own Nation and the Israel of God beside, who being unjustly
cast out of their dwellings, (not for their sins but for their Conscience
sake,) have come to some of them, their old acquaintance, for shelter, hoping
to be hidden, and covered by their means, from the face of the spoyler: but
they contrary to all humanity, have used them, as Moab used Israel; scorned
and derided them, and made themselves sport, at the notice of their miseri^s:
yea, have been so far from hideing, or keeping them secret; that they have
bewrayed and delivered them up into the hand of the Hunters; nay what if it
should be evidenced, that it is preached amongst them, as a matter of Religion,
to betray and discover those, that being driven from their natural
possessions, do seek for a secret covert against them? Nay farther yet, suppose
it should be evidenced tha^ themselves, have been the outcasters, the spoylers,
the Thieves, the Hunters of their Brethren, and the murderers of them, and so
have acted both the part of the Chaldeans, and the Moabites too, against
Israel; both of barbarous Enemies, and of treacherous neighbors? sure it
cannot be denied, if Moab for her part alone was justly called by M. Marshall
the Enemy of Gods Church; but they who exceed Moab so far, must of necessity
be yielded none of Gods friends, of what account soever they are in their own
conceits.

But whether this may not be evidenced of M. Marshalls Faction, I refer to
the many thousands of banished, persecuted, and imprisoned Englishmen of all
degrees, Reverend Fathers of ^he Church, faithful Ministers, Honorable
Nobles, Worshipful Gentlemen, and Conscientious Christians, to determine; who
within these three years last, have had experience of their dealings. And if
it be so, then let M. Marshalls own Conscience conclude in secret, who they
are that deserve to have the vengeance and curse of God to be powered upon them*
and thus much for the first of M. Marshalls three Scriptures.

I now proceed to a second of them, which he also alleges in Confirmation of
his doctrine; his words thereof to his Auditory are these.

Another place, you shall find in Psalm. 137.8, 9. The daughter of Babylon was
there to be destroyed, observe now the Epethite which God gives to the
Executioners of his wrath against Babylon; Blessed is the man that rewards
thee, as thou have served us, Blessed is the man that makes Babylon drink the
same cup which Babylon has made Gods people drink; now he that reads the
book of the Lamentations, may find how Babylon had used the Church of God,
they had broken their bones as a Lion breaks the bones of a Lamb; brought
their necks under persecution; made their skin black like an oven; hanged up
their Princes by the hand; and which is most of all cruel, had dash't their
Children against the stones: now says the Spirit of God, Blessed is the man
that thus rewards Babylon, yea blessed is the man that takes their little
ones, and dashes them against the stones: what Soldiers heart would not start
at this, not only when he is in hot blood, to cut down armed Enemies in the
field; but afterward deliberately, to come into a subdued City, and take the
little ones, upon the spears point; or take them by the heels, and beat out
their brains against the Walls: what inhumanity and Barbarousnesse, would this
be thought: yet if the work be to revenge God's Church against Babylon, He is a
blessed man that takes and dashes the little ones against the stones.

These are M. Marshalls own words, concerning his 2d Scripture: in which is
offered to our considerations these particulars.

1. The People to be destroyed: 2. The Executioners of this destruction: 3. The
Epethite given unto them: 4. The manner how the same is to be done. Of all
these briefly; and then we will search out that Anguem in Herba, that quoddam
latens, or mystical doctrine, which is found in this example, by those only of
that faction; and so we shall see how suitable this Scripture is, thought not
to the text, yet to the purpose; though not to the doctrine in hand, yet to the
cause in hand; to that great design which at this time shakes the whole
Kingdom; unto which Scripture it self, must be forced to contribute, and to
afford (at least) some colorable assistance.

1. The people to be destroyed, was the daughter of Babylon: the Chaldeans, (of
whom we had mention before) that ere while were the rod of God's Anger to
punish others; are now become the objects of his indignation, and must
themselves be cast into the fire (and therefore in their right order M.
Marshall did all^adge his two Scriptures.) Every sinner we see, has his time
of night, as well as of day, in this World: one after another, the Sun did not
always shine upon the Chaldeans; it went down at last, and rose no more: and
such will be the condition of those, that have now got the strength and Militia
of this Kingdom, into their Hands and use it only to the undoing, and
destruction of their Brethren; they will have their turn too, when they have
finished Gods will upon us, who have been, and are great sinners against the
most High: even as Israel of old were; and have (we confess) deserved more
misery at his hand, then we can feel from theirs; but our deserts in this kind,
they do no more, aim to rep^y in their plagueing of us; then their Parallel
the Babilonians did, in their dealings with Israel: it is our conscionable
obedience to Gods word, and our Loyalty to our Sovereign, which they h^te us
for; if we are for God and the King, then Reproach us, Plunder us, Kill us,
cannot do mischief enough unto us: but if we will be for them, though for the
Devil also; then will they make much of us. I will not deny, but some of the
seduced, ignorant vulgar may happily think, they do God service in killing us;
for so M Marshall and other their Ministers teach them to believe; by whose
black mouths we also are made more black to their apprehensions, then sin or
Satan, has yet made us: But as I said, there will come a time, when God will
remember them, and as (he here did Babylon) set others to reward them as they
have served us.

2. The executioners of this destruction, were not oppressed Israel, who has
been thus dealt withal, by the Babilonians; no, their work whereto they were
appointed by the Lord, was to pray for the Babilonians: Ier. 29.7. and to seek
their prosperity, not to dash their Childrens brains against the stones, in
requital of the wrongs received by them; nor indeed were they any people, that
had the denomination, or took to themselves the name of Gods People; (as those
do whom M. Marshall would have to be stirred up by this example, to act the
part of bloody executioners:) in a word, they were the Medes and Persians, that
were designed by the Almighty, to be the executioners of his wrath upon
Babylon; raised up for that purpose to punish Babylon, as Babylon had been
before to punish others. And indeed, you shall seldom find in Scripture, God
employing his own people, to be instruments of his wrath, against the Heathen
Nations, (unless only against such as were bound to live in obedience under
them, when they broke out into Rebellion:) for indeed those whom God intends,
to make vessels of mercy hereafter; he imployes to be instruments of mercy
before hand: giving them hearts and spirits to delight only in the works of
mercy: and so does fit them for their future glory, and these are called the
men of Gods Heart, for they lie there, they are the men of his love, of his
bowels, and being loved of him, they come to be loving like him, even to their
Enemies, merciful as he is merciful, and kind to the unthankefull and to the
Evil.

On the other side, God does employ the wicked, to be the Instruments of his
wrath, who are for this cause called Gods sword, Psalm. 17.13. (as those
Babilonians were, while they were executioners of his judgments) and the men
of his hand, indeed he suffers them, by this employment, to fit themselves to
be vessels of wrath hereafter; the Devil is Gods great Instrument in this
kind, and the wicked are his Members, who delight to do the work of their
Father; even as the Godly being Members of Christ (that great Instrument, and
indeed fountain of mercy,) do delight to approve themselves like him. And
besides the work of Judgment is called in Scripture Gods strange work, not
only because, he and his true Children are not so naturally inclined to it, as
they are to Mercy; but also, because he imployes those in it, who are strangers
to him: or rather suffers them to take the employment for a season upon
themselves.

3. The Epethite here given unto them, which (as M. Marshall observes) is the
Title Blessed: Blessed is the man that rewards thee as thou have served us:
Blessed is the man that makes Babylon drink the same Cup, which Babylon has
made Gods people to drink. But in that they are pronounced blessed, it is not to
be understood, that by this fact they did declare themselves to be in the state
of Blessedness, much less that thereby they should merit divine grace, or
life everlasting, (as those that kill us are promised to do, by some of the
Ministers of M. Marshalls faction,) or that they should by this their doing the
will of God, in a special or peculiar manner please God: for it is well known
that the M^des and Persians, had as little aim at Gods glory, and as little
respect or love to the people of God, (as such in the execution of this
judgment upon their oppressors, as the Babilonians had before in their
punishing Moab; they were driven to do what they did, only by their Ambition,
and desire of rule and greatness. But because they did execute the punishment
decreed of God, they are promised a good success, and an happy event in their
undertakings; and many temporal blessings for the same; which for a season
they did enjoy: Even as Iehu who by vocation extraordinary, was employed to
punish the house of Ahab; though he walked in the ways of Jeroboam, which were
so abominable in Gods eyes; yet he enjoyed the Kingdom of Israel for a
season: and I do not doubt but they, who by an ordinary Providence; (for
extraordinary vocations are out of date in these days) are appointed to
fulfill the will of God, in this kind upon sinners, may for a while, enjoy the
pleasures of sin, and worldly greatness; which in such undertakings is the
only thing, which they usually look after. I call that an ordinary providence,
which does not cross a Moral precept, as when a Nation or People, by call and
direction of their supreme Governor, are stirred up to punish another Nation,
unto whom they are in no sort tied in subjection; thus the Normans were stirred
up to punish the sins of the former inhabitants of this land, and had the
Isle at their disposing for it: so the Medes and Persians had the Empire of
Babylon. But it is no lawful Providence for Subjects, without the command and
express warrant of their Sovereign; to take upon them to punish, either their
superiors or their fellow Subjects; nor do I know of any blessing so much as
temporal, that they have any warrant to promise to themselves for so doing:
yet I do not doubt but the Heads of this present bloody faction inter nos, do
promise to themselves this kind of blessedness by their undertaking; if they
can but kill, slay, and destroy, the King with His Nobility and Gent^y, they
may make themselves possessors of their Land and Estates: which (like the
Edomites of old,) they swallowed up long ago in their expectations; and of
late (as it is reported) have been so bold as to tender them to sale, (as if
they were already at their sole disposing,) to the simple vulgar, unto whom
they may happily promise more then this too; even the promises of the life to
come also, for a reward of this their bloody cruelty, which most blasphemously
they nickname with the title of Godliness.

4. The manner how this Execution is to be done, with great severity, even upon
their very Children and sucking babes; who should be dashed against the stones:
which M. Marshall himself confesses, to be so cruel an act, as may make a
very Soldiers heart to start: yet does he enlarge that cruelty, further then
the Scripture does seem to warrant; for that neither commands nor declares;
that the same should be done with deliberation; nor yet approves of the same,
if so done: for in time of War and Battle, what is done in heat, may not be
done deliberately, without extremity of barbarousnesse and inhumanity; which
God did never allow of to be practiced, by any upon the greatest Enemies of his
Church and people. Indeed the words are only, a Declaration of what Babylon
did deserve, for her cruelty against Israel; whom God indeed had delivered
into her hands to punish: but with all, expecting, that in the execution, she
should have shown some mercy as appears, Esaias. 47.6.7. I was wroth with my
people (says the Lord) and gave them into thine hand, and thou did show them
no mercy, upon the Ancient, thou did very heavily lay the yoke: yea it is
said, 2. Chron. 37.17. when they took the City Jerusalem, that they had no
compassion on the young children, on the maiden, or on the old man, on him that
stooped for age. Now the Lord for this had threatened by the Prophet Esaias, that
Babylon should be repayed in her kind; some others should do unto her as she
had done to his people: and this word of God, the Church had laid hold on, and
from the same does comfort her self, in these words of the Psalm; promising a
prosperous success to whomsoever they were that God should stir up to that
undertaking. Blessed is he that rewards thee as thou have served us, i.e. God
has an assured judgment, to execute upon Babylon, for her cruelty to us, and
therefore whoever shall be employed in the business, shall have the
concurrence of Gods assis^ance; and thereby undoubtedly prevail against her,
and so atteine to that power and dignity over Nations, which Babylon her self,
that great Empress of the world does at this time enjoy.

And indeed any one in the Churches condition, (the King of England his
Nobility, Gentry, Ministry, and every faithful Christian, that by the
rebellious Faction, have been cruelly dealt withal, robbed, spoiled and turned
out of their possessions,) may make a like conclusion, for his or for their
own comforts against their Enemies; since that God does use to observe the
rule of retaliation, in punishing the wicked: He or they may conclude, that God
will by one or other, repay their Enemies in their own Coin: the spoylers of
others, Esaias. 33.1. shall be spoiled themselves, and the treacherous dealers
shall be treacherously dealt withal. We know it is said of the Rebellious
Edomit^s, who breathed out nothing against Israel (unto whom they ought as
being Subjects, Ezekiel. 35.6.
to have lived in obedience,) but kill, slay and destroy, that because they did
not hate blood, therefore blood should pursue them: and again, Obad. 7.
because they dealt treacherously with the Israelites, (their Lords and
Masters) therefore the men of their Confederacy should deal treacherously with
them: and verse. 15, 16. of Obadiah: as you have done, so shall it be done to
you, your reward shall return upon your own Head, as you did drink healths
upon my Holy mountain, (or where you had nothing to do,) to the confusion of
my people, (whose possessions you had usurped to your selves,) so shall others
deal by you: they shall drink and feast for joy of your destruction: they
shall keep it holy day, and count it a great blessing to be rid of such bloody
and treacherous Rebels: yea Saviors and blessed men are they said to be, that
should make the wicked Edomites, to drink of that cup, which they had forced
upon others.

And thus we have viewed the second Scripture, which M. Marshall alleges to
confirm his doctrine; and have seen the scope of the spirit of God therein;
now let us inquire into M. Marshalls scope, what he would have to be inferred
by it, or what he would have those of his side conclude from it; and apply unto
themselves: something it must needs be, or else he should allege it to no
purpose: and in a word I apprehend his meaning this.

That all those who were then his Auditors, together with all that did hang or
depend upon them, their orders, or directions; and were at that time preparing
to begin a bloody War in this Kingdom; should apprehend themselves, to be
the very people appointed of God, to revenge his Church upon Babylon; that is
to say, upon all those of their own Country and Nation, who are not of their
own Faction, (for under the notion of Babylon they are all to be comprehended,
the King, and his Children, the Nobility and Gentry, the Ministers of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, and Christians of all sorts, be they Parents,
Brethren, or Kinsfolks, if they differ from themselves in opinion;) whom they
are to kill, slay, and destroy, both root and branch, old and young, as the
Enemies of God, and of his Church: yea and when the elder sort, are cut down
in the fields, or where else they can be found; then afterward, they must come
into their subdued Towns and Cities, and deliberately, take their little ones,
upon their spears point; or else by the heels, and beat out their brains
against the walls; which though it may be thought inhumanity, and
barbarousnesse: yet it is not so: because the work is, to revenge Gods Church
against Babylon: and they shall hereby, for such their zeal and godliness,
put themselves into the state of blessedness, and into possession of the
promises, concerning the things both of this life, and of that to come: they
shall immediately when the work is done, have the lands and estates of those
Delinquent Babilonians conferred upon them, and divided amongst them; ( and
therefore let them be sure to knock their Children on the Head, least afterward
they chance to claim the Inheritances of their Fathers:) And besides that,
they shall have Heaven it self thrown them into the bargain: for as one Text
^aies: Cursed is he, that does Gods work negligently, Cursed is he, that
withholds his hand from blood: so another Text says, Blessed are they, that
shall serve Babylon, as she has served Gods people, Blessed is he, that shall
take their little ones, and shall dash their brains against the stones: and
thus are the Scriptures brought to speak, according to the point laid down:
that men are cursed or blessed, as they help or help not the Church of God.

This must needs be the use or application, which Mr Marshall would have his
friends make to themselves of this Example; for otherwise it can neither suite
to his doctrine, nor yet to his purpose: And to evidence this further (because
I would not be thought in anything by any good people, to mistake M. Marshall)
let but these few ensuing particulars be considered of.

1. The time when this Sermon was preached, and this example urged, it was,
Feb. 23. 1641. when they were plotting how to quarrel with the King, that so
they might begin this unhappy War: it was not many months after they had
welcomed him home from Scotland, with that their (to give it no worse title)
unkind Remonstrance, which did more then whisper to wisemens hearts their
secret intentions: it was a little after that unparalelld affront was offered
to His Majesty, when he required lawful Justice against the five Members: it
was about the very time, when the rude and base multitude, were encouraged to
abuse the Lords Anointed; and by their expressions and behaviors toward Him,
to force Him for the safety of his Life and Person, most unwillingly to
withdraw himself from His Palace at Westminster. It was about the time that
they did mark and denominate for Popishly affected, all that did not concur
with themselves, in their unreasonable demands, and Propositions. It was not
long before the time, that the King was couzened of His Arms and Ammunition;
and violently robbed, of His Ships and Castless in a word, it was not many
months before they did publicly breath forth, most sulphureously in their
Declarations, that Antichristian Language of kill, slay and destroy, against
all that opposed them in their Rebellious courses: if these and such like
particulars, concerning the time of the publication of this Sermon be
remembered, it will be easily apprehended what was M. Marshalls meaning.

2. The Persons to whom this doctrine was first preached, and afterward (being
put in print) dispersed: had it been preached to the English Army in Ireland;
or after it was printed, had the Copies been sent over by M. Marshall to the
Soldiers thither; it might probably, have been conjectured, that by the
Babilonians, he had intended those Irish Papists, who extremely, had butche^ed
and slaughtered the English Protestants in that Kingdom; and that his aims
had been, to have our Soldiers there; to revenge the blood of their Nation and
Brethren. But this doctrine and example was urged upon the House of Commons at
Westminster, who never intended (if themselves could help) to leave their
fortress and strong hold of London, to look into Ireland; and after its
publication, it was sent to Brampton-Bryan-Castle in Hereford-shire, and to
Coventry, and Northampton, and to Namptwitch in Cheshire, and to Gloucester, and
other such like places in England; whose inhabitants and fighting men, were
never intended should be sent into Ireland, to punish the Babilonians there:
for there was a new Babell in making at home: themselves did create and
denominate a daughter of Babylon, whom they destined also to be destroyed; and
this Sermon (as a special piece,) was sent about the Countries to awaken men's
spirits to the execution; (as have many others of the like nature since that
time.) And what can be imagined to be the intention of that White Member, who
has been so bold with the Black Devil, as publicly to take his Office out of
his hand, of flandering and accusing the Brethren: I mean Him, who has
endeavored in Print, to scandalize and defame by Centuries or Hundreds, those
Ministers of Jesus, whom himself and his fellows have persecuted: what could
his aims therein be, but only to make them to be thought Babilonians, and to
exasperate the vulgar People and Soldiers, to rob them of their lives, even as
himself and the rest before had done, of their Lively hoods and maintenance:
indeed as their fore-father^, the Heathen persecutors, did deal with the
Christians of those times; they wrapped them up in beasts skins, that so the
dogs might be provoked ignorantly to rend and tear them, which otherwise
would not have fastened upon them: so do they now endeavor, by beastly vices
and false reports: to obscure the office and graces of Christ's Ambassadors,
that so the misled, and seduced vulgar, might be exasperated, and encouraged to
murder and destroy them. But O our God we will wait for thy salvation, for unto
thee we have referred our cause.

3. Consider the Effect which this doctrine of M. Marshall, and those examples
by him alleged to confirm the same, has wrought in the persons to whom it
was preached and sent. Have the men of Westminster, or the Faction there, done
any thing ever since, but studied to make good that interpretation (before
expressed) of M. Marshalls mind; and like obedient Auditors to regulate their
practice according to it? and those of the common sort, when they have been
urged, to show a warrant for their bloody and rebelliou^ way, they have only
alleged those two Scriptures, and M. Marshalls interpretation of them in that
sense expressed; which shows plainly they did so understand them; from whence
they have learned to account us, as they call us, Popish dogs, Brats of
Babell, friends of Rome, and Lims of Antichrist: yea every one that is not for
the Parliament (as they call it,) they look upon, as on a daughter of Babylon
made to be destroyed; and conceit of themselves, that they should be accur^ed
of God, if they should do the work of the Lord negligently; that is, if they
should not behave themselves cruelly toward us: whereas they doubt not of a
blessing, if they shall but deal with us, as the Babilonians are to be dealt
withal, stock us up both root and branch, that our names may be no longer had
in remembrance: yea they are persuaded (many of them,) that they do God most
acceptable service, in killing any of us, under that notion. I could give
instances of some who have stolen into the Chamber, where some, whom they have
taken to be Cavaliers, have been asleep, and shot them dead; and then gloryed
in it, as in a work most acceptable to God: as also I could instance in some of
that party, who (being poisoned with such like doctrines as this of M.
Marshall,) have held, that they ought not in Conscience, to give Quarter to any
of the Kings side, nor to take any Quarter from them. Yea farther yet, I could
name the parties, some of whom, have been men of note too, and trust among
them: who I am sure do know M. Marshall, and are known of him; and have well
perused this his Sermon, and have his full sense thereof: who have said and
protested, that in this their cause (viz. to promote the same) they would cut
the throat of their own Father and Mother. These three particulars, of time,
persons, and effects being thought upon, will sufficiently evidence to any man's
heart, M. Marshalls meaning to be as was expressed.

But perhaps some will say, what bloody actions have yet been done, by any of
that side, which have not been out done by the Cavaliers? and where can it be
shown, that they have exercised that cruelty upon little Children?

I answer to the first: that my particular undertakeing is not to enumerate
their particular bloody Actions, it is too big a task for one man; yet Mercurius
Rusticus, has spoken somewhat to that purpose, with particular intimation of
persons, times, and places; and more I believe the world shall understand
hereafter. Nor will I take upon me, to justify all the Cavaleers, to be free
from cruelty: the God of Heaven knows, my heart has bled in secret to hear^
of some of their carriages in this kind: so contrary to the spirit of Christ,
and o^ the Gospel, and to the mind and disposition of our gracious King. But
this I dare say, they are not by their Ministers so taught, as M. Marshall and
his fellows teach their Auditors: and the truth is, the Cavaleers learn much
of their cruelty from them; for they hear and read how M. Marshall and the
rest do stir up those on their side, to esteem of them, and to deal with
them: And they think, they have as good authority to account in like sort o^
them, and to deal accordingly with them: even to reckon of them, as of
Babilonians too, and Enemies of Gods Church; specially because they do so
vilify the Religion of Christ, established amongst us: abusing and destroying
the places of Gods worship. And so betwixt the one side and the other, the
whole Land (if this unnatural War continues) is like to be unpeopled ere
long, and to be even drowned with the blood of her own natives: let M.
Marshall, and those of his side ask their own Consciences, who is like to
answer for it at Gods Tribunal.

But further I say the cruelty of the Cavaleers, is not in all respects so high
as that of their Enemies, for I believe no reasonable man, but will confess,
that it is better to be killd out right, then to be hackt and hewne about the
head and face, and to have their hands cut off, or at least the sinews of
their right arms, all cut in pieces deliberately after Quarter promised: to
the end they may never be able to fight for their King and Country more; nor
get their ^ivings; but live most miserable Cripples all their days: which is
the practice of these cruel and merciless men.

And whereas it is said, where has there been such cruelty acted yet upon Women
and Children? I answer that I could name where in a most savage manner, they
have trampled both Women and Children to death under their Horses feet. Perhaps
they have not dealt so barborously yet, in places near to their own associate
Counties; for fear the spirits of those amongst them, who have not yet quite
put of all bowels, should rise against them, and fall off from them. And M.
Marshall does well infer unto us, that the determinate time of the slaughter
of Infants, is not till the Cities and Counties be quite subdued; but when they
shall afterward come, and with deliberation, look into the places themselves
have conquered: then, O then, must the massacre of our tender Infants be, then
must they be pricked upon the swords point (to speak in M. Marshalls phrase)
or else, have their brains dashed out against the walls. Indeed should this
extreme barbarousnesse be acted sooner, it might be greatly to the weakening of
their cause, and therefore M. Marshall, I believe is in the right, in setting
down the appointed time; which doubtless did fall from his pen unawares to
himself: God did suffer him (a knowing man in secrets of that nature,) to hint
unto the Kings friends, and Loyal Subjects, what they must expect shall be the
portion of them and their posterity, if these men prevail; that so they might
timely beware of them, and prepare to defend themselves against them. God give
us hearts to take a right notice. Amen*

But I return. This being evidently M. Marshalls meaning, that all we who are
not of their Faction, must be understood to be Babylon, and therefore to be
destroyed, root and branch, our selves and Children. Then also on the other
side, (if the Parallel be perfect,) M. Marshall yields his side, who must do
Execution upon us and upon our Infants, to be the Heathenish Medes and
Persians, (who shed blood only to enrich themselves to enlarge their
Territories, and to domineere over others:) they are not the Church or people
of God; for the Church which had been so evilly handled in Babylon, did not
undertake to punish her, the Psalm tells us, that her part, was only to weep,
and mourn under her burden: nor indeed (as was noted before,) did God ever
employ her to revenge her self, Israel was to live in subjection quietly in
Babylon, and to pray for the Peace of the Country. This (I say) is in special
to be noted, from M. Marshalls Parallel; whom he yields his Faction to be, if
we be Babylon. And then also let us hear call to mind, what we were bid before
to remember. Namely, that ere while, when Babylon was on the rising hand; and
to shed the blood of Moab; then these men must be Babylon themselves; and they
thought they should be under the Curse, if they did not act her part; but now
Babilons time is come, that her blood must be let out; we must be Babylon
another while, for they will be in her Coat no longer; they must still act the
part of Executioners; Good God what Tigers blood did these men suck?

Well, but since we must be Babylon, and drink of her cup, yet according to
the Scripture alleged, our punishment ought to be but answerable to our
sin: we should be rewarded, but as we have served Gods people. Now therefore
let M. Marshall show, when and where our gracious King. His Nobles, Gentry, His
Reverend Bishops and Learned Clergy, have acted any such bloody cruelties,
against the people and Church of God, that should merit such a retaliation, as
M. Marshall has proportioned out for them? whose bones have they broken? whose
Children have they murdered? what barbarousnesse or inhumanity in this kind,
have they at any time perpetrated? nay which of them, (as M. Marshall himself
has here done) did ever stir up to the acting of such things? Has not this
Kingdom been the Asylum, to the persecuted flock of Christ, when they have
fled out of all the neighbor Nations? has not the Bosom of our Religious
Sovereign, been always open to receive them? has not the wing of his
Protection been spread to shelter them? And has not our envied Nobility and
Gentry; our hated Bishops and now despised Clergy, manifested the tenderness
of their Bowels, in affording relief to Foreigners and Strangers, whom they
saw in misery? has not the blessing of those that were ready to perish, came
frequently upon them? I referr these things, to the testimonies of those
thankful, and humble people, whose spirits have been refreshed with our
English Bounty; And O thou God of Heaven, who know the secrets of all hearts
and ways: though thy servants (who are now persecuted, under the Notion of
Babilonians, and turned out of those their possessions, wherein thy hand did
place them) have done nothing for thine afflicted Church and people, but what
thine own merciful, and loving spirit did provoke them unto; nor did they
give them any other relief, then what thy self did first give them to
bestow; so that of thine own hand they did receive, what they have distributed
to thy people; yet be thou witness for them, against their Enemies, remember
them concerning these things, and wipe not out, the good deeds which they have
done, for the House of God.

But perhaps I shall be answered, (as I have often heard some of that side say)
that the blood which was shed by the Popish Bishops in Queen Mary's days,
with the approbation of them that sat in the Throne, and of the Nobility and
Gentry, is not yet expiated; and the guilt thereof still runs in the veins of
their Posterity; specially in the Hyerarchy, which together with Monarchy,
upholding the same, does make up the perfect body of Antichrist: now these whom
w^ oppose being the supporters of and welwillers to the same, are all
Antichristian Babilonians, and therefore all the blood, which their
Forefathers have shed, is to come upon the Heads of this present Generation,
and must be required of the same: this is the Answer, to which I thus reply.

Our New state-men, for want of matter to quarrel at, near at hand can fetch
it a great way off. So one of their Learned Ministry (an Essex man,) arguing
against my self, (maintaining as my duty was, the innocence of my Sovereign,
and the uprightness of his cause,) told me that he thought (and his thought
though it was simply his, yet not solely his, it was a common thought) that
William the Conqueror was an usurper, and so were all his successors, and
therefore it was fit, that this King should be called to answer for William the
Conquerours sin of usurpation. And to whom must he answer trow ye? why even to
the House of Commons, for they alone are the only Parliament, the
representative body of the Kingdom, whom the people choose; as for the
Nobility in the upper House they sit but as private men, for their Barony^s,
being called but only by the Kings Writ, and not chosen by the votes of the
People: But did William the Conqueror usurp the Crown and Diadem of this
Realm, from the House of Commons, that King Charles his lawful successor,
must now answer the matter before them, or resign it unto them? though 600.
years possession might plead somewhat in a case of this nature, yet if any New
State-man, or any of their Learned Ministry, can but prove the House of Commons
(as now established,) to have so much as a bare being, at that that time though
but in Embrione: for quietness sake, the case may happily be argued with them,
and proved too; that right by Conquest (unless of Rebels) is no usurpation:
But to the business in hand.

I know well that this impious and unreasonable conceit, that the blood shed in
Queen Mary's time, is yet to be expiated; and that all the sins of the Popish
Clergy in former ages, is Chargeable upon the heads of the Bishops in these
times, etc. I know I say that this conceit is deeply grounded in the Hearts of
many of our factious people: Dr Layton in his Sions plea, some sixteen years
ago, labored mightily to the working of it, by enumerating up the faults, of
all the Popish Bishops that have been in England, specially since the Conquest;
and speaks of them, as if the present Bishops then alive were guilty of the
same, and dese^ved punishment for them: and after him some four years ago,
the Smectymnists: (all men of M. Marshalls near acquaintance,) did bestirre
themselves, to the same purpose; their postscript at the end of their Book, was
written to no other end; then to work the same belief in people, concerning
our present Bishops; they there do Laytonize up many of the miscarriages of
the Popish Bishops, as if they were the faults of ours so endeavoring to
imbitter peoples spirits against that Sacred Order, and against all that
Reverence either the men or the calling; as against Antichristian men, and
maintainers of the same evils, practiced by men of another Religion, many
Hundreds of years before they were borne. But then comes William Pryn with his
two volumnes, and speaks over the same thing the third time, with many more
words, though with as little Conscience and Honesty as the rest; and he strikes
the matter dead; for by the mouth of three such witnesses the thing is so
established, that people should be worse then Infidells if they believe it not.
Now therefore it being so; the Bishops must be plucked up root and Branch, and
all that approve of them, be they who they will, must (like welwillers to
Babylon as they be) be cast down, and rooted out with them, what effusion of
blood soever it cost, for it is the Lords work against Babylon. And therefore
most zealously did a Neighbor of mine (an Essex teacher too,) arguing with my
self speak, when he said at the beginning of this Parliament,) that it was
better, that all the streets in England should run down with blood, then that
one Bishop or one Ceremony should still remain. But how impious and
unreasonable these conceits be, I hope I need not to men unblinded, use means
to discover. How senseless is it that men should commit sin, four or five
hundred years before they were borne; or be guilty of the sins committed by
others, of another Religion so long ago, and deserve punishment for them,
though they have disclaimed them, writ against them, and every way opposed
them: How absurd is it, that a calling should be sinful or infectious, save
only in respect of sin^ull men executing the same? If Hyerarchy be Antichrist,
or Monarchy, or Superiority, then Antichrist is in Heaven, for there is both
Hyerarchy, Monarchy, and Superiority: surely therefore it is sin and not Prelacy
that makes men Antichristian.

But to come closer yet to the matter: if the blood shed in Queen Mary's time,
must be expiated now with our blood, and because those that s^te in the Throne,
and the Nobles in those times, did consent unto it, therefore their successors
now must partake in the suffering. Yet let me start a Question. How if the
House of Commons in those days were consenting to it, as well as others; what
will become of those that succeed them in these times? I confess I have heard
an Answer to this Objection, out of certain notes taken from a Sermon Preached
by Mr I.D. (an Essex Minister too,) and it was this: That the Body of the
Kingdom (which is the House of Commons) did never consent to what was then
done, therefore they are free, and are to require this blood at the hands of
others, (perhaps he means they did not of themselves, make an Ordinance, for
the doing or for the approving of it: though peradventure they passed the Act
or Bill as well as the King or House of Lords, when first propounded, else how
could it have had the force of a Law?) But then let me ask farther, how shall
those on their side escape, who are the Posterity of some notorious great
persecutors, (of Gods Saints in Queen Mary's time?) I hope they will not deny
them, to be their law^ully begotten Children, and derived from the same line,
and blood, whose names and lands they do inherit; unless their taking part
with the present faction, has expiated their Grandfathers Guilt, without
their sufferings; I cannot see but their blood ought to help in the expiation,
as well as ours.

And then farther yet; how if some of the forefathers of us, who must be
Butchered, were Martyrs in Queen Mary's time: and some of them that must murder
us, be the Children of those that murdered them, (as may well be suspected from
their similitude of Spirit?) is it Justice, because their Fathers joined with
the Popish Bishops in those days, to destroy our Fathers, therefore they may
join with the House of Commons now, to destroy us? to say the Parliament
judges so, will not give sufficient satisfaction. But in a word, I return my
reply to that impious and unreasonable conceit, in the words of the Lord
written by Ezechiell, Chap. 18.20. The soul that sins it shall dye: the Son
shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the Father bear the
iniquity of the Son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him;
and the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

But perhaps M. Marshall and his faction will say; that those whom they have
destined to destruction, are great sinners also in themselves against God
(without consideration of the iniquity of their Fathers,) and therefore they
deserve as much punishment, as can be inflicted on them.

To t^is I answer, it is most true, we are great sinners, and we cry out with
the Church in the Lamentations, Woe unto us, for we have sinned, and for our
sins sake our Crown is fallen: we have grievously transgressed against the
Lord, and therefore the breath of our nostrills, the Anointed of the Lord,
has been taken in the pits, or deceived by the fraudulent pretenses of the
crafty; and we thereby hindered from enjoying the pleasing influence of his
wonted protection: for our sins against the most high it is, that our Princes
and Nobles are not honored, that many of those who did feed delicately, are
driven even to desolation, and that those who were brought up in Scarlet
embrace dunghills: for our sins sake our Priests sigh, and our Prophets are
despised, by means of them it is, that our Adversaries are the chief, our
Enemies prosper, and servants bear rule over us, our sins are the cause of
all our sorrows, and although our burden be extreme great, we must confess
with holy Esra, Esra. 9.13.
That God has punished us less then our iniquities have deserved.

But yet are there not with them, that magnify themselves against us, that
insult over us, that take upon them to destroy us, are there not with them
also, even with them, sins against the Lord their God? Solomon says, there
is a Generation that is pure in their own Eyes, yet are not washed from their
filthiness: were men without sin as Christ was, they would be like him in
conditions, and not bloody, not cruel, nor yet provoking thereunto: were they
the Children of their Heavenly Father, they would surely be like him, merciful
as he is merciful: nay did they know God or Christ truly, they would never
think or teach, that to kill men were to do God service: our Savior tells us
Josh. 16.2, 3. The time would come, that some should think they do God
service, in killing you; and gives this reason why they should think so:
because (says he) they have not known the Father for me, quoth. though they may
boast, that they are the only people and Children of God, stirred up of him,
to rid the world of those they call his enemies; whom to kill, they shall
entitle the work of God, and to help the Lord and his Church: but if they did
know the true nature, and condition of me and my Father, they would be of
another judgment, and far enough from delighting in sheddin^ of blend. I
think there is no man but has cause to believe, tha^ the times there
prophesied of, are these that we are fallen into: and I wish with my soul that
M. Marshall, and all his bloody facti^n would but s^riously in their cool and
retired thoughts, meditate upon that saying of our Savior.

But again suppose that these men of blood were without sin themselves, and
we were the only they that have offended, yea suppose we had thoroughly
deserved, at their hands what they have determined against us; yet Crimine quo
parvi caedem potuere mereri? what offenses have our tender Infants done, that
they should deserve this intended Butchery? an satis est jam posse mori, is it
^rime su^ficient that God has given them a life to loose; O male concordes
nimiaque cupidine c^eci sanguinis, O cruel Professors, how evilly do these
your conditions, agree with the Gospel which you profess? How strangely has
the thirst of blood put out the Eyes both of grace and nature in you? Here are
bella plusquam civilia indeed, Wars worse then Civil, nay more then
barbarous; jusque datum scoleri, and privilege given to wickedness under
pretense of Godliness. O unhappy England, that have been the Mother of such
Mons^ers: Caucasus and Lybia must now give place unto thee. O that I were able
to bewail sufficiently thy present miseries, which thine ungratious Children
have brought upon thee, and still do labor to perpetuate in thee, I shall take
up only the words of Lucan, a^ most proper to thee.

Luc. lib. 2.
Nobilitas cum plebe porit: lateque vagatur
Ensis, and a nullo revocatum est pectore ferrum;
Stat cruor in templis multaque rubentia caede
Lubrica saxa madent, nulli sua profuit aet as,
Non senis extremum piguit vergentibus annis
Praecipitasse diem: nec primo in limine vitae
Infantis miseri nascentia rumpere fata.
Thy Noble and thy vulgar blood
The cruel sword does spill,
It spares no persons great or good
In every place to kill;
Thy sacred Temples are defiled,
With heaps of slaughtered men,
Whose streams of purple gore have spoiled
The stones, that blush again.
Youth naught avayles from death to free,
Nor can age pity crave;
The gray hair'd Sire must tumbled be
With swords into his grave;
The wretched Babe that is newly sprung
From woeful Mothers womb,
Must against the pikes, or walls be slung,
And scarcely deigned a tomb.
And these (O England) are the works of thine own unnatural and rebellious
Children; even of those that have been often entreated, by thy Religious King, to
give thee but leave to enjoy thy wonted Happiness: O what real obstructions
that hindered thy good, might not they most easily have removed, by keeping in
the paths of Christian Loyalty? what blessings could they have wished from an
indulgent Father, which have not been tendered them by the King? nay how
frequently, both by requests and proffers of occasions, has He even courted
them, to tie their Country to themselves, for ever, in love and affections? How
has Sovereignty stooped below it self, for securing the Subjects felicity,
offering Bonds (as it were) to engage it self even unto captivity: but alas
alas -- Civilia bella, Gesturi, metuunt ne non cum sanguine vincant, these
Savage men, having a purpose to wage a Civil War, were afraid to prevail
without doing mischief, or to conquer without blood: sed quis furor o caeci
scel^rum? what strange madness to act evil has seized upon your spirits, O
you blind men? what can you imagine will be the conclusion of these courses?
will Blood yield you benefit? will War afford you wealth? will that which you
make yours by violence, dwell long with you? Have you no Bowels left in you
toward your bleeding Mother, your native Country? O behold, behold in one
place, a woeful Brother stands weeping over his dead Brother, whom himself
perhaps has killed by your incitements; in another, see a distraughted Mother
tearing her Hair, and rending her heart, for the Children of her womb, who by
your means and setting on, have slaughtred one another, and Rachell-like can
receive no comfort, because they are not: see here a loving friend, embalming
with tears his friends body, or rather bedewing his Cheeks, because he cannot
among those heaps of mangled Corpses discern or know the body of his friend,
that the might so imbalme it: see there many desolate Widows, pale and wan,
wringing their hands, and continually lamenting, the loss of their dearly
beloved Husbands, whom you have exposed to destruction: Behold yonder a raging
Father, (from whom you have violently taken the staffes of his Age,) ready to
send out his soul, after the souls of his Children, murdered by you: O know
it, that the Curses of Brothers, Friends, Mothers, and Fathers, Widows, and
helpless Children, are all thrown upon you, in the bitterness of their
spirits: and think you that Heaven will be ever dull to such motives? O
remember (I beseech you) at length remember, and let M. Marshall (that unhappy
instrument of provoking to this unnatural War) remember too; that speech of
God to Cain, Genesis 4.10. The voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from the
Earth; and no sooner the cry comes, but the curse follows in the next words:
now therefore thou art Cursed from the Earth; and immediately after, a Vagabond
and a Runnagate shall thou be on the Earth. Or at least let M. Marshall
remember his own doctrine; that Babylon must drink of the same cup, that she
has made Gods people to drink of, And let him consider, that if he and his
Faction be found to be Babylon (according to their bloody doings or
intentions,) in Gods account: then their little Children, and M. Marshalls
among the rest, by some desperate Ruffians, (whom for his sin God may permit)
shall be pricked upon spears points, or have their brains dashed out against
the walls: which barbarousnesse and inhumanity, from his Children, I beseech
God in mercy to divert, by giving to him (their Father) the grace of true
repentance, and a spirit to recant his erroneous and bloody doctrine.

And so I come to his third Scripture, whereupon I shall be but brief, because
in the same, he is not so extravagant as in the two former. It is taken out of
Mat. 25. v. 33, 34, etc. where the day of Judgment is described, and the
manner of Christ's proceeding then. And the thing which M. Marshall notes
thence for his purpose (as he takes) is.

That the reward or punishment (I use his own words) shall then be dispensed
to all men, as they did or did not, help and succor Gods Church and people in
time of need: to the one side, come ye blessed receive the Kingdom prepared
for you, for you visited my Church when it was sick; you gave meat to my Church
when it was hungry: you gave my people drink, when they were thirsty, you took
them in, when they were strangers; you clothed them when they were naked; you
came to them when they were in Trison; in as much as you have done it unto
these, even unto one of these, you have done it unto me.

Let us here observe by the way, before we proceed, that the bl^ssing shall not
(by M. Marshalls own confession) be pronounced unto them that did put the
Church into a destructive sickness; or did persecute those that would have
visited her, and used means for her recovery, nor yet to them that took away
from the Members thereof, their meat, drink, and clothing; which God in his
provident goodness had bestowed upon them: it is not said come ye blessed and
receive the Kingdom, to them that had turned the Church of God out of her
possession; that had cast the Ministers thereof into Prison; that did banish,
persecute, and Plunder, all that loved the Church; or had sent relief unto her
in her comfortless and starved condition: And therefore upon what grounds Mr
Marshalls f^ction can expect, come ye blessed and receive the Kingdom, should
be spoken unto them, I cannot see. Indeed their patience will not give them
leave, to stay for to receive a Kingdom, till Come ye blessed be pronounced,
they will have a Kingdom at their disposal before hand, though it cost the
lives of an hundred thousand men; nor shall Christ need to prepare a Kingdom
for them, who contrary to his word: will, (if they can) provide one for
themselves in this world, which will be more suitable indeed, to their spirit^,
then that other can be, which Christ speaks of, and lies (indeed) in a world to
come. But to proceed with M. Marshalls quotation: on the other side (says he)
Christ shall say, Go ye cursed. Why are they cursed? I was hungry and ye gave
me no meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink, I ^as a stranger and ye
took me not in, naked and ye clothed me not; sick and in prison and ye visited
me not: verily I say unto you, in as much as ye did it not to one of these
little ones ye did it not to me: as if the Lord at the great day, did tak^
notice of nothing but what the Carriages of all people have been, to, or
against his Church and Children, thus M. Marshall. And indeed he speaks well,
at that great day God takes notice of nothing so much, as of the carriages of
People to or against his Church and Children: and therefore doubtless, if Go
ye cursed, shall be said to those that have omitted these duties of Charity to
Christ, in his Members; when he was Hungry, Thirsty, Naked, a Stranger, and a
Prisoner: then those that have put Christ into that Condition, that have made
him Hungry, Thirsty, Naked, a Stranger, and a Prisoner, shall never escape the
Curse: wherefore, let M. Marshall, and all his faction with him, look over his
quotation again, before they make application of it.

And let all men else look over it too, before they enter Covenant, to help or
assist these men; for if these shall be found in Gods account to be none of his
Church and People, but rather the Enemies, and the ill users of them: and shall
for the same have, Go ye Cursed pronounced upon them; I do believe that those
who have assisted them, or associated with them; shall be bound up with them in
the same Curse, and still keep them Company.

But perhaps, some may here marvel, that M. Marshall should allege a
Scripture, which seems so clearly to ex^lude his own faction (in regard of
their conditions,) out of the state of blessedness, and to involve them under
so great a Curse.

In way of Answer to this, I will tell you, what I have a long time observed in
some Ministers, of M. Marshalls faction, and near acquaintance; (though for
himself I must confess I never (unless now,) saw any cause to suspect him
guilty thereof; but before this Rebellion began, I have always and in all
things observed and found him, for my part, and thereupon judged him, to be a
most Honest, faithful sincere hearted, plain dealing man,) but I say I have
observed it in some others, that it was their Custom, to Preach most often
such doctrines, and to quote such Scriptures, a^ those who best knew them, did
conceive, were most directly against themselves; and to propound such lessons,
for others learning, a^ themselves were farthest from, in their own practice:
for example, the most proud of them, would beat most against pride, and press
oftnest the duty of self denial; the most malicious would preach most against
malice, and persuade to the practice of love and charity; the most covetous
would inveigh most bitterly against worldly mindedness; and the most
Rebellious (as has since appeared) would be most fervent and zealous in
Preaching for Passive obedience. Now whether they did hereby think, to hide
from the public, their own dispositions, and to gain from the world an
opinion of being farthest from those vices, which indeed they were most guilty
of; and most addicted unto those virtues, whereto they exhorted others; or
whether they did it, to any better ends or purposes, I leave it at this
present, to the Judge of all secret^ to determine. So whether M. Marshall by
his quoting this Scripture, does think to hide the conditions of his faction,
from the ignorant vulgar; who are more apt to judge of the tree by the leaves,
then by the fruit: and to think that if men speak and quote Scripture, against
Hardheartednesse, Cruelty, Injustice, and wrong doing to Gods Church, though
themselves practice the same things; yet they shall not be accounted
transgressors of Gods word, because it will rather be thought, that they to
whom these abuses are offered, (by these Scripture speaking men;) are none of
Gods Church and people, but of that race or rank rather, that the Cananites
and Amorites were of, whom God commanded his people to root out of their
Habitations: I say, whether this was M. Marshalls intention or no, when he
alleged that Scripture, I leave to God and his own Conscience to determine:
only withal, if his Conscience chance to recoyle upon him, I would have him
remember that of the Apostle, Romans 2.1. Thou art inexcusable O man, whosoever
thou art, that judge another (for offering those abuses, or for showing those
neglects to the Church of God,) to be under the Curse, for wherein thou judge
another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same things.

Yea, but (indeed) some will say here lies the difficulty: how shall we know in
these distractions, on which ^ide is the Church and People of God?

To resolve this question, I shall note some passages, wherein the conditions
of Gods people are hinted to us from this Sermon of M. Marshall, (from whom I
shall never willingly dis^ent, but only where he dissents from Gods truth;) and
besides, what is of his, may be of more credit with some, then what is
proceeding from another man, only first I think these few grounds will be
granted by all.

1. That all particulars on both sides are not of the Church and people of God.

2. That God has been wont to make use of wicked men, to defend and assist his
Church, and people: the earth helped the woman, Rev. 12. they may have their
ends, and God has his.

3. That when God does defend, and restore his Church, by the most notoriously
wicked men, or by the most unlikely means; then is his own arm and hand more
visibly apparent in the eyes of the righteous.

4. That some in all Ages, have boasted themselves most to be the Church and
People of God, and yet have been none of that true number, witness the
Pharisees, Arrians, Donatists, Papists, Anabaptists, and those that in Ieremies
time cried out the Temple of the Lord, etc.

5. That Hypocrites, who have pretended most holiness, have of all enemies
been the most cruel and deadly, that ever the Church has had; as appears; by
our Saviors continual Preaching against them, and laying them open, and their
bringing him to death.

6. That Christ's true Church and People, are endued with his true spirit, are
conditioned like him, and do walk in those ways wherein himself did go^
before them, this M. Marshall witnesses page 19.

7. That the way which Christ walked, and which his true Church must and do
follow him in; is set down plainly in holy Scripture, and not to be taken up
from the Traditions or Opinions of men.

I hope no man can or will deny the truth of these particulars. Now I shall
give three or four notes of the Church, and people of God, which M. Marshall
himself does seem at least to him unto us.

1. The Church and people of God have most commonly been, a distressed and an
injured people, a people that have needed help, even of meat, and drink, and
clothing, a people, that have been like Strangers excluded, and thrust out of
their own possessions, (as the Lords Anointed, and many of His faithful
Nobles and Subjects at this time are,) a people that have been wont to be
banished, from their own homes, or cast into Prisons, (as the Ministers of the
Gospel, and other Christians at this time be, by the Rebellious Faction) they
are a people so darkened with Afflictions, and so obscured with slanders and
reproaches; that the very righteous themselves, (their own Brethren) whose
study it is to do all the good they can to the Saints; shall not know when
they have helped them, as M. Marshall informs us in the 14 Page of his Sermon:
when (says he) Christ shall say to them come ye blessed you fed me, you
clothed me, you visited me; they shall Answer: Lord when saw we thee, hungry,
or thirsty, or a strang^r, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and administered
unto thee: M. Marshall al^o in the next Page, does tell us, that the s^r^^nts
of Christ are poor abjects, such as are made the ofscouring of the world:
Clouts, rags, or wispes to scowre withal (as Jeremy Buroughs in his Book
called the Glorious name of God, etc. Page 21. calls and reckons of those that
take part with the King.) In a word the people of God, are such who as they are
thrust down lower in the world, then by right their place is: so they are more
lowly in their thoughts then others be: they do not desire to greaten
themselves, with that which belongs to other men; to get the Militia of
Kingdome^, and the Navyes of Nations into their hands; they do not use to hu^t
Kings, and Princes up and down in their own Kingdoms, that they may kill
them and destroy them: they use rather, to be those that are hunted and
persecuted by others, and thence are called, the persecuted flock of Christ:
This I take to be one mark of the true Church and people of God: and M.
Marshall (I hope) unless he will eat his own words, cannot deny it.

2. The Church and people of God (as M. Marshall inferres, Page 15. and. 16.)
as they account Gods cause theirs; so like Iehosophat they betake themselves to
prayer in the time of their distresses, and seek help from God: they do not
(as some of old did,) send to Egypt for help; nor (as some of late have
done,) send to Scotland for assistance: use any indirect or unlawful me^nes:
they dare no^ play the Achitophells, or Machivellians, or Devils, to raise up
Combustions and Wars in all Nations, to break Peace and unity among
Christians, to the end that their own designs may succeed the better at home;
they dare not do any evil to others, that good may come thereby unto
themselves; nor do they in any sort allow of that distinction which one of M.
Marshalls Auditory did make (with the approbation doubtless of some fellow
Members,) that though evil may not be done to further the private good of any
man, yet to further the public Cause it may. No the People of God dare not be
so wise, as to use any means, but what they may with confidence from the word,
expect Gods blessing upon: for Gods People rest chiefly upon God for help:
they live by says, accounting (as M. Marshall says) the Battle not theirs
but Gods, whose cause is united to the cause of his people: when Asaph (says
M. Marshall) had laid down the Churches sufferings, Psalm. 74. the pulling down
of their Synagogues, the wasting of their Country, the reproach and scorn cast
upon them by their enemies, he does, v. 22. and 23. interest God in all this.
From which quotation of M. Marshalls, we may also note for our purpose, (by the
way,) that the pullers down of Churches, the wasters of their Country, the
casters of reproach and scorn upon their betters, are the Enemies of Gods
Church, and people; and so also of himself; indeed the Psalmist in plain words
calls them Gods adversaries. Thine Adversaries roar in the midst o^ the
Congregations, they set up their Banners for tokens, they break down the
carved work in thy Temples with Axes and Hammers, they have set fire upon
thine Holy places, and have defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy
Name; yea they have said, let us destroy (kill, slay, and destroy) them
altogether, thus have they burnt up the Synagogues of God in the Land. Now from
this place of Scripture so happily quoted by M. Marshall we learn; that the
Authors of such actions or expressions may be concluded to be the Enemie^ of
Gods Church and people; yea M. Marshall helps us in this Collection too, Page
18. of his Sermon, where he pronounces this sent^nce: They must needs be
blessed that serve the Church, and he must needs be cursed that deprives it of
its dues. And who these are that do so, I leave to every man's own observation
to determine.

3. The Church and people of God (as M. Marshall, Page 16. inferres unto us)
are they that maintains the good cause; and (says (...)) when David's cause was
good, his adversaries must needs be evil, and then he could foretell, that
they should be ashamed, and brought to confusion, clothed with reproach and
dishonor who opposed themselves against him: which indeed fell out accordingly
upon all that pack of Rebels and Traitors, that conspired against the Lords
Anointed, to pull him from that honor whereto God had advanced him:
Achitophell hanged himself, and a Tree hanged Absalom, and twenty thousand of
their followers, that did associate with them, were slain in a day: And Sheba
afterward who trod in their rebelliou^ steps against the King, had his head
severed from his shoulders: and therefore M. Marshall was in the right also,
for that particular.

And then that we might the better know the good Cause, he gives us two marks
of it, which also may be allowed of: the good Cause (says he) which is Gods
Cause, is a noble Cause, and a successful Cause: and therein he speaks right
for the King. For

The Kings cause is a noble cause, not only in respect of his Royal self
whose cause it is, and in respect of those Noble Personages, that are agents in
it; but also because it is not for a trifle, or a thing of no great Consequent,
but even for a Crown, (which according to Master Marshall's judgment in that
place) does enoble the cause: the Kings cause sure is for no less then for a
Crown, and for to keep the Dominion of three Kingdoms, which the Lord of
Heaven and Earth has entrusted him withal. He would still hold his
Sovereignty only and immediately from the Lord, but they would have him
acknowledge his dependence upon themselves, and if he would but so far deny
God, and debase himself as in that manner to worship them, they tell him as
one did once our Savior,) all the^e will we give thee, or we will make you the
most glorious Prince in Christendom; but the King like a good Tenant
maintains the right of his true and old Landlord the glorious Lord God:
therefore his cause is a noble cause, it is Gods Cause, and says Master
Marshall,

2. Gods cause is a successful cause; in the end or final issue, it will
prove so, for a while the malignant Church may prevail against the good, and
an ill cause may have the better; and then that shall be called good, falix and
prosperum scelus virtus voca^ur; and the good cause failing in the execution
will have the denomination of bad: and therefore I believe their great Major
Crommell was in the right, when he said, if we prevayle our opposers will be
acounted the grandest Traitors to the state, that ever were, and be used
accordingly; but if the King prevail, our undertaking will be judged the most
horrid and black Rebellion that ever the sun saw. If therefore we will judge
by the event we must suspend our sentence, till all be done; the good cause,
like good men, grows illustrious by degrees, as the sun shines more and more
bright toward the perfect day^: as the waters of Siloe run, so does Gods help
often come to his people; slowly but surely, and though success of late, has
in some places favored the Kings Enemies, for the sins sake of us his
followers: yet I think Master Marshall cannot deny, (if he does but remember,)
that the King has thriven somewhat, since himself went down with the Army
toward Nottingham, with this opinion in his heart, and these words in his
mouth for the encouragement of his Companions: that the King might fly from
place to place for a little while, but there is no remedy, he must yield, and
come in at last; he cannot possibly withstand our great forces. And I doubt not
(through the the mercy of our stong, our just, and holy God,) but in the end
Master Marshalls quotation in his 17 page from Esa. 44.17. will be evidenced to
be true, no weapon can prosper that is formed against it (the Kings cause) and
every tongue that rises up in judgment against it, shall be condemned.

Fourthly and lastly, we gather from Master Marshall page 18. that those who be
of the Dragons Army, of the Church malignant that have (as in page 20.) their
names in the Dragons muster book, are none of the Church or people of God: And
herein he speaks most truly also. But how shall we know who they are? Master
Marshall (like a friend) helps us in this too, in the same place, viz. the
later end of the 18 page by his quotation of a Scriptures.

The first is Prove. 30.17. the eye that mocketh at his father, (and the King is
Pater Patriae a common or public father) or despises to obey his Mother,
(the Church of England is our mother, that has brought us forth to God) the
Ravens of the valley shall pick it out; that is, (as if he had said,) such a
one is heir of the curse, as being one of the Church malignant, and none of
Gods people.

The second Scripture is, Romans 9.2, 3. Paul (says Master Marshall) thought it
no more then his duty, when he had great heaviness and continual sorrow in
his heart, and could wish himself accursed from Christ, for the good of his
brethren, his Kinsmen, who were Israelites: whence we gather that they who are
so far from thinking i^ their duty to be so affected as Saint Paul was, for
the welfare of their brethren and Countrymen; that they think it their duty
rather, and make it their endeavor to destroy the same; are directly of the
Dragons Army: And these are they, who have set their Countrymen and Brethren in
a most bloody Combustion against each other; and have forced upon them most
accursed oaths, to the ruin of their souls for ever. For I verily believe,
that let i^ be well considered, it well be yielded, that their Horrid Covenant,
which they have enforced, and (as they say) now made it death to fall from; is
virtually as true, and as perfect a God damn me, as ever proce^ded verbally
from the mouth of the most dissolute Cavali^r.

But again, Master Marshall be friends us farther, by hinting to us another
mark, of one that belongs to the Dragons Army, page 19. toward the end
thereof, where he says, that Gods spirit dwelling in all his Saints, (i.e. in
all that belong to Christ's Army) works the same spiritual disposition in them:
namely, as was in Christ their Captain; and that was a meek, mild,
merciful, an obedient, patient, and peaceable disposition: from which speech
of Master Marshall, it may be inferred by the rule of Contraries, that the
Dragons spirit, dwelling in all that belong to his Army, does work them to be
of his disposition; and that is, to be bloody, cruel, barbarous, contentious,
rebellious, hating peace, delighting in killing, slaying, and destroying, yea
of infants, and ^ucking babe^^ therefore when we see or discern these
conditions in any men, we may conclude them to be of those that have their
names in the Dragons muster book.

And indeed beside these helps, which Master Marshall has afforded to us; for
the discovery of the members of the Church malignant, the Dragons soldiers,
himself in his first use, pap. 21. very honestly, out of Scripture deciphers
them unto us: I Will give you his very words: He says,

1. They are such as set themselves, and take council against the Lord (his
Church) and against his Anointed (his King,) digging as deep as Hell for
Counsel to do all the mischeife they can.

2. They are such as with Balaam do what in them lies to Curse for reward, the
Children of the most High, (those of whom God has said, ye are Gods,) and for
very malice to rail upon them and revile them.

3. They are such as with Edom look upon the Affliction of Israel, rejoicing
over them in the day of their destruction, speaking proudly in the day of their
distress, crying out against Jerusalem (or the places of Gods worship) down
with it, down with it, even to the Ground.

4. They are such as with Amelecke smite the Hindmost of Gods Church, all who
are weak and feeble, (not sparing sucking babes or harmless infants) when
they are faint and and weary, laden already with afflictions, adding sorrows
to their burden; (as those who turn women and Children out of doors, when
they have taken away their maintenance, and banished or imprisoned the masters
of the family.)

5. They are such as with Sanballat and Tobiah, are greeved, when any are found
to do good (or to be faithful in Israel, whom they will punish more then they
will an Hundred Knaves, because they are more serviceable to God, and
prejudicial to them then so many.) and thus they endeavor (says Master
Marshall) to hinder the building of Sion (or of peace,) and to further the
repairing of the walls of Babylon, (or of Confusion.) Now all these sorts of
men, Master Marshall most truly calls, (...), fighters against God, and says,
it is the fittest appellation that he knows for them. And thus Master Marshall
has helped us with marks and tokens to know both the people of God, and the
Dragons Army by: And I wish that all people in their secret thoughts would
consider of this matter, and of what has been noted from Master Marshall's
Sermon, and it will easily be suspected on which side those that he pleads for
do militare. And so I end my third Section.

SECTION IV. In which is breifely expressed the rest of Master Marshall's
Sermon with the explication and rectification of some particular passages
therein.
ANd now I have done what at first I undertook, viz. to vindicate the
Scriptures of God, (those three in special. Iud. 5.23. Ier. 48.10. and Psalm.
136.8, 9.) from the misapprehensions, misinterpretations, and misapplications,
of Master Stephen Marshalls the rest of his Sermon, which is in way of use; and
indeed for the most part more suitable to the duty of the day, then the text it
self was; (being chiefly an exhortation to help the Church of God, and to
pray) I shall but breifely pas^e over, for I confess, taking the Church in the
right sense, his words are much unto the purpose. I Will note only his Method,
tell you summarily what he says, and here and there put in a word, for
explication or rectification, and so conclude with Master Marshall.

First, He reproves Newters, page 22. whom he likens unto the Samaritanes that
feared the Lord and served their Idols, (as indeed is the fashion of too many
amongst us) fear the King, (at least say they do) and serve the Parliament,
(as they call it:) But (as he says, God will one day say of these, they love
not the Lord, so may the King say one day of such, they loved not him: Now Mr
Marshall notes well, that his text does Curse all them who came not out to
help him, as well as those who came to fight against him. And our Savior at
the last day, will as well denounce; Go ye Cursed, against them who gave them
not bread, when they were hungry, as against them who plucked their bread away
from them, for in this case it is a certain rule, He that is not with me, is
against me: These Newters, page 23. he devides into two sorts: and says.

1. Some are Newters out of policy, whom he compares to Zebah and Zalmanah,
that would first see what would be the event of the war, before they
discovered themselves; and to these he hinteth, that if his side prevail, (
which God forbid,) they shall be rent with Briars and Thorns, have their
houses beaten down, and themselves slain as Zebah and Zalmanah were: (let
such Newters mark that, and give their timely assistance to their Sovereign.)

2. Some are Newters out of sloathfulnesse, and carelessenesse; who are
indifferent (as he says) whether the Bear bite the Dog, or the Dog bite
the Bear, and these he resembles to the men of Iabesh Gilead, who (when all
the Tribes had bound themselves by oath against Benjamin) would not enter into
the Association with the rest: for which (as he notes) it cost them dear, even
their own Heart blood in the Conclusion. But here it must be remembered by the
way, that that Association was not against any Sovereign King, to whom they
had sworn Allegiance; nor against the mind or without the Consent of any such
a one; for indeed (as yet) they had none set over them; but their prime
Governors whom they were to obey, did call them unto it: and therefore the
case and condition of any amongst us, cannot hold Parallel with theirs, (as
happily Master Marshall would insinuate,) nor can they justly be terrified
thereunto with that example.

Then Master Marshall comes to his second use, which is for Exhortation; to
give up our selves to the service of the Church, his motives thereunto are
three, from Gods Honor, from our relation unto the Church, and the Churches
gain, and from our own good, both inward and outward: all which motives may
well serve to stir us to give up our selves to the service of Gods Church,
and cause, now managed and maintained by the King our Sovereign.

1. The Honor of God commands us, for hereby we shall engage our selves, to
maintain the Act of Gods wisdom, who has placed the King (of all other men
in the world) to be his Anointed, and Vicegerent over us.

2. Our relation to the Church requires it, for as we are members of the body,
our care must be to defend the Head, and uphold the Body it self, which the
Enemies endeavor also to dissolve. Master Marshall tells us, (from the
observation of Politicians) that Commonwealths usually thrive when private
Subjects are Commonwealths men: He says indeed but usually, not always: for
I am sure our Commonwealth was never so weakened and broken, as it has been
of late, since private wealths men, have taken upon them to be Commonwealths
men. But I dare say, that the Church has always best thrived, when private
men in their proper sphere have proved themselves good Church men; and had
those amongst us done so, they had doubtless prooved better Commonwealths men
too, then they are, however they do conceit of themselves; both Church and
Common Wealth had fared better, had they in public matters been less busy.

3. Our own good per^wades us, to give up our selves to the service of the
Church, we shall gain three things by it, inward peace, outward Honors and a
great reward, says Master Marshall.

1. Inward peace, which always is then greatest, when we have done any thing
for the benefit of the public.

2. Honor before God and man, for to have an influence, (as Master Marshall
says well) into the welfare of many, is not only noble, but also Angelical,
yea divine: it is to imitate God himself, who above all things, minds the good
of Sion: that is, the peace of his Church. Saint Paul, Romans 16. commends many,
that they labored much in the Lord i.e. in the ways and works of the Lord:
(which are ways of obedience and works of mercy,) not of rebellion, strife,
and cruelty: And Saint Paul gloryed (as Master Marshall notes) in this, that he
labored more abundantly then others; (viz. to make peace among men* and to
plant the doctrine of faith and patience in men:) and he says, he became all
things to all men, that he might save some, (not destroy some,) no he wished in
another place, that they were cut o^f that did so: cut off* not by Master
Marshall's bloody sword: but by Excommunication.

3. A great reward we shall gain to our selves in this life, Houses and lands
an 100 fold, for what we loose, (says Master Marshall) (perhaps he means, out
of the estates of others) and everlasting life beside.

But I dare assure everlasting life, if we endeavor in Gods way, and
su^ficiency here, at least contentedness, which is equivalent, and thus much
breifely for the motives.

After these Master Marshall lays down directions, how we may be able to do
this service for the Church: and first he shows, what is requisite to fit and
prepare us to do the Church service, and the means he lays down are three:
Godliness, self-denial, and Love.

1. Men must be Godly: And O that we Ministers on the Kings side, could be
means to work this Condition in the hearts and lives of all His Majesty's
Soldiers: I dare say the service would be better done, and their endeavors
would in many places be more speeded with a blessing.

2. Men must deny themselves, not seek their own ends, nor proceed in their
own ways, when once they appear sinful in themselves, or to others
detrimentall; I wish Master Marshall (if he had been in earnest) had been so
happy, as to have persuaded all and every of his Honorable Auditory, to the
practice of this point, which (as himself affirms rightly) is the A. B. C.
in Christ's School: But alas the whole nation feels to its smart; that he
has been as unsuccessefull in teaching this first Lesson, as my self and
others have been in pressing of the former, which is a doctrine of an higher
form, and of farther proficiency.

3. Men must love the Church, indeed love will make men labor, and the labor
of love is the best labor, and most pleasing unto God. But though our special
love must be unto the Church, yet we must love others too, even those that yet
are enemies to us; and of a differing opinion from us, yea though yet out of
the state of grace it self; and so love them as we may allure them, we must
not be bloody or Cruel to them, Master Marshall I observe speaks 2 or 3 times
of love in his Sermon, but it is only of love to the brethren, that is (as may
without breach of Charity be supposed) to those of his own side and faction;
as for other men though of the same Nation, perhaps Nature, brethern of the
same Parents, they may be set at odds, and tempted to hate or kill each other,
(for such has been the practice of some of them, that talk much of love to
the brethren, But I affirm^ from Gods word; that our hearts must be seasoned
with love unto our enemies, insomuch that we must, after the example of our
Savior, and our Sovereign, both truly desire, and by our gentleness,
endeavor their good: and this love as proceeding from a selfe-denying spirit,
is of all most acceptable to God, and most serviceable to his Church. After
this Master Marshall proceeds in his method to show what the friends of the
Church thus prepared must do, He says

They must first inform themselves, what the wants of the Church are, and
sympathize with them, inquiring wherein they may be helpefull, and then he
shows well, that somewhat must be done to God for it, and somewhat must be done
from God for it.

Somewhat must be done to God for the Church, and that it says he we must pray
for it; for God has not promised to do any thing without prayer, but he will
do all things by it: and herein (to the shame of many that pretend themselves
for the King, I must needs say, they are most extremely, and most Atheistically
defective. His Sacred Majesty, in the piety of his spirit and confidence in
God, has strictly commanded fasting and prayer, yet what is there practiced in
many places by many people on that very day, but drinking, and swearing, yea
(and by some that should give better example) playing at Cards? How empty are
Gods houses, and how full are Alehouses? But good Lord lay not this sin to
the charge of thine Anointed, or of those that are truly and conscientiously
for him. But hence, hence, it is, that the righteous cause lies so long in the
Sudds, for did we pray better, our enemies would soon be turned back, this
will I do for you, howbeit I will be sought unto for it by the house of Israel,
Ps. ^6 9. Ezekiel. 36.37.
says the Lord God.

And here by the way Master Marshall exhorted his Auditors unto another good
duty; and that is to prize and esteem of such, as have the spirit of prayer;
which also is too much neglected, by many, in some of the Kings quarters; for
as Master Marshall says truly (to whom I consent:) to pray is not to read
prayers, or to say prayers, or to sing prayers, or barely to conceive and utter
prayers; but it is a pouring out the soul to God, with purity, faithfulness*
servency, humility and constancy, and those that can thus pray, are (as he
well) the very Chariots and Horsemen of Israel. But alas, I say, how extremely
are such men slighted, and scorned by many amongst us, insomuch that if
injuries, or abuses would drive them all, (as they do too many) from the Kings
side, and from their Allegiance, His Majesty should scarce have one praying man
in some of his quarters; The Rebels by their wicked pretenses, have brought
Religion into such extreme suspicion, as that many amongst us, who know not
themselves what true Piety and Religion means, do think it impossible (as I
suppose,) that any man should be both religious and loyal,: but let Atheists,
and profane men know, that our Loyalty is of a better kind then theirs is, for
it is so strengthend by Religion; that all the injuries and reproaches, which
the Rebels, the Devil, and themselves together can heap upon us, or dart
against us, shall never be able to enervate, or weaken it in us: but I return
to Master Marshall, who says.

2ly. Somewhat also must be done from God for the Church, and that is, we must
employ all the gifts and talents which God has given us in the Churches
service, they are given us for that end, to profit the Church withal. 1 Cor.
12.7. and therefore as good stewards of the manifold gifts and graces of God,
we must dispense them. Most true; has God given men wisdom, strength or
wealth, why all these, and what ever else they have, that may in any thing be
availeable, they are bound as they will answer it to God, at the dreadful day
of Judgment, to employ at this present, in the service of their King and
Country; we thinks every true Englishman should blush to look upon any thing
which himself has, that his Sovereign wants, or that may do him any
service* shall I go into my house, to eat and drink, 2 Samuel 11.11.
and lie with my wife (says gallant Vriah) when the Ark of God, and my Lord
Ioab and the servants of my Lord are encamped in open fields? So me think,
should every Gentleman, every rich man say, shall I go in Skarlet while my
Sovereign goes in Sackcloth? shall I be richly clad, while my Sovereign is
meanly attired? shall I have gold in my Chests while my good Sovereign wants
it to buy food, to put in to his Soldiers bellies? shall I lie soft and fare
well, while my Sovereign lodges hard and fares ill, yea is hunted up and down
the land, like a Patridge upon the Mountains, and is robbed of his
maintenance? shall my Sovereign be in my Saviors condition, and complain
with him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests, but the
King of England has not where to hide his head, and shall I live like that
Dives in the Gospel, and care for nothing? No, far be such things from me, I
had rather beg with my Prince, (my natural Liege Lord,) if God so please:
then reign and domineere with his rebellious Enemies. Thus I say (me think)
we should all even grutch our selves, to fare better then our King, or to enjoy
any thing which he wants, or to have any thing in our possession which might
be serviceable to farther that righteous cause, which His Majesty maintains.

But once again to Master Marshall, who now draws toward the end of his
Sermon, which he concludes with an exhortation (so the margent calls it) to his
Right* Honorable and beloved Auditors: and wishes that they could hear the
Lord himself speaking to them in the same language, as once he spoke to Cyrus,
and truly I wish the same thing with him, for then I hope, they might have
been drawn from that bloody and sinful way, which ever since some of them
have walked in. For God (I am sure) would not have spoken to them as Master
Marshall has done.

But instead of exhorting them, he does fall to commend them you (says he) who
have heretofore lived at ease, enjoying the delights of the sons of men, have
now changed your pleasures for pains, your delights for dangers, your profits
and gains for expen^es etc. if they have (as he says) been Changelings in
these things, I wish they had been such in nothing else, or done no worse, but
alas, they have changed our peace into war, our happiness into misery, they
have turned the whole Kingdom upside down, and of a flourishing Country have
made it an Acheldama or field of blood. But Master Mashall goes on, and tells
them, such fruit^ as yours are not brought forth by every plant; such plants as
you gr^w not on every ground (no God forbid they should, the world would soon
be at an end then; nor had it stood till this day, if former ages had produced
many such.) But go ye on, (says he) ye nobles and worthyes, forget what is
behind, (if the worm of Conscience will give them leave) God and his People
will never forget it (I believe they will not, for there is too great cause it
should be remembered.) Get the resolution of Zisca that Brave Bohemian Captain,
who not only was willing to fight while he lived, but bequeathed his skin when
he died, to be made a drum head for the service of the war; (were we but in
possession of such a Legasy from them, there would not be such need of Drums
for these wars and this fighting, (which we see this Minister stirred them up
unto) would be ended. Be good Shepherds still (says he) to rescue and feed
the flock committed to you, (they rescue us from peace, and with blood and
blows they feed us;) Be so many Saviors upon mount Sion, (O that they would,
and leave off to be destroyers.) and to quicken you the more, remember (says
he) how much of your golden time you have wasted, with Domitian in catching of
flies; (How happy had it been for this Nation, had they still followed that
employment;) How much of your estates has been spout needlessly, in picture^,
feastings, buildings, sportings, if not worse, in riot and disorder; how much
of your strength has been bestowed in the service of the world, and the God
of it, etc. Thus he goes on, from the remembrance of their evils past, to
stir them up to commit greater: for however he may (in his present
distemper,) think and call it zeal and righteousness in them to practice
what in effect he exhorts them unto; yet he will see at the great and terrible
day, that God will find it to be extreme madness, and most transcendent
wickedness.

He tells them further, that God has chosen and accepted them, into the most
Honorable service that man is capable of, yea into that which he employed his
own son in. If this be true; then woe unto some of them for their
unfaithfulness, in not doing the work for which they were chosen, as Christ
taught them by his own example. It cannot be denied, that Christ brought peace
to the earth, and wrought peace on the earth; he reconciled enemies, made no
divisions among friends, he was called the Peacemaker, but these have been our
Peace-breakers: therefore Master Marshall is deceived, either they were not
chosen of God, (as he says) and sent as Christ was, or else of all men, they
are the most unfaithful.

In the close of all, Ma^ter Marshall speaks to the rest of his Auditory, and
tells them, that they may be called to spend their blood in the Churches cause,
(meaning that which is since called the Parliament cause:) and he would have
them all of that Martyrs mind, who said, if every Hair of his head were a
life, he would venture them all. But it was in a way of suffering not of
fighting, (which the Martyr meant) in a patient submitting to supreme
Authority, (as he then did,) not in resisting the same; therefore that saying
of the Martyr in this case, (as Master Marshall would have it understood) was
most impertinent, and the Auditory might be deceived by it.

And thus have I now quite done with Master Marshall's Sermon; what has been
good therein, I have consented unto, what has been dissentive to truth or
Godliness, or liable to misconstructions, and misapplications, I have
endeavored to discover; that so the ignorant henceforth may not be so mis^ed
by it. I wish I had had the occasion to have done it sooner. And my wishes also
are, that some Godly Ministers would, (for the reducing of simple souls,) but
look over those Sermons which are preached and printed by those of that
faction, and note their errors: for the Scriptures of God are most extremely
perverted, abused, and misapplied by them; what ever particular Comminations
and cursings are threatened therein against any particular Nation, they use to
apply, as if they had bin spoken from Heaven Nominatim, against the Kings
party: and what ever judgment they read of (in Gods word) against any
particular King, for any particular or grand sin; they will most unjustly,
and most undutifully apply it against the Lords Anointed their own Sovereign,
upon whom also they will cast the same iniquity: and yet all their unjust
Calumnies, are not able in the least degree, to darken the brightness of his
Royal mind, which (as it always has been,) so still is watered (even
toward them) with the mildest dews of mercy and moderation.

How often have they compared him to Pharaoh, to Saul, to Ahab, yea to
Manasses; when as the world never saw, nor England ever had, a Sovereign more
meek, more patient, more merciful, more religious, more fully manifesting the
spirit of Jesus Christ, and of the Gospel: indeed were he not so good, they
would use him better, were he not so like the Son of God in his Conditions,
he should not meet with so much of His entertainment in the world.

When this unnatural war, was but yet in Embryone, the Ministers that looked
to be great in that new world or Church (which was then in hatching,) were
preparing the peoples hearts unto it, and one of my neighbor Preachers in
Essex, comes up into the Pulpit with these words for his Text, Esaias 30.33.
Tophet is ordained of old, yea for the King it is prepared. and so handled the
matter, that all his people, easily perceived, it was only his own King, whom
he thereby would have intended. Another he expounds after his fashion those
words Ezekiel. 21.25, 26, 27. And thou profane wicked Prince of Israel, whose day
is come, when iniquity shall have an end, thus says the Lord, remove the
Diadem, and take off the Crown, this shall not be the same, exalt him that is
low, and abase him that is high, I will overturne, overturne, overturne it, and
it shall be no more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him.
Another he alleges, (or makes for his purpose) that in Ezekiel, Ez^k.
39.17, 18.
where all the feathered fowls and beasts, of the field, are called to eat
the flesh of the mighty, and to drink the blood of Princes and Nobles. And
Cursed be he that with holds his hand from blood was an usual Text amongst
them: and so was that Ier. 46.10. This is the day o^ the Lord of Hosts, a day
of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries, and the sword shall
devour, and it shall be satiate, and made drunk with their blood. And the
very truth is, these very men have been the chiefest exciters unto, and
promoters of this most accursed and unnatural Rebellion, which work or
employment of theirs, has wrought a very Metamorphosis in many of their own
natures and dispositions; diverse whom I have known to be (to my apprehension)
of most mild and compassionate spirits, like Lambs and Sheep, are now become
most savage and bloody, like Bears and Tigers.

This very Master Marshall (how ever some are pleased to bespot him for some
former miscarriages, yet I (who have known him well for to years space) shall
ever speak the truth of him, and) I do assure the world, that before his
engagement in this rebellious and bloody business, as he was a man of most
able natural parts, a most laborious Preacher, successful in his endeavors,
(God giving him the affections of most men with whom he wa^ acquainted,) and
conformable to the orders and discipline of the Church according to his oath of
obedience, so was he also a man of an unblameable life and carriage, of a
cheerful and affable disposition, exceeding loving to his friends, and
communicative of any good unto them, very Charitable to those whom he saw in
misery, though enemies unto him: in a word his acquaintance was so grateful,
and pleasing, that many Ministers, (among whom my self was one,) did account
it one of our greatest outward blessings that we dwelt near unto him. But
alas, how has this Rebellion (like Witchcraft indeed,) conjured him out of
himself, and transformed him into another man, both in his conversing, and in
his teaching.

1, For his conversing; my self had a little experience of it, the last time I
had discourse with him, (at his own house,) about the Subject matter, which I
writ unto him of afterward, in my book called the Loyal Subjects Belief:
when as (indeed) I found in him so great an alteration, from that wonted
mildness, and sweetness, which I had formerly known in him, that I should
not have believed the same upon the bare report of another man, so tetricke,
and waspish, and froward, was he in his arguings, that unless I would yield to
his sayings, and fancies without reasons; he would dispute no more.

2, For his teaching; others even of the common sort of people have observed,
that a little before I was driven out of Essex, his fortune was to preach at
Brainetree (a neighbor Town to me,) upon a Lecture day: (where my self had
lately before preached obedience to the King, and thereby made diverse of my
factious Auditors run out of the Church:) But (I say Master Marshall coming to
repair the breach, made there such a Sermon to provoke unto the war, and to
assist the Parliament (as he called it) that some Godly Christians, (for there
be some such even in Essex that love the King, and are resolved to part with
their lives; rather then to start from that doctrine of obedience unto him,
which heretofore they have learned from Master Marshall and others:) some such
I say who had all their days highly Honored Master Marshall, heareing that
Sermon of his, were most extremely astonished at it, and came to me with sadded
hearts, and weeping eyes, for to bewail him. Never (cried they) did we expect
to hear this from Master Marshall, so contrary to himself, his former
doctrine and way of Preaching.

So that (alas,) we see what man is, if God leaves him for a season to
himself, how unable to stand, or persist in ways of good, by grace we are
saved, by that we are preserved, our whole sufficiency, subsistency, and
persistency, is of God,: it was a good Caveat therefore of the Apostle, be not
high minded but fear, and it was good advice of His too, to others, that they
should follow him, no farther, than he followed Christ; indeed no examples of
good men, must we make our absolute rule for practice, to the law to the
testimony (says the Prophet) when they speak not, or walk not, according to
that, leave them. There are too many (I know) that did depend upon Master
Marshalls example, and are fallen with him, for his Apostasy is like the fall
of a great Oak, which bears down much of the underwood with it. I beseech
God reduce him, for I think his recovery might pull back as many people from
this rebellious way, as any one man's example whatsoever. The Lord open his Eyes
and work upon his Heart.

But in the mean time, it is my duty, and so the duty of every faithful
Minister, to detect the wickedness of that way, which he with others have
Apostatized into, and truly I have often thought with my self that as these
men have been the Chief exciters unto, and promoters of this unnatural
Rebellion, so perhaps the Providence of God has ordered that the discovery of
them, must be the means to appease the storm, we see fighting does but
increase the fire, happily it is writeing which may quench the flame: and
therefore I wish with my soul, that every conscientious and faithful
Minister, (where ever he lives) would make it his sole work to detect these
men, for the recovery of the seduced out of their snares, and to vindicate Gods
holy word from their abuses of it. (And the blessing of God rest upon the
spirit, of the Author of that book, Against Resisting the Lawful Magistrate
under color of Religion, who has in the same most learnedly, and religiously
vindicated some other texts of Scripture from the misinterpretation and abuses
of Master Stephen Marshall in particular.) Surely we all owe this duty to
Christ, and to our King, we must show our valor and courage in our place and
callings, as well as others do, we in our way as they in theirs, the fear of
the prevailing Rebell^ in any place, should no whit d^un^ us: for if our faith
and zeal in the service of our Savior, (whose Ministers we are,) and of our
Sovereign, (to whom we have sworn Allegiance,) should be awed with the power
or malice of any rising foe; we should show our selves most unworthy of Christ's
favor, or of the Kings protection: our days are all numbered in Gods Holy
Book, and it is too great a degeneration, both from our Religion, from our
Ministry, and from the Nature of true Englishmen, to think to purchase a
spanne of time at so dear a rate, as for fear of any mortal creatures, in
the expense of our Talents, aut Deo, aut patria, aut patri patriae deesse, to
be failing in our duties to God, to our King, or to our Country: We, We are
they, that are entrusted with Gods Holy truths; we are they, that must answer
it to the Judge of Heaven and Earth, if by our silence we suffer his Holy
Gospel to be scandalized or abused. We have some advantages (me think) to
encourage us, which our Predecessors the Martyrs, and Witnesse-bearers of
Christ's truth scarce ever had.

1. Never was there so clear a truth, so ancient, so generally acknowledged by
all Christians, in all ages, upon the stage of persecution, as this is which we
are called to maintain: the Doctrine of faith in God, and of Obedience unto
Princes; which alone indeed makes Christians, and Christian Religion, to differ
from all other people and Religions in the world; if we let this Doctrine go,
then farewell the Doctrine of Jesus Christ; and assuredly, to deprive the land
of that, is the thing which the Devil aims at by these men; whom he makes his
instruments to restore Popery in this Kingdom; and to heal up those deadly
wounds, which the Beast has formerly received by many of our Reverend Bishops,
and grave Divines.

2. Never had any of our Predecessors such Honorable Associates in
persecution as we have: our King and Sovereign, the most illustrious defender
of Christ's faith, the most Noble and Holy Christian upon the earth, is under
the same burden of persecution with us; for our bloody Domitians scorn to
spend their time only in hunting small flies, it is the Royal Eagle whom they
spite most, as being He, who has most of God upon Him: We are but like the
Disciples of our Savior, that suffer for our relation and love to him; O let
us not be like the Disciples in one thing, to forsake our Lord, to fly from
him: Since he began to be in his desolate Condition, me think I have often (in
my soul) heard him speaking to us those words of Christ to his Apostles What
will you also forsake me? Joh. 7.67.


Well, we have each of us but one life to loose, and we cannot part with it in
a more Honorable cause; wherein we may gain more glory to God, and credit to
our selves. Indeed we must resolve upon this, and look for it; to be murdered
and martyred by these sanguinarious and bloody men, (if they can catch us,) as
our Savior was by the Pharisees and Saduces of his time, if we do but (as he
did) stir against them, in detecting their wickedness and Hypocrisy; and the
more Holy we be in our lives, and the more faithful to Christ our Master, and
to the King our Sovereign; the more extremely strong will their hatred burn
against us, and the more cruelly will they torture and use us: because by our
known Honesty and sincerity, we do more detriment to their ungodly way in the
eyes of people, then others do. But we must remember, that we are appointed to
suffer, as well as to preach; 1 These. 3.3. P^^l. 1.29.
and to us is given in the behalf of Christ, strength to suffer, as well as to
believe; and when Saint Paul was called to be a preacher, he was called to be a
sufferer; Act. 9.16.
I will show him what great things he must suffer for my sake: And if God by
our sufferings, shall please to reduce the seduced from the paths of error,
we may rejoice therein: if by any means we may be instruments to recover
souls to Christ, it shall be to our eternal gain and glory, at the day of
reckoning; We are not our own, we are bought with a price; Christ bought us of
his Fathers Justice, (out of the Devils hands,) with the price of his blood;
and to the end, that we by our blood (if occasion be,) might be means to
redeem others, out of the hands of his strong ones. Sanguis Martyrum, was
semen Ecclesiae of old, and must be so again. Let these be our thoughts, and
(by Gods g^^ce,) we shall not fear what men can do unto us.

And now O thou God of Glory: for the Honor of thy great and Reverend Name:
(which thou have been wont, above all things to regard) stand by us, and help
us against these men, who have defiled thy Temples, pulled down thy
Sanctuaries, persecuted thy Prophets, scandalized thy Go^pell, perverted thy
Scriptures, and slandered the footsteps of thine Anointed, endeavoring to
cast Him down from that excellency whereunto thou have exalted Him; and yet do
color all these their ungodly practices, with pretenses of Religion,
entitleing thine own Holy self unto all their villainies. O our God for thine
own Honors sake, look down upon them, as thou did once upon those
builders of Babel, and let not their mischeivous imaginations any longer
prosper, but let the wickedness of these wicked ones come to an end. Great
God, and mighty Governor of the world, thy servants do believe thy Majesty to
be most deeply interessed in this cause of thine Anointed, thy wisdom did
think him to be the fittest of all men to be Ruler over us, O maintain thou
the act of thine own wisdom. Thy spirit has highly enriched his Royal
breast with all Gospellike conditions: O glorify in the eyes of men the work
of thine own spirit. Thine Arm has protected him from many dangers, and thy
sole power with small help, has atcheived for him great Victories. O thou
that did never leave any thing unperfect, which thou did begin to take in
hand, perfect thine own work for him, resettle him in the Throne of his
Kingdom, that thy servants may see it to thy glory. O let not ( good Lo^^)
those Heaven-provoking sins, which are committed a^ongst us, obstruct or
hinder thine assistance of him. O Remember. Remember, the greater and more
notorious our evils have been, the more evidently will it appear to be the
work of God, when thou shall bring it to pass. Thy word does inform us, that
it is not for any thing in thy people, that thou do manifest thy self at any
time in their behalf, but only for thine own great Name, O therefore for the
sake of that, hear us, consider us and help us. Thou art the Savior of thy
People, O for that Titles sake leave us not; for thine own goodness sake,
because thou have been gracious to us already, be thou thy wonted self, still
the same. Thou art the Judge of all the world, and thine eyes are in all
places, O for thy Justice sake, when thy servant the King, or any of his
faithful Nobles, and Subjects, (invocateing thine help in secret,) shall
spread before thee, (as Hezekiah did,) the blasphemous expressions,
reproachful scandalls, or unreasonable demands, and propositions which are
sent unto them, or published against them, and against thy Church, (by the
enemies of our peace,) then look thou from Heaven thy dwelling place, and
deal with their bold Adversaries, according to thine own wisdom. Thou have
promised us, that if we will call upon thee, in the time of trouble, thou will
hear us, and so hear us, that thou will give us further occasion to glorify
and praise thee, O for that word and promise sake, wherein thou have caused us
to put our trust, have respect unto us in our Condition, and let the light of
thy Countenance be toward us, yea for Jesus Christ his sake who has taken
upon him, to mediate with thy Justice, for the pardon of our sins, once
again, once again (dear Lord) let this poor English Nation, taste of her
lost happiness, and be comforted with the blessings of Peace and order; which
most foolishly she has put away from her self. And let thine Anointed have
double joy, for that measure of sorrow he has endured; that we his Subjects
may again under his protection, serve thee the living God, and have no more
leading into Captivity, no more of this lamentable complaining in our streets.
Amen. Amen. Good Lord. Amen.

Laus and Gloria, Deo and Christo, Jesus ac adjutori meo. AMEN.

FINIS.

