ORIGO PROTESTANTIUM: OR, AN ANSWER TO A Popish Manuscript (OF N. N's.) That
would fain make the Protestant Catholic Religion Bear date at the very time
when the Roman Popish commenced in the WORLD. WHEREIN PROTESTANCY is
demonstrated to be elder than POPERY. To which is added, a JESUITS LETTER With
the ANSWER thereunto annexed.

By John Shaw Rector of Whalton in Northumberland, and Preacher at St. John's in
New Castle upon Tine.

Cypr. Pomp. contr. Ep. Steph. Quod and nunc facere oportet Dei Sacerdotes
divina Precepta servantes, ut in aliquo si nutaverit and vacillaverit veritas,
ad Originem Dominicam and Evangelicam, and Apostolorum traditionem revertamur,
and inde surgat actus nostri ratio, unde and origo surrexit.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Church-Y^^^ 1677.

TO The Right Worshipful Sir RALPH CARR MAYOR, Sir ROBERT SHAFTO RECORDER, THE
ALDER MEN, SHERIFF, And the rest of the Members of the Ancient Town and County
OF Newcastle upon Tine. J. SHAW Humbly presents this ensuing TREATISE.

The Preface.
WHen it pleased God in his great goodness and mercy to this Persecuted Church
and Harassed Kingdom, by a miraculous Providence to restore his Sacred Majesty
to his just Rights, and the Church to her Legal and Primitive settlement, I
also (who was before necessitated to seek shelter elsewhere till the Tyranny
was overpast) returned to my own Native Country; where I found diverse (whom I
left professed Sons of our Church) turned Renegades, having forsaken their own
Mother in the day of Trial, and betaken themselves to that flattering Stepdame
of Rome. This I reflected on with much regret, and so much the more, because I
found that with this defection from their Mother, they were also grown cool in
their Affection to the common Father of their Country, our Sovereign Lord the
King, as being sowred with Republican or Protectorian Leaven, infused into them
by the so much admired Thomas de Albiis, amongst others, I observed further,
that the Romanists in these parts grew every day more insolently active to
bring more Grist to their own Mill, and List more men in the Popes Service, not
only by Printed Books, but also by private Letters and Manuscripts. The first
whereof that came to my hands was the short Letter subjoyned to this Treatise,
to which I have (upon my Friends request) framed an Answer, and here annexed to
the Letter. The next I met with was a Manuscript (that would fain usurp the
Title of Origo Protestantium) sent me by a Gentleman for my opinion thereof,
which after having perused and transcribed it, I returned to him again, and
have here endeavored to refute, and therein vindicate the English Reformation.
The Author seems to be a man in great request amongst them, especially if he be
the same N. N. who assisted in the late Conference; if not, he is probably that
N. N. who was Second to Father Knott, as S. W. or W. S. was to Mr. White. Be
the Author who he will, you are to understand, that as the design of the former
was to seduce unstable Souls from our Church, by suggesting it to be no true
Church, through the defect both of Moral and Personal Successions; so also the
great business of this latter is, to prove the Nullity of our Church for want
of Personal Succession therein, chiefly upon the old Nags-Head Story, which
might have passed for current Roman Coin perhaps [in 57] when Lilly's Almanac
and Mother Shipton's Prophesy were in vogue. But they are much out in their
Politics who think such like Riffraff as fitly Calculated for [75]; the World
is grown a little Older, and so much Wiser too, than to believe all is Gold
that Glisters; and can discern between Legends and true History, however the
insinuating Jesuit would fain become again a Pearl for a Lady --

Other Scripts and Prints of this nature and to this effect are since come to
my sight, which perhaps I may (when I have nothing else to do) animadvert upon,
holding my self obliged to lend my poor endeavors in scouring these Northern
Coasts (especially) of those Popish Pirates, who count all Fish that comes to
the Net, and will break all Laws to compass one unlawful Prize.

Mean while the Reader is desired to Correct such Errata as he may possibly
meet with in this Treatise, in regard of the Author's great distance from the
Pres, and he will thereby oblige.

His Humble Servant, J. Shaw.

Origo Protestantium: OR, PROTESTANCY Before POPERY.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I.
N.N. IN the year 1516 there was no other Religion in our Parts of the World
acknowledged Catholic and Apostolic, but that which the Protestants now call
Popery.

SECT. I.
J.S. 1. PRotestants on the contrary assert, that which now is called Popery,
though it was then the prevailing Faction in the Church, yet it was not the
acknowledged Catholic Religion in these our parts of the World. Erasmus Epist.
ad Godeshal. Ros.
has declared there was nothing in Luther, but might be defended by good
Authors; he had good reason to say so, for that the Pope, and his Great Council
did politickly devise and erect an expurgatory Office, which they industriously
advanced to expunge out those very Doctrines which the Protestants embrace.
Particularly the Doctrine of Merits in and about that time was not reputed
Catholic: In a Book entitled, A form of Baptism, according to the Practice
of the Roman Church; Printed at Paris But since Corrected in 6 places, or
otherwise prohibited by the Inquisitors of Spain. p. 249.
1575. And in the Roman Pontifical, Venet. 1585, Reformed at Rome, Ann. 1602.
under this head. Questions to be made to a dying man, this is one, Credis
quod, etc. Do thou believe that our Lord Jesus Christ died for thy Salvation,
and that none be Saved by their own Merits, or by any other means, but only by
the Merits of his Passion? And in a Book much elder than these, called Hortulus
Animae, Since forbidden, Index lib. prohib. p. 156.
A Garden of health for the Soul, there are several Questions of the same
nature and import, which were daily used by the Ecclesiastics in their
visitation of the Laics. The like are to be found in Breviloq. Bonav. in
Gerson. de Agon. and interrog. Ansel. published by Cassander; commended by
Caspar Vtembergius, and confessed by Martin Eisingreene Tract. Apol. de cert.
gratiae pro vero and Germano intellectu. Can. 13. Sess. 6. Conc. Triden. c. 8.
a learned man, and Chaplain to the Emperor, to be the ordinary form used at
the visitation of the Sick in their last Agonies; further relating, that he
found an old Book in the Called Rhasme id. ib. p. 484.
Covent of the Augustine Friars wherein the same Questions were: and further
adds, that such there were in Agendis veteribus, the ancient Liturgies of
Wittenburg, Salsburg, Mentz, etc.

2. That which Protestants call Popery, and is the Fundamental of all Popish
Fundamentals, viz. The Popes Supremacy over all General Councils, and the
Infallibility of his judicial Sentence in causes of Faith, was so far from
being acknowledged Catholic and Apostolic Doctrine, that it was condemned for
Heresy in that Age. The Council of Sess. quarta and quinta, confirmed by Martin
V. Ep. Synod. Conc. Basil. ad omn. Christ. p. 143.
Constance determined the power of a General Council to be above the Pope,
which determination was judicially passed, for that all the public Acts
(amongst which this was entered) were Conciliarily Ratified, as appears by the
Council of Basil writing to Pope Eugenius. For when the Fathers there
assembled, heard that the Pope intended to dissolve them; to prevent that
Project, they thus writ to him: It is not likely that Pope Eugenius will any
way think to dissolve this Council, seeing it is against the Decrees of the
Council of Constance, which both his predecessor Martin V. and himself had
approved. And indeed if that Decree was not Conciliarily concluded, Martin V.
had not been true Pope; for in pursuance of this Decree, the other contesting
Popes were deposed, and he created John Gerson who was present at Council, upon
every occasion, in his writings did approve and extol that Decree, which he
would not have done unless he had known it to be Conciliarily determined: Ep.
Juliani Cardin. ad Eugen. p. 76. inter opera Aen. Sylvii.
. After this the Council of Basil Confirmed by Eugenius with his Letters read
in Council Sess. 16. from which the Fathers concluded decret. quinque conclus.
p. 96. his Pontificial Ratification affirmed Decree. Sess. 33.
affirmed the Decree, superadding this their sense of it, that what was decreed
was a Ep. Conc. Bas. p. 144.
Truth of Catholic Faith, that he who gainsaid it was to be accounted an
Heretic, and that the Universal Church ever till then had embraced it, and
that so constantly and conformely that never any learned Infin. Sess. 45.
Conclus. 5. and in decret. quinque Council. p. 96.
man doubted thereof. It is true, endeavors were soon used to invalidate it,
but all the then famous Universities Orthuinus Gratius in fasco rer. expet. p.
240.
asserted it, and so did many excellent men far and* near, who were famous for
their parts and Piety in that Generation; as Card. Lib. 2. de concor. Cathol.
lib. 17. and 20.
Cusan a Belgian, Joh. de Lib. de Auth. Genesis Conc. p. 88.
Turrecr. a Spaniard; Card. C. significasti extrav. de electione.
Panorm. a Sicilian, and Anton. Rossel. Monar. part. 2. c. 15. and part. 3. c.
21.
an Italian. To make sure work (if possible) against all opposition, about four
years after the determination of this Council the Pragmatical Sanction (which
was received, says De Benefic. lib. 5.11. By the consent of the whole Clergy,
and all the Peers of Faanee, Joh. Marius lib. de Schis. etc. c. 28.
Duarenus, with the applause of all good men) was established by Charles the
seventh at Bourges for the Confirmation Gagninus annal. Franc. l. 10. and Bin.
Not. in Conc. Bitur. ex Gagnino.
of that Decree. Pope Pius the second was hereat much perplexed, and labored
with Lewis the eleventh to have it annulled, but all in vain, for the
Parliament at Paris crossed the Popes design by exhibiting a Book to the King,
which convinced him that the Popes project, if it took effect, would be in an
high degree prejudicial to the State. For that if the Pragmatical Sanction were
not maintained, there would yearly be transported to Rome Defens. Paris. Curiae
pro libert. Eccles. Gall. adversus Romans aulam. number. 67. and inde.
above a thousand thousand Crowns: and that the Pope has had for three years
last past for Archbishopricks and Bishoprics above an hundred thousand Crowns,
for Abbeys an hundred and twenty thousand, for other Dignities an hundred
thousand, and for Benefices five and twenty hundred thousand; by which means
the Goldsmiths Shops were drawn so dry, that none but such as made Puppets, and
Ib. number. 71.
Childrens Gaudies dwelt in them. But here the matter rested not, for not long
after Lewis the twelfth assembled a Council at Tours, Genebr. lib. 4. Chron.
omn. Epist. Gall. and Chron. Mattaei. Ann. 1510.
consisting of all the Bishops in France, and very learned men, in which it was
resolved, the Pragmatical Sauction should be kept inviolably. About this time
Julius the second was mounted on the Papal Chair, who resolved by all means
right or wrong, to erect and settle the Papacy; at his Election he was sworn to
summon a General Council, which Popes utterly dislike, and being after required
to remember his Oath, and observe the constitution of the Council of Constance,
viz. That after the determination Council. Constan. Sess. 39. Oct. 9. Ann. 1417.
Caran. p. 840.
of ten years a new Council should be appointed; Pontifice vel non valente vel
non Caran. p. 884.
volente, (says my Author) The Pope either not able or unwilling, (which is
more likely) utterly refused: whereupon certain Cardinals at the motion of
several Bishops called a Council at Pisa, which was favored by the Sabel. and
Onuphr. in vit. Jul. II.
Emperor and Christian King. The Pope being much straightened makes use of his
Keys, and the Sword, which he pretended St. Peter and St. Paul left to his
management in Chief, whereupon he forthwith excomunicated the King of France,
and procured Ferdinand King of Arragon to join in Arms with him against the
French King, and other Adherents to the Pisan Council; and after maintained a
bloody At Ravenna a City of Romaniola, in which many thousands were slain.
Caran. p. 884. and 885. Lanquet in his Chron. ad Ann. 1512. says; it was
Fought on Easter Day, and the Pope was discomfited with the loss of 1600 of his
Soldiers.
Battle against them, in which many thousands were slain. Historians Speculum
Pontific. per Steph. Szegidinum p. 105. and a Spaniard in the lives of the
Popes, collected out of Dr. Hascar, Friar Joh. de Pineda, etc.
number those that died in this Quarrel within the space of seven years to Two
hundred thousand. But here the Popes fury (for the Man was more enraged, by N.
N's good leave, than ever Luther was) stopped not; he proceeds to the
Excommunication of John de Albert, Plat. in vit. Julii secundi.
King of Navarre who by Marriage to Katherine, right Heir to Blanch Queen of
Navarre, held that Kingdom, and by his Bull deprived him of it, and made a
Grant thereof to the abovenamed Ferdinand to dispose of it as he pleased:
whereupon he invaded that Kingdom, and soon became master of Pampelona the
chief City therein, and after got possession of the whole. In the year 1513.
Albert pressed Ferdinand to do him right and reason by the restitution thereof,
but he defended his Invasion and Usurpation by the warranty of the Popes
Excomunication; and to prevent all after-Claims, by virtue of the Popes Bull,
bequeathed it in his last Will and Testament, to his Daughter Jane, Queen of
Castile, and ordered the union of the two Kingdoms New Heresy of the Jes. p.
37. and inde, out of Monsieur de Hay in his Treatise of the right of the King
of France, from the Testimony of Spanish Historians, against the Cavils of
Card. du Perron, who attempted the vindication of the Pope, and forecited
Spanish Historian from Guicciardine lib. 11.
Castile and Arragon.

But the Pope had yet a further Game to manage: a Council must be had,
whereupon he calls a Counter-Council (as Eugenius before him had convened an
Anti-Synod at Florence) at the Lateran in Rome, where some Cardinals and
Bishops who favored his Pretensions, and some on other motives assembled to
him, before whom at first he Council. Lat. Sess. 1.
excused his Perjury by reason of State: his next endeavor was by the
publication of a Bull to condemn the Pisan Synod, and by a second to null its
Acts, together with the Pragmatical Sanction. To gain validity to this
Practice, he procured Francis the first, So the Concordate, and from it
Relnffusc. licet de seriis and li. 1. ff. de Offic. Cons.
or rather compelled him (for he protested he complied with the Pope much
against his mind, being constrained so to do by his pressing necessities) to
condescend to the Abrogation of the Pragmatical Sanction. But this Pope dying
some ten Months after he had assembled his Partisans and Pensioners, could not
perfect his Project. Leo the tenth succeeds him, who falls afresh upon the
Pragmatical Sanction; yet upon second and better thoughts he stops the Carreer
for two or three years, resolving however, having the work half done to his
hand, to complete it in convenient time, and so at long run in the eleventh
Session of that Conventicle upon the 19 of December 1516 (the certain Birthday
of the new Popish Church) he passed a Decree point blank contrary to that of
Constance, continued and confirmed in those of Basil, Bourges, Tours, and Pisa,
viz. That the Pope had authority over all Councils, and that it was necessary
to Salvation, that all Christians should be subject to the Pope. This is Origo
Papistarum, thus (by such unauthorized Antichristian means) then (upon that
19th day of December) and there (at Lateran) Popery commenced, and had its rise
both name and thing: for though some Romanists pretend the title of Papist to
be of more ancient extraction, deriving it from Pope Peter, Pope Paul, and Pope
Christ; yet Dr. Bristow a bitter enemy to Protestants, and a fast friend to the
Cause (witness his great endeavors and attempts in the Rhemish Testament) is
better advised, and Demand. 8.
speaks out the whole truth. The name (says he) of Papists was never heard of
till the days of Leo the tenth. All which premises being laid together a mean
accomptant may easily compute of how long standing Popery is according to the
true reformed Roman account. The total of all which those Sess. 1. And
Cassander thinks Papists to be Pseudo-Catholicks, they being such who will not
permit the Church to be reformed, though corrupt. Lib. de Offic. boni viri,
Sect. sunt alii, etc.
very Lateran Assemblers could not deny, but have so far honestly witnessed,
that by reason of the malignity of the times the Popes seemed to have
tolerated the Pragmatical Sanction, because they could not help it (thanks for
nothing) in as much as for all the Popes could do even to that very day it
stood in full force and virtue. But for all was then done, the true Roman
Catholics even then did not think the Pragmatical Sanction was sufficiently
annulled: neither did that Lateran Decree find any kind reception amongst them,
but soon after was stoutly rejected as Heterodox; for within four Months after,
toward the latter end of March ensuing, the Divines of Paris spoke as
undervaluingly of this Lateran Synod, as it had done of the Council of Basil,
contemning and condemning it as Conciliabulum and Conventiculum, a Conspiracy
or Conventicle Appel. Universe Paris. a Leon. 10. facta die 27 Martii, An. 1517.
Bochell. lib. 8. de decret. Gal. Eccl. c. 4.
not assembled in Gods name: and the Cardinal Lorraine writ expressly after that
to Pope Pius the fifth, that as the French Church would never receive that of
Florence, so they also had always protested against the Lateran made up of a
New Heresy of the Jesuits, p. 103. out of the History of the Concordate,
composed by Monsieur de Puy.
few Italian Bishops. And that this Lateran Decree would be opposed, Pope Leo
foresaw; who therefore cunningly contrived a way if not to prevent, yet to
smother and stifle all opposition. For 70 Decret. p. 534. Caran. p. 893.
in a certain Decretal he ordained that hereafter for ever, no man should
Print, or cause to be Printed, any Book or Writing in the City of Rome, nor in
any other place, unless first by his Vicar, or Minister of his Palace, or by
some Bishop, or other deputed thereto, it be diligently examined and
Subscribed: and after the Trent-sticklers finding that Books notwithstanding
this Policy were published, and did creep abroad; they made a Rule which they
gave in charge to the Inquisitors, That if in the Books of latter Catholics,
written since the year 1315, that which needs Correcting can be amended by
taking away, or adding a few things, that course should be followed, otherwise
let it be Caran. p. 894. and instruct. post indicem, etc. Index l. Prohib. p.
25.
altogeeher blotted out. But neither the Popes Authority, Power, nor Policy,
could prevail so far with the Roman Catholics of that time, as to overruled
the Council of Basil, or confirm the Lateran; for many of them constantly
adhered to the As the Germans, Kings of England and France, ad Ann. 1422. in
the Margin of his life, p. 101. etc. Ep. Synod. Council. Basil.
Council of Basil, because Eugenius the fourth by an Authentic Bull (recited
in the sixteenth Session) acknowledged, that it was Lawful and General from the
beginning of it to that moment, and in the last of the Bulls which he revoked,
after he had But not till after admonition and citation. Acts of Superiority, 8
pronouncing him contumacious, for threatening of a dissolution. Caran. p. 856.
rejoyned himself to that Council, he declared, that in matters of Faith, the
opinion of a Council ought to be preferred to that of the Pope, which cannot
hold if the Pope be Infalible, as the Lateran crew suggested, because there is
no opinion which can or ought to be preferred to the judgment of an Infallible
Monarch and Umpire: and as those Romanists stuck to the Council of Basil, so
did they to the Council of Constance, as a lawful General-Council, and to its
Decree concerning the Superiority of a Council above the Pope, and as many do
to this day; which also necessarily destroys the supposition of the Popes
Infallibility, because no inferior Authority can be Infallible, for that it
can be controuled, and corrected by a superior overruling Power, and that
which is Infallible cannot, neither ought to be, controuled or corrected, If
any Romanists conceive (and some there be, who would be esteemed, and pass for
such with otherwise discerning men, to be the more moderate sort) that this is
no direct consequence, it were well done of them to reconcile the different
pretensions and contradictory persuasions of the Pope, and a Council, and
clearly declare, whether the two contesting parties can be both Infallible,
(for an Infallibility they will have, and if there be such a thing, it must be
seated in the one, or the other, for there are no other pretenders to it:) and
if we must have two Infallibles, then which of them for the time being is the
most Infallible to end the Controversy? for till this be decided, there can be
no end of Controversies; because this Controversy will be still agitated, and
few, or none besides shall be satisfactorily determined, because all others do
mostly depend on this; or whether it were not more prudent by way of
Accommodation to compound the difference betwixt themselves, that by consent
the Contestants should take the Infallibility by turns, the Pope have his
vicissitude, and the Council theirs; or that it pass, as a long time it has
done, by a standing Rule of Catch that Catch can, provided it can be so
ordered, that it be done without hot bickerings and canvassings. But the
through-paced Papists stand close to their tacklings; for where they fix the
Supremacy, there also very consonantly to their supposition they lodge the
Infallibility; for thus they argue in the ease of the Pope, His Authority Bell.
l. 4. de Pont. c. 24. Sect. 2. etc. l. 2. de Conc. c. 13. And this is (says
he) the judgment of the best writers, quos recenset ib. Sect. ult. and
therefore his judgment is the last and highest, id. l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 1.
Sect. Sed nec, and Sect. denique; and because it is the last and highest,
therefore it is Infallible, ib. l. 3. Sect. contra, and l. 2. de Conc. c. 9.
Sect. accedat, etc. c. 11. Sect de 2. and Sect. de 3.
is Supreme, therefore his judgment in causes of Faith is the last and the
highest, and because it is the last and the highest, therefore it is
Infallible. But upon the whole matter it is evident from what has before been
avouched, that the Holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul were not the Founders
of the present Romish Church, as it is now constituted and managed, but Julius
the Second, and Leo the Tenth by their new settlement; and so their pretense of
possession (which at the best was tortious) is quite out of doors, and at last
N. N's Original of Protestancy falls out to be indeed the just date and
commencement of Popery. Wherefore as the Papists frequently, but foolishly
propose to us, Where was your Church before Luther? So we upon the foregoing
grounds may more reasonably demand of them, where was your Popish Church before
Julius the Second, and Leo the Tenth? which Question they will never satisfy
till they renounce their new Faith, and new Foundation of Faith upon which
their new Church is superstructed.

3. Supposing this acknowledgment then ( an. 1516.) and there (in our parts of
the World,) this is far from rendering it Catholic, because far removed from
that Golden Rule of Catholicism delivered by Vin. Lyr. and approved by all good
Catholics, quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus, etc. For if before that
year and age, and in other parts of the World, that which Protestants now call
Popery was not acknowledged Catholic Doctrine, it must not now be acknowledged
Catholic; neither ought it then and in our parts of the World to have been
acknowledged Catholic: the ancient Primitive is to be more respected and
reverenced, than the Church of the last Century; and other parts of the
Christian World have been and are as truly and univocally parts of the one Holy
Catholic Church, as ours can be, and the true Faith is one and the same in all
ages and places. But will or can N. N. answer to Bell. who l. de notis Eccl. c.
7. positively declares, that if only one Province should retain the Catholic
Faith, yet it should be truly and properly called the Catholic Church as long
as it might be showed (as Protestants have) it was the same which it was at
other times, in other plaees of the World? and Driedo dogmat. Eccles. lib. 4.
part. 2. seems to be of his mind. And what will he say to Dr. Bristow? who
motive the 45. confesses, some there have been in many ages in some poinis of
the Protestants opinion, insomuch that there is scarce one piece or Article of
our whole Faith, but by one or other first or last it has been called in
Question, and that with such liking for the time, that they all have in a
manner drawn after them great herds of followers; these some and all were long
before this Origenists Era 1516. and what if these some of Bristow prove to be
very many, as the Cardinal of Praeneste reckoned them, Vicards, poor people of
Lions, Speronists, Arnoldists, and Waldenses, who, as Reinerus reports, were
far spread, and of long standing in the Church. For thus he relates the matter
( refort Illyric. Catal. test. devit. tom. 2. p. 543, but in an old Edition, p.
32. lit. D.) they continued so long as no Sect has, some say it has been
since Sylvester, some since the Apostles, (there is universality of time) and
there is almost no country wherein it spreads not, (there is universality of
place and persons) they have great show of Piety, living uprightly before men,
and believing all things aright concerning God, and all the Articles of the
Creed, (and abating his [great shew] they were good Catholics, because holy
believers, and livers; but that he added a subsequent cause,) only they hate
and blaspheme the Church of Rome, and that marred all, otherwise they had
passed muster; and St. Bernard is much to the same purpose, Sermon. 65. sup.
Cant. Edit. Venet. an. 1575. Tom. 1. p. 328. tit. H.

Si fidem interroges, etc. If you require an account of their Faith, nothing is
more Christian; if of their Conversation, nothing more commendable; they
frequent the Church, honor the Priests, offer their Gifts, make Confession,
and communicate in the Sacraments, (these were no Schismatics,) they hurt
none, circumvent none, contemn none, are true and just in all their dealings,
performing what they promised, (these were not unjust wicked men,) yet he had a
pique at them, they did not observe the Monkish Vow of Continence, which he
conceived to be scandalous, because he was of that Order.

To clear this Proposition, N. N. thus sets out. SECT. II.
N. N. ANno 1517. Leo the tenth granted Indulgences to such as voluntarily
contributed toward the War against the Turk, who at that time threatened all
Christendom, having added Syria and Egypt to the Ottoman Empire. The business
of divulging these Indulgences in Germany was committed to the Archbishop of
Mentz, who appointed John Tetizel a Dominican Friar to Preach, which Office
long time before had been given to the Augustine Friars, amongst whom Martin
Luther a Famous Preacher expected the place; but seeing his hopes frustrated,
he resolved now to write against Indulgencies and the Pope, as he had prepared
to Preach in favor of both before.

The first occasion which offered it self were certain abuses (unavoidable in
things which pass through many hands) in the management of this affair, against
which, or rather Indulgencies, he framed certain Libels, and Conclusions, which
were condemned and burnt, as heretical, by John Titzell his Competitor, who
then exercised the Office of Inquisitor in Germany. This fire did so warm
Luther, and added such flames to his hot disposition, that most part of Europe
felt the smart of it; for being once engaged and enraged by Titzell's
declaration against him, he would not recant his first error, but added others,
denying Purgatory, the Pope's Authority, Merits, the necessity of good Works,
etc.

SECT. II.
J. S. 1. THis Narrative concerns not the Church of England; they who desire to
be informed how the Affairs were managed in Germany, may consult Sleidan and
Guicciardine. It will not be amiss to recite one testimony from him ad An.
1520. where he charge N. N's certain (not, as he suggesteth, unavoidable)
abuses on Leo the tenth, affirming he was the cause of what was done in
Germany; because he, after complaint upon complaint that his Indulgencies and
Bulls were sold in Shops, the Buyers and the Sellers playing the money at Dice,
did not redress those faults, nor attempted to redress them: further adding,
all the World knew, the Money was not gathered (as was pretended) to make War
against the Turk. but indeed to maintain the Pomp and Lust of the Pope's Sister
Magdalen. See the Author of the Hist. of the Council of Trent, fol. 5. and
withal reporting that Adrian the sixth, immediate Successor to Leo the tenth,
intended to reform the abuses, fol. 22. etc. but first he would reform the
corrupt manners of the Court of Rome, because he saw all the World desired it
earnestly, fol. 26.

2. Be it so for once, that Luther was engaged and enraged, yet this was no bad
Argument of the Cause he had undertaken; for to satisfy N. N. that which
engaged him was the sorry shifting defenses the Indulgence-mongers framed for
themselves: for they finding themselves too weak for Luther in the particular
case of Indulgencies, which had no other foundation than the Bull of Clement
the sixth made for the Jubilee an. 1350. betook themselves for shelter to
common-places, such as the Pope's Authority, the Churches Treasury of Merits,
the Doctrine of Penance and Purgatory. Hist. Coun. Trent. fol. 6.
Thus Tetzel and Eckius managed their Plea, and would have avoided Luther's
objections; but Sylvester Prierias, Contra Lutherum, Jewel. def. of Apol. fol.
49.
Master of the Pope's Palace, above all other gave Martin the occasion to pass
from Indulgencies to the Authority of the Pope; for he having upon a forced-put
delivered, that Indulgentiae scripturarum, etc. Indulgencies are not warranted
by Authority of Scripture, but of the Roman Church, and Popes, which is
greater, put Luther upon it to examine and discuss this bold Affirmation.

That which enraged Luther, (if it were so, oppression makes a wise man mad)
was, that he knew very well what counsel Friar Hogostrate Hist. Counc. of
Trent. fol. 7.
had given to Pope Leo not to meddle with him by Argument, but to confute him
with Chains, Fire and Flames, and he knew this would be his Fate, if he fell
into the Pope's Power. Neither could he expect to find further favor from
Adrian his Successor; for the Cardinal of Praenest^, who had been employed in
Civil Affairs in the Papacies of Alex. Julius and Leo, and was then Adrian's
Confident, told him, No man ever extinguished Heresies by Reformation (the
Council of Trent it seems was not convened for that end, whatsoever was
pretended) but by Crusadoes, and by exciting Princes and People to vote them
out; That Innocent the third did by such means (a sure evidence of Usurpation
by the known measures of Tyranny, and that their Religion cannot endure a fair
trial) happily suppress the Albigenses in the Province of Languedock; and the
next Popes by the same means in other places rooted the Waldenses, Picards,
poor people of Lions, Arnoldists, Speronists, and Patavines, so that now there
remains no Hist. Coun. Trent. fol. 23.
more of them but the name only. And Adrian himself exhorted the Princes
themselves assembled at the Diet of Noremberge, 1522. to reduce Martin and his
followers into the right way by fair means, if they could, but if not, to
proceed to sharp and fiery remedies, to cut the dead members from the body, as
anciently was done to Dathan and Abiram, to Ananias and Saphira, to Jovinian
and Vigilantius; and finally, as their Predecessors had done to John Huss, and
Hierom of Prague; whose example, in case they cannot otherwise do, Hist. Counc.
of Trent. fol. 25.
they ought to imitate. The forementioned Cardinal declared no Reformation
could be made, that would not totally diminish the Rents of the Church; for
that if Indulgencies were stopped, one quarter of the Revenues of the Church
would be cut off, there being but four Fountains, whereof this was one.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I.
N. N. HENRY the Eighth, among others who writ against Luther, composed a
Learned Book in defense of the Seven Sacraments, the Pope's Authority, etc.
which gained him the Title of Defender of the Faith. But being weary of his
lawful Wife Q. Katherine, (despairing to have issue-male by her,) and enamoured
of Ann Bullen, cast off all obedience to the Pope, because he would not declare
his Marriage with Q. Katherine invalid, and by Act of Parliament made it
Treason to acknowledge any Spiritual Jurisdiction of the Pope in his Dominions,
himself being proclaimed Spiritual Head of the Church. This was the occasion
and beginning of the pretended Reformation in England. Notwithstanding, Henry
the Eighth observed the old Religion in all Points, except the Pope's
Supremacy, (which he borrowed of the new, to marry Ann Bullen, and enrich
himself by the spoils of the Monasteries) and persecuted all other Novelties
and Heresies in such degree, that though many crept into England in his Reign,
yet very few durst profess them, because as many as did, were burnt by his
command.

SECT. I.
J. S. TO this suggestion it will be seasonable to premise a general Narrative
of the matter of Fact, and then to discover the imperfections and mistakes
therein. It is the Papal Power which was challenged in Ecclesiastical Affairs,
and which was by Act of Parliament and Convocation cast out of this Kingdom,
but the method used therein was solemn and regular. For it was debated in the
Universities and chief Monasteries, An aliquid Authoritatis, etc. Whether any
Authority did of right belong to the Pope more than to any other Foreign
Bishop in this Kingdom of England? It was resolved in the negative, which
resolution was soon after concluded in An. 1537. and validly asserted in a Book
Entitled The Institution of a Christian Man.
the Convocation, in which also a rude draught of Reformation was chalked out,
as may be seen in the And the Kings Injunctions by the Lord Cromwell. Fox Acts
and Monuments in Henr. 8. p. 1104.
Records; whereupon some Superstitious abuses were suppressed. For we find a
Letter of Henry the eighth, directed to the Archbishop of Canterbury, in which
he was commanded to suppress the Worship of Images, Relics, and Superstitious
Pilgrimages, as being contrary to his Injunctions, and accordingly the Images
of the Lady of Walsingham, and and the Lady of Ipswich were burned Speed in
Hen. 8. n. 100. and l. 6. c. 9. n. 13. Sand. de Schis. Angl. l. 1. p. 165. 166.
at Chelsey; and more than so that King declared esse sibi, etc. He and the
King of France were thinking to abolish the Mass in their respective Dominions.
About this time a Tract was written de vera differentia, etc. Of the true
difference of Regal and Ecclesiastical Power, Composed by John Stokesley Bishop
of London, Cuthbert Tunstal Bishop of Durham, Stephen Gardener of Winchester,
and Dr. Thirlby after of Westminster, in which the Resolution of the
Universities, Monasteries, and Convocation, was asserted from the practice of
the Saxon, and first Norman Kings; and then what was thus concluded, and
asserted, was confirmed by Act of Parliament. All which is agreeable to the
Canon Law, which fully settles the Kings Supremacy; Inter personas
Ecclesiasticas intro Regni sui terminos Rex est Supremus Gubernator, qui in
Ecclesia summum potestatis culmen obtinet, etc. citante Drezouch de Script.
Jur. and Jud. Eccles. Part. 1. Sect. 2. p. 3.

This being premised, and the main of it acknowledged by Learned Romanists, the
cavils which N. N. has framed are next to be considered.

1. He tells us, Henry the eighth first gained, etc. If by gaining he mean this
Title was not assumed by the former Kings of England, or that Henry the eighth
acquired a right thereto by the bounty of the Pope, he may be mistaken; for our
Kings have a right thereto From a Parliament in the Conquerours time, the first
words of Magna Charta, and the Kings Coronation Oath, and Stat. of 24 Henr. 8.
c. 12.
Jure Coronae, and it was anciently used by them, as appears by several
Charters by former Kings to the University of Oxford, particularly that of
Richard the second; and long before in Ann. 435, Guithilinus Archbishop of
London in his speech to Constantine then King of England, styles him the
Defender and Restorer of the Faith, assuring him he was Christ's immediate Vicar
and Vicegerent in his Kingdom, by, for, and under whom he should Reign, and
Conquer as well as Constantine the great. He that would be farther satisfied in
this particular, may consult Sir Isaak Wake his And the Present State of
England, first Treatise, p. 88.
Rex Platonicus. Certain it is, all this King gained by this Complement of Pope
Leo, was just as much as his Daughter Queen Mary gained by the courtship and
cunning of Paul the fourth, who (forsooth) for her sake would undertake to form
Ireland into a Kingdom, which had been one long before, and would bestow on her
the Title of Queen of Ireland, which her Father had assumed, and her Brother
enjoyed.

2. He talks of his lawful Wife, etc. This is but one Doctors opinion, he may
give his betters leave to speak, who were not of N. N's private judgment. For
this matter was debated at Oxon, before the Bishop of Lincoln, and at Cambridge
before Stephen Gardener, and Dr. Fox, who concluded the Kings marriage with
Katherine to be unlawful: so did the Universities of Paris, Orleans, Anjou,
Burges, Padua, but none of them more fully than that of Bononia, the Popes
retiring place, and part of St. Peter's Patrimony, confidently averring the
Marriage was horrible, accursed, and abominable, etc. and that the Pope had no
power to grant a Dispensation in that case. Our own Historians report, that the
Pope privately gave out a Bull to declare the Marriage unlawful, if his Legate
Cardinal Campeius could have obtained his desires from the King; but the Author
of the History of the Council of Trent, fol. 68. confidently affirms, that
there was a Brief framed in which the King was declared free from that Marriage
with the most ample Clauses that were put into any Popes Bull. Whereas
therefore N. N. says, King Henry borrowed of the New Religion his Supremacy to
marry Ann Bullen, it is most false: For Stephen Gandiner assures us, that
whereas the Sentence of Gods Word (that is the Old Religion) had been
sufficient in that affair, yet his Majesty disdained not to use the censures of
the gravest men, and most famous Universities; and Guicciardine Lib. 19. p. 891.
relates, that the Pope himself thought that the Divorce of King Henry was
lawful.

3. N. N. is offended that the Popes Jurisdiction is taken away by the
extinguishing Act. This he misunderstands. That Power which the Pope was
divested of was termed Spiritual, but not in that sense that the Power of the
Keys is Spiritual, (for this is properly and formally Spiritual, extending only
to the Conscience) but in that sense the Courts of the Church are styled
Spiritual Courts, because of their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. Those words in
the Act, No Foreign Prelate shall exercise any Spiritual Power, etc. (any
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction) are not meant of Power properly such, but external
and coactive, (which as Rivet distinguishes) is Spiritual Objective, though
not formaliter. That this is the true sense is evident from 25 Hen. 8. cap. 21.
provis. 1. and in the extinguishing Act. 28 Hen. 8. c. 10.
the Act it self, which is a purely Political Ordinance framed upon reasons,
and respecting only such ends and uses as are merely civil, viz. to preserve
this Realm from Rapin, etc. as it is declared, Proviso the first. Hereupon the
Title of Supreme was By the King. 26 Hen. 8. c. 1. Staplet. de tribus Thom. in
Thom. Cant. complained and cried out that Henry the second clandestinely
demanded, what Henr. 8. openly usurped.
reassumed by the King, which signifies only a Political Governing Head, (as
Saul was of the Tribes of Israel, 1 Samuel 15.17.) to see that all Subjects do
their duties in their several places, and respective Functions, which Power Mr.
Heart in his Conference with Dr. Rainolds confesses to belong to Kings in the
judgment of St. Augustine: and that no more was intended by that Title is
evident from that King's Answer to the Convocation at York, which at first
scrupled to acknowledge him Supreme Head, but upon his Declaration that he
challenged no more by that seemingly-offensive Title, than what Christian
Princes in the Primitive times had assumed to themselves in their own
Dominions, they at last freely consented thereto.

4. He quarrels with the Motives inducing him, viz.

[1.] His despairing, etc. But if the King desirous to have Issue Male was
enamoured on Ann Bullen in hopes thereof, this cannot be objected against him
as a crime: for he being satisfied of the unlawfulness of marrying his Brothers
Relict, as it was not unreasonable to him to desire Issue male, so there was a
necessity he should be enamoured of some Lady for a Wife, and if Ann Bullein
were his choice, why not she as soon as any other?

[2.] His intention to enrich himself, etc. But this is more than N. N. knows,
or can prove. The Post-fact does not always infer an Antecedent intention, many
at long last have done that which in the first attempt they never designed. But
supposing he did so intend, this, as it is extrinsecal to his rejection of the
Popes Supremacy, so the Pope without Demur could dispense with this, provided
he had a share in the spoils, according to his Lust, or that his Interest
thereby be advanced. He gave the example and encouragement to this ruin by
consenting to Cardinal Wolsey's Request, for the suppression and alienation of
diverse Religious houses.

[3.] But to what end are these Motives urged? If that which the King did in
extinguishing the Popes usurped Supremacy, and in the Divorce from Katherine
were in themselves justifiable Acts, both in respect of the matter thereof, the
competency of the Power, and the manner of their management, it matters not
what moved him to do so, or how inclinable he was to undo what he had done, (as
some surmise;) for as it was honorable and just to defend his own Rights and
Prerogative, and to preserve his Subjects from Rapin and Oppression; so it
could not be a fault in him, as the matter stood, to desire Issue-male, and for
that end to be enamoured on a Lady.

5. N. N. Fansieth this to be the occasion, etc. He guesseth amiss; that which
chiefly occasioned these Transactions, was the Popes Dissimulation, and his
unjust Claims. The beginning came from Zealous Romanists, with the concurrence
of others, who being sensible of the Popes indirect dealings, and gross
Usurpations, sadly resented the condition of the King and Kingdom, and
therefore employed their Counsels and endeavors to redress and rectify those
grievances under which they suffered: But these were no Reformers, nor this the
Reformition, for Reformation in the sense then used, imported and respected;
only the redress of corrupt Doctrine and Manners, or rectifying abuses in the
Worship of God, and therefore did not concern the Popes Supremacy further than
it was conceived unjustly Usurped, or tyrannically exercised by him. But if N.
N. will have that to be the beginning of the Reformation, then his own Grave,
Learned, and Conscientious Divines (as he after styles them) were the first
Reformers.

6. He at last comes in with a cross observation, Notwithstanding, etc.

[1.] This was rashly observed, for hereby it is visible, if Henry the eighth
did any thing in favor of Papacy, neither the Pope, nor any of his Partisans
will quarrel him for taking too much upon him; but if he Act any thing in
prejudice to the Pope and his Pretensions, then it must be irregular and
Sacrilegious. But this is to be observed from the Author of the History of the
Council of Trent, fol. 90. That the Pope can blow both hot and cold with one
breath. It is to be marvelled (says he) how the Pope, who before thundered
against that King, upon the making the Edict for the six Articles, was
constrained to praise his actions, and to propose him for an Example to the
Emperor for his imitation. So that a man's personal interest makes him commend
and blame the same person. [2.] He observed, That Henry the eighth observed his
Old (New) Religion, etc. But this is contradicted by some of his old Friends.
The Author of the Book ( viz. Dr. Worthington) entitled, The Anchor of
Christian Doctrine, Printed at Doway 1618. Permissu Superiorum, is not so
confident, Preface, p. 4. and is evident by the Kings Injunctions.
maintaining still (says he) in most (that is not all, except the Supremacy as
this Originist fancieth) points the Romish Religion: But welfare Saunders, he
speaks out at an high rate, Haeretica Sand. de Schism. Angl. l. 1. p. 153, 154.
This may be one reason of the Popes Bull against him, for therein he traduceth
him for publishing Heretical Doctrine in his Kingdom. Hist. Trent. fol. 89.
multa tenebat, etc. He held many Heretical points, for he affirmed there were
only three Sacraments, Baptism, the Eucharist, and Penance; and as to that
Sacrament. he denied Auricular Confession to be instituted by Christ, and by no
means would he allow the name of Purgatory. If this be truth, was the King in
all points except Supremacy, of N. N's. Old Religion? which is not yet full an
hundred and twenty years old: however this be, either Saunders or N. N.
deserves to be marked. Next he enlarges upon Edward the sixth.

SECT. II.
N.N. EDward the sixth, a Child of nine years old succeeded his Father, Lord
Seymour his Uncle who inclined to Zwinglius his Heresy, was made Protector of
the King and Kingdom, upon the sixth of March, scarce 20 days after he was
invested in the Protectorship, he sent away Commissioners into all parts of the
Realm, to pull down Images, and other Ecclesiastical Ornaments. He also invited
out of Germany diverse Sectaries of what Religion soever, especially Apostate
Friars that had tied themselves to Sisters, assuring himself they would be most
for his purpose; and so there came into England Martin Bucer, who had been a
Dominican Friar, and an earnest Lutheran, Peter Martyr a Canon Regular, who
inclined to Zwinglius, yet came with an indifferency to teach what he should be
appointed, Bernard Ochine a Capuchin, weary of that Austere life, took a Woman,
and wrote a Book in defense of having two Wives at once, but after Repented,
and died Catholic.

These three Apostles of the Reformation were distributed into the three
Fountains of the Land, London, Oxford, and Cambridg; with these joined
Coverdale an Augustine Friar, Ball a Carmelite, Hooper, and Roger with other
Apostates, who did so vary in their Doctrine, that all was in confusion; and
the Common Prayer Book which Cranmer, Ridley, etc. were then composing,
obstructed, especially after Hugh Latimer had sided with them, who was of great
account among the common People. In this Confusion the Protector calls a
Parliament, 1547, but the Common Prayer Book did not then pass; yet all former
Statures made against Heretics, or Sectaries, were recalled and annulled. In
the ensuing Parliament the Book was approved, because it seemed in matter of
the Sacraments to humor diverse Sectaries who before had opposed it; yet the
Common People of England took Arms in defense of the Old Roman Catholic
Religion, complaining that most Sacraments were taken from them, and they had
reason to fear the rest. This was King Edwards Reformation, which could not be
perfected, because he lived but six years,

It is remarkable how in this Kings time it was resolved, that whatsoever
should be determined by six Bishops (such as they were) and six Learned men in
the Law of God, or the major part of them, concerning the Rights, Ceremonies,
and Administration of the Sacraments, that only should be followed. Never did
any Sectaries before this time presume so far as ours did in preferring the
judgment of seven men, (for that is the major part of twelve) before that of
the Christian World, in changing the matter and form of Sacraments, abolishing
the Sacrifice of the Mass, and ancient Rites and Ceremonies of the Church
Catholic, confirmed by so many General Councils, and approved by all the
Ancient Fathers. Heresy is always accompanied with presumption, but this
exceeds all Parallel.

SECT. II.
J. S. HEre again something in General is to be premised to remove those
prejudices which N. N. has raised against the procedure of Edward the sixth.

It is granted that King was but a Child, yet it must not be denied, that the
Laws of the Kingdom committing the exercise of Supreme Power in that case to a
Protector, what was regularly done by him, ought to be deemed as valid as if
the King had been of age and done it himself. The Reformation made in Jehoash
his minority, 2 Chronicles. 23, though it was the immediate Act of his Uncle
Jehojada, was firm to all intents and purposes. It is acknowledged also, That
Images were pulled down, a Body of English Liturgy formed, etc. But what was
done in these particulars was done without confusion or contradiction. For it
was done by Authority of the Supreme Power, with the advice and consent of the
major part of the Bishops, not opposed by the Convocations, but rather approved
(for that the Clergy in the respective Diocesses generally practiced the
prescribed form) and after confirmed by Parliament. This appears from the
Provisional Injunctions 1 Edw. 6. and the Acts of Parliament 2 and 3 Edw. 6. to
which the Bishops had so great a respect, that as they practiced themselves, so
they took care for the uniform observation of these Injunctions and Statutes,
requiring conformity to them from the Inferior Clergy, which accordingly they
submitted to. For we find a charge was drawn against Stephen Gardener, one
Article whereof was, He observed not the Book of Common Prayer, nor ordered the
observation thereof in his Diocese; to which charge he made this Answer to the
Duke of Somerset with five others of the Council, viz. That he having
deliberately perused the Book of Common Prayer, although he would not have made
it so himself, yet he found such things in it as satisfied his Conscience, and
therefore he would use it himself, and see his Parishioners do so too: the same
in effect he said to the Lord Treasurer, Secretary Peter's, and Sir William
Herbert, when they came to him with Articles from the King himself.

To confirm this procedure it is to be observed,

[1.] The whole affair was managed by an approved Catholic Rule, which was to
reform what was amiss, according to the Doctrine of the Holy Scriptures and
usage of the Primitive Church; not to form any New Religion, but retrieve the
Old, and to reduce it into that state as Christ had left it, the Apostles
practiced, and the Primitive Church had received, and observed, as the King
declared to the Romish Rebels.

[2.] It was ordered as the Tridentine Assemblers thought most fit, Decreto de
Celebratione Missae, (in which Institutions were read concerning abuses to be
corrected in the Celebration of the Mass, the substance whereof was) that the
Bishops ought to forbid all things brought in by Avarice, Irreverence, or
Superstition: If it be alleged the Bishops were so to do, as Delegates of the Sea of Rome the Return is obvious, Our Bishops as Commissioners of the Supreme
Power might do what they did with better Authority and Warranty. For,

1. Learned Romanists do confess that particular Nations have a Power to purge
themselves from Corruptions as well in Church as State, without leave from the Sea of Rome. This is acknowledged by Seren. Cressy in his Answer to Dr.
Pierce's Sermon, p. 285. But what if the Pope issue out a Prohibition, and
interdict the whole Nation? very many of them do conceive it may be waved and
opposed, because no reason can be assigned, why the Church should continue
under known Corruption for the Popes re^lyeness to have them redressed. Aeneas
De Conc. Basil. l. 1.
Silvius (after Pius the second) was once of this mind, for that if the Popes
recusancy may hinder the proceedings of a General Council, to the disturbance
of the Church, corruptions of the Minds of Men, and the destruction of their
Soul, all would thereby be undonne without remedy. Cardinal De concord. Conc.
l. 2. c. 12. and l. 3. c. 15.
Gusan goes yet higher, affirming, that the Emperor in duty was obliged by his
Imperial Authority to Assemble a Synod when the great danger of the Church
required it; which determination was also resolved in the first Conc. Pis.
impress. Lutet. 1612. fol. 69.
Pisan Council. Quintinus A Lawyer, and pablick Professor at Paris, in repet.
lectione de Civitatis Christianae Aristocratia.
Heduus, who lived in Henry the eighth's time, has aproved by many Canons,
that if the Pope command, and the King forbid, the King is to be obyed;
therefore when the King calls together the Prelates of the Church, to reform the
state thereof, they are bound to obey, though the Pope forbid it Franc.
praelect. 4. a. 161. at this day a General Council may be called against the
Popes mind by the Emperor and the Christian Princes, whether he will or not.
Baron Ad Ann. 553. n. 2.
confesses the second General Council is approved, though Pope Damasus with
might and main opposed it. Vigilius, though once he consented to the calling of
the first General Council, yet when he was called to give his personal
appearance, and afford his assistance, and concurrence, being commanded so to
do by the Emperor, and solicited thereto by twenty Baron. 553. n. 35.
Metropolitans, whereof three were Patriarcks, the sturdy insolent Pope utterly
refused: whereupon the Emperor (the necessity of the Church, which was then in
a general Tumult and Schism about the Ibid. Ann. 547. n. 29.
three Chapters, so requiring)* Commanded the Holy men assembled to protract.
Inst. Ep. ad Synod. Collat. 1. p. 520.
the time no longer in expectation of the Popes presence, but to debate, and
deliver a speedy Judgment upon the Controversy depending before them; which
they readily submitted to, and accordingly did discuss and Ibid. Coll. 2. p.
524.
determine the matter without the Popes Placet, and contrary to his good liking
and Baron. Ann. 553. n. 212.
affections.

2. The practice not only of Heathen and Jewish Kings do confirm this, but of
Christian also, who have challenged and exercised this Power as their Original
Right, derived to them from God. The first, famously known, Christian Emperor,
Constantine the Great said to his Bishops, You are the Bishops of those things
within the Church, but I am appointed of God to be Bishop of those things
without the Church; meaning thereby that the oversight of the external
Government of things belonging to the Church was by God committed to him as the
administration of Holy things of God within the Church was deputed to them
Cited in the Book De vera differentia, written An. 1634.
King Edgar in an Oration to the Clergy required them to make a Reformation by
a conjunction of his and their Power, committing the whole affair to so many
Bishops as he then nominated. Charles the Great convocated the Bishops to him,
to Counsel him how Gods Law should be recovered; and in the Preface of the
Capitulary wrote thus to the Clergy, of his Empire, We have sent our Deputies
to you, etc. Let no man censure this as a Presumption to correct what is amiss,
etc. For we have read in the Book of Kings, how Josiah restored the Service of
God in the Kingdom which he had given him. Maximilian in Ann. 1512. Declared,
though he of his clemency had tolerated the Pope and the Clergy, as his Father
Frederick had done, yet it appertained to his Duty that Religion decay not,
that the Worship and Abbot Vrspreg. Grth. Great. Easc. Whereupon he. with Lewis
the twelfth of France, and some Cardinals called a Council at Pisa, and cited
the Pope in it. Onupher. in vit. Julii secundi.
Service of God be not diminished.

3. It is the Duty of Sovereign Princes to do as Josiah did by the directions
of faithful men, though the majority of the Priests express their unwillingness
and averseness. For many Kings have been severely reproved for not reforming
the Idolatrous abuses of Gods Worship in their Reigns, which would never have
been done, unless they in Duty had been obliged to do it; and obliged they
could not have been, unless God had settled a Power in them to do it, of which
because there is no revocation, or limitation in the Gospel, therefore the
first Grant and Commission stands good; for the Gospel does not destroy the
Law, but perfect it.

4. Ad hominem, did not Queen Mary in her huddled reduction of Popery exercise
this Power? Did she not introduce the Popish form of Solemn Mass, which was
then abolished by standing Laws? Did not she to drive on her design, imprison
one Archbishop, displace two, and deprive eight Bishops? Did not she with the
consent of a sorry Convention, which she called five days after her
Coronation, repeal some Statutes made by Henry then eighth, and others, by
Edward the sixth? Sir Henry Spelman in his larger History of Tithes, c. 29. p.
170. tells us, he had heard there was but twenty persons to give their voice
with the Bill, and yet carried it. Did not she for a color when the work was
done, some few days after call a Convocation, which she soon after dissolved
by her peremptory Mandate? but not a word of this from our cunning Origenist,
because it was done for the advancement of the Catholic Cause. Popish Princes
may do what they like, in order to the Good old Cause, and never be checked or
censured for it; but Protestant Sovereigns must be bound up till the Popes
License, or a Vote in Convocation loose them.

5. Although Synods be the most prudential, and safe way to determine
Church Matters, yet without them Gods Worship may be Reformed, and the
Catholic Doctrine restored. In the case of the Catholics and Arrians,
Nazianzen (ad Procopium) complained he saw no good end of Councils; certainly
in those where Faction prevailed, and Votes passed not by weight, but number.
Not that he thought so absolutely and Universally, but pro hic and nunc in
respect of the Times, and Persons assembled. For he knew if a Council had been
called when the Arrians were the overruling party in the Church, the Catholics
would be overpowered by multiplicity of Votes; yet for all this, He and other
Catholics did endeavor the suppression of Arrianism.

6. Neither in such times and cases must the business be delayed till a General
Council be summoned, especially when he who pretends to have the sole Power of
calling it, and the parties called are aforehand agreed by Clandestine
correspondencies, they will do nothing toward a Reformation, but either
obstruct or baffle it. Henry the eighth said well, A General Council would do
well where all may speak their Judgments, but it cannot be called a General
Council, where they only are heard who are resolved to be on the Popes side in
all matters, and where the same men are Plantiffs, Defendants, Advocates, and
Judges. Hist. Conc. Trid. Angl. fol. 85.

7. Supposing there wanted a formal Synodical concurrence in this Transaction
of Edward the sixth, there was in effect that which to all intents and purposes
is equivalent, viz. a General submission and conformity to the Provisional
Injunctions, and Acts of. Parliament by the Clergy.

8. There was a Synod to carry on this matter in Edward the sixths time, for
though the first Edition of the Liturgy was only framed by the advice and
suffrage of Bishops, and elected Divines, which yet was afterward revised and
completed with the addition of a form of Making and Consecrating Bishops,
Priests and Deacons, (but whether the Synod then in being composed and formed
it, or passed their Power (which is more probable) for the forming of it to the
selected persons appointed by the King (and so may properly enough be said to
have done it, because by those to whom they had consigned their Authority) I
shall not pretend to determine:) yet this may be safely resolved on, a Synod
there was, which appears from the Statute-Book, which makes mention of a
Subsidy of six Shillings in the Pound granted by the Clergy unto the King, 2
and 3 Edw. 6. and it is notoriously known such a Grant in those times passed
not without a Convocation; and it is certain, mention was made of a Synod 1
Mariae, held in King Edwards days; and Mr. Philpot a member of the Convocation
1 Mar. maintained the Catechism exemplified in the Common Prayer Book, to be
Synodical, upon this account, that the Convocation in King Edward's time had
passed their Authority to certain Persons Deputed by the King to make Spiritual
Laws Fox Act. and Mon.
. So that though nothing appears apud Acta, because perhaps not so carefully
registered, or not at all, because it was the Personal Act of their Deputies, or
in that primo Mariae (which is likely enough) expunged and destroyed, yet a
Synod there was to carry on this work, upon the foregoing Reasons; to which may
be added what Bishop Jewel def. Apol. fol. 520, affirms, which Mr. Harding
Scoffing at it as a small obscure meeting of a few Calvivinists Def. Apol. fol.
521. which Bishop Jewel farther avers, Defen. Apol. fol. 645.
could not deny: We have not done (says he) what we have done altogether
without Bishops or a Council, the matter has been treated in open Parliament
with long Consultation, and before a notable Synod, and Convocation.

Having premised thus much, the less shall be said to N.N's exceptions, and
reports, and nothing at all to his angry, scurrilous, malicious invectives and
expressions.

[1.] Edward the sixth was a Child, etc. This is a close reflection on his
incompetency to act in that kind, but N. N. might have considered that Kings in
the eye of the English Laws are never Minors, and that though he was a Child in
years, yet not so in understanding; for during the time of his Reign he kept a
most exact judicious Journal of all the most principal Haywards Ed. 6.
affairs of State, and his abilities were so great, far beyond his years, that
he could encounter Gardan, and disputed his new devised Paradoxes with so much
acuteness, and strength of Reason, that Cardan reported his parts to be
miraculous. And as to his Knowledge in matters of Religion, his Answer (formerly
related) to the Romish Rebels, sufficiently shows, he was no Candidate thereof,
but a solid understanding Christian. But if his being a Child be so great an
offense to the Romish tender Consciences, why should not their Universal
Monarch's being a Child work the same effect in them? Such they have had,
Benedict the ninth was a Lad almost ten years old, John the eleventh a
stripling, and a Bastard to boot, which one of their stout sticklers grants,
and makes a pleasant Phanatick A. D. Soc. Jes. in his Reply to Dr. White, p.
289. Sect. to the seventh.
Apology for their youth, viz. in these words. The young years of our Bishops
cannot be a hinderance to debar them, ( of being Infallible Pastors and
Universal Monarchs in the Church,) since out of the Mouth of Babes our Lord can
work his own praise; neither is Ignorance, want of Learning, or Discretion any
let, when by the mouth of an Ass God can instruct a Prophet.

[2.] They did vary (as he runs on) and so were in confusion. The Antecedent is
beggarly without proof, and the consequence is naught: every variation in
judgment and opinion does not infer or imply Confusion. The members of the
Trent-Assembly in far more and more importing Doctrines did vary almost at
every turn, yet I presume this man of confidence will not adventure to
conclude, that all was there in a Confusion. But King Edwards Doctors did not
vary, for they were perfectly agreed, and took an effectual course to prevent
discord and confusion. For,

[3.] The Common Prayer Book was not obstructed, but generally and Religiously
observed. For in 1 Edw. 6. it was Authorized by Proclamation, recommended to
the Bishops by special Letters from the Lords of the Privy Council to see it
practiced, and in 2. Edw. 6. a penalty was imposed by Act of Parliament on such
as should deprave or neglect the use thereof: if any disturbance therein, it
proceeded from the Popish party, and their Preachers, which occasioned a
Proclamation to be issued out to silence them.

[4.] He relates every one might Preach what he pleased, etc. This is false,
for a Proclamation was published, none should Preach, unless he were Licensed.

[5.] Hugh Latimer (says he) was in great esteem, etc. If so then probably the
Common People would have sided with him, for the Common Prayer Book which he so
highly esteemed, that he judged all those who condemned it to be Factious and
Seditious, as in particular he charged Thomas Lord Seymour upon that account.

[6.] He tells us the Common People took Arms, etc. Surely not those who so
much respected Hugh Latimer; they were some who affected Popery, that is no
news such should prove Rebels when they dare; he might have spared this, to
save the Credit of his Old Religion. This practice is sufficient to prove them
no true Roman Catholics, for the Old Religion, taught Subjects Submission and
Suffering for Religion, and forbad Resistance and Rebellion, and taking up Arms
against their lawful Sovereign.

[7.] He supposes Edward the sixth's Reformation could not be perfected, etc.

In good time! by the same reason Queen Mary's reduction of Popery could much
less be perfected, for she lived but five years.

[1.] He presents his grand remarkable, in this Kings time, etc. But he is so
reserved and wary as not to specify the year of his Reign: if he means 1 Edw.
(as is most probable) he misseth one of the number, for thirteen were
appointed, this is a pardonable mistake. That which follows is a downright
Calumny, as has been sufficiently proved, for those seven men had a real
respect to the Judgment of the Christian World, and Practice of the Catholic
Church. If he pitch on 2 and 3 Edw. 6. then 32 persons were nominated to
examine Ecclesiastical Laws, viz. such as concerned the Jurisdiction and
Rights of the Church in foro externo, which indeed were but so many Regulators
of the Canon Law. If he relate to 6 Edw. 6. only eight persons were named in
the Kings Letters Patents, with a power to call into their Assistance whom they
pleased. But this is remarkable, that when N. N. lays claim to all the
Christian World, many General Councils, and all the Fathers for their Matter
and Form of Sacraments, and their Sacrifice of the Mass, he is then fallen into
the braving humor of his old Thrasonical Bragadochio Colleagues; Testor omnes
patres, omnia Concilia, etc. No less than all was the nothing Brag of Father
Campian, but the Author of the Apologetical Epistle published Ann. 1601, goes
far beyond him in this swelling ranting ventosity; That Faith which I defend is
taught in all the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures, and all ancient Glosses and
Scholies on their Latin and Greek, by all the learned Fathers, Historians,
Antiquaries, and Monuments, by all Synods, Councils, Laws, Parliaments, Canons
and Decrees of Popes, of Emperors, and Kings, by all Martyrs and Confessors,
and Schools, by all Friends and Enemies, even Mahumetans, Jews, Pagans, and
Infidels, all former Heretics and Schismatics. All these he had carefully and
with diligence studied, and considered them; this is a right Don Glorioso. But
somewhat is still behind, his Faith is approved by all the Testimonies that can
be devised, not only of this World, but of God, of Angels, and Glorious Souls,
of Devils, and Damned Spirits in Hell, (the fittest Witnesses of all:) and here
he stops his Carreer. Other puling Heretics have boasted of this or that
Council, or of some few Fathers; but these have attained to that pitch of
Impudency, that all makes for them, all is theirs; when upon a just examination
none at all appears for them. Heresy is always accompanied with Vanity and
Insolency, but this exceeds all Parrallel; but that we find it the constant
custom of the Romish Hectors.

SECT. III.
N. N. AFter Edward died his Sister Queen Mary Reigned, who being a Catholic,
restored Religion by Act of Parliament; Cardinal Pole, the Popes, Legate
absolved the Kingdom from the Excommunication and Schism incurred. Some
Histories report that three thousand Sectaries, all Strangers, were Banished
out of England, and among the rest the two holy Apostles Peter Martyr, and
Bernard Ochine. All King Edwards Bishops were Deposed, and Imprisoned, the
Catholic Bishops set at liberty and restored to their Sees.

SECT. III.
J. S. 1. QVeen Mary did reintroduce Popery, but this she did contrary to the
solemn Promise made to the Gentry of Norfolk and Suffolk: to violate such an
obligation will scarce be proved either Honorable or Religious.

2. She did not regularly restore her Religion, but confusedly shuffled it up
as has been before declared, that if any Protestant Prince had done the like,
an hideous Hubbub would have been raised.

Bishop Jewel relates the manner thus: Reply to Harding, Art. 13. fol. 358.
The Papists first scattered it and forced their Mass against a Law then in
force against them, then established it by Law; and next after had a Solemn
Disputation at Oxford, to try whether the Law were good or no. This (says he)
Mr. Harding is your Lidford Law: for in order of nature the Disputation should
have been first, then the Law, then the Execution thereof; but, as Tertullian
says, Haeretici ex Conscientia infirmitatis suae nihil tractant ordinary.

3. He cannot but his hand must slip though he have no visible advantage by it;
for all King Edwards Bishops were not Deposed, the Bishops of Lincoln and
Hereford were not; the Bishops of Litchfield, Salisbury, Norwich, Bangor. St.
Asaph, and Landaffe complied.

4. If the deposed Bishops were but pretended Bishops, then your restored
Bishops were so too, for some of these received their Ordination from them and
those who ordained them.

But now the Originist after all these Sallies falls afresh on his great work,
on which he spends much Paper and time, wherein he most triumphs, and glories:
and thus he makes his first approach and onset.

CHAP. III.
SECT. I.
N. N. QUeen Mary deceased without issue, her Sister Elizabeth is proclaimed
Queen. The Reformation is established by Act of Parliament, notwithstanding the
great opposition made by all the Bishops and others in the Upper-house. The
Queen was resolved to pull down Catholic Religion, because Cecil and others of
her Council persuaded her, she could not be secure as long as the Pope's
Authority was acknowledged in England, seeing the Apostolic See had declared
her a Bastard, and all Catholics looked upon the Queen of Scots as true Heir
to the Crown. Nevertheless it was judged expedient for her quiet, and the peace
of the Realm, to keep always a Resemblance of it in the Clergy, as the best
remedy against Puritanism, which was thought by her Majesty dangerous to
Monarchy. The titles therefore of Archbishops, Bishops, Deans and Chapters
were retained, as also in her own Chapel some Images, the Altar and a Crucifix
upon it. But what will they do for Ordination? That Form which was instituted
in Edw. the sixth's time was judged invalid, by public Judgment in Queen
Marie's days, insomuch that Leases made by King Edward's Bishops, though
confirmed by Dean and Chapter, were not esteemed good, because, says the
Sentence, they were not consecrated, nor Bishops: see Brook's Novel Cases,
Plac. 463. fol. 101. impress. London, 1604. Seeing therefore it concerned the
Queen to have consecrated Bishops, she endeavored by all means to have such as
she named for Bishoprics consecrated by Catholics; but they all resolved not
to make Bishops in the Church, whereof themselves refused to be members. The
Queen, notwithstanding the reluctance of Catholic Bishops, named in her
Letters Patents Kitchen Bishop of Landaff, among others, to consecrate Mr.
Parker, and his Fellows; he being the only man, among all the Catholic
Bishops, that took the Oath of Supremacy in her Reign. But many others who
complied with Henry the eighth in that particular, refused now to consecrate,
and Landaff was resolved to do the same; yet at last, by fair words and
promises, they prevailed with the old man to give them a meeting at the
Nags-head in Cheapside, where they hoped he would have ordained them Bishops,
despairing that ever he would do it in a Church, because that would be too
great and notorious a scandal to Catholics, among whom Landaff desired to be
numbered. Bonner Bishop of London hearing of this, sent Mr. Neal, his Chaplain,
to forbid the exercise of giving Orders in his Diocese, under pain of
Excommunication, wherewith the old man being terrified, and otherwise also
moved in his Conscience, refused to proceed in that Action, alleging chiefly
for reason of his forbearance, want of sight. This excuse being interpreted an
evasion by Mr. Parker and his Fellows, lessened his entertainment, some of them
reviling him, and saying, this old Fool thinks we cannot be Bishops, unless
we be greased, alluding to the Catholic manner of Episcopal Unction. Being
thus deceived in their expectation, they resolved to use Mr. Scories help, an
Apostate irreligious Papist, who had born the name of Bishop in King Edward's
time, and was thought to have sufficient power to perform the Office: he having
cast off, with his religious habit, all scruple of Conscience, willingly went
about the matter, which he performed in this sort; having the Bible in his
hand, and they all kneeling down before him, he laid it upon every one of their
heads and shoulders, saying, Take thou Authority to Preach the Word of God
sincerely, and so they rose up Bishops of the new Church of England.

SECT. I.
J. S. TO this long lying Section, the fittest method will be to discover the
several falsities, and vain conjectures, as they lie in order.

First, He vainly surmiseth great opposition was, etc. This is one
misadventure, for there was but fourteen Bishops then living, whereof four were
absent; and then a Question may be made, whether all those ten who were present
did oppose it? for some of them had learned the Art of compliance so exactly,
that they could suit to the times without any opposition: for the others, there
was but one Abbot of Westminster, and only two Lords Temporal, the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and Viscount Montacute, who did oppose it: these thirteen, if they
had all combined, could not make any great opposition.

2. The Queen (says he) did resolve, etc. This is most false, for thus she
expressed and declared her self: Cambden, Ann. p. 35, 36.
England embraces no new Religion, nor any other than that which Christ has
commanded, the Primitive and Catholic Church has practiced, and the Ancient
Fathers have always with one mind and will approved. If N. N. has another
Catholic Religion, let him keep it to himself.

3. The Pope did declare her a Bastard, etc. Perhaps this may be true, but if
he did so, he declared against his own Conscience, if Guicciardine say true:
but whether this were so or no, the Pope has a faculty to determine and
declare contradictions: If once he did declare her a Bastard, he has a cleanly
conveyance to call in his Declaration, and pronounce her Legitimate. Our
English Authors of good account, probably upon common report, have written that
Pius the fourth, as he offered very large Concessions, so, (if the terms could
be agreed on which were proposed,) to revoke the ^cateace against ^rer Mothers
Marriage. This seems to Mr. Fuller to be a light conjecture, but others as
modest, and more knowing than himself in that point, have averred it. Bishop
Babington on Number. the seventh affirms of Clement the eighth, and Bishop Andrews
Tort. Torti. p. 142. is very positive in it, Certe ill^^d rentatum constat, de
cuteris si -- ut vero Primatus, etc. Mr. Fuller himself relates, the Pope sent
by his Nuntio, the Abbot of St. Saviors, a Letter to her, in which he promised
to grant her whatsoever she would desire for the establishing and confirming of
her Princely Dignity, and assured her (having furnished the Abbot with secret
Instructions) he should deal more largely with her, entreating her to give the
same credit to his Speeches which she would do to himself. If these
Instructions contrived for that pretense and profer were not publicly to be
seen, this was but a piece of Pope-crafe; for the matter was so to be managed,
that nothing was to be concluded, till the Abbot certainly found the Letter
would take, and produce the designed effect. But before this Paul the fourth
promised, though not so frankly, yet home enough; that if she would refer her
self wholly to his free (crooked) disposition, he would do whatsoever might be
done with the Hist. Counc. of Trent. fol. 411. ad An. 1558.
honor of the Apostolic See; and we know that the Popes have ready
inventions, they can any time off-hand find an expedient to salve its honor.

This Pope in the year 1554, being a moderate good man, by a Letter to Queen
Mary, whom he knew to be zealously addicted to the Papal Interest, granted a
close Dispensation to confirm and ratify the alienation of the Possessions and
Revenues of the Church, and forged six reasons to satisfy the World, that such
a Dispensation might be granted with honor and conscience. This Letter, with
the reasons, was found in the Offices of the King's Papers, the original
whereof was there preserved: but the next year following the tender-conscienced
man changed his mind, and in private discourse often told the English
Ambassadors with deep protestations, that he could not profane the things
dedicated to God, and that his Authority reached not so far as to approve
Sacriledg, and therefore under an Anathema restitution must be made of
Church-Goods and Revenues; adding withal, they could not hope that St. Peter
would open Heaven to them, so long as they usurped his Goods upon Earth, Hist.
Counc of Trent, fol. 392, and 393. ad An. 1555.

This was a pure piece of Pope-craft to get Peter Pence from the people, and
Annates from the Crown for himself, which he gained by this Artifice, and let
the Church shift for her Rights as well as she could.

The Pope and his Adherents do generally charge the Greeks with Heresy and
Schism, yet by an accord the Greeks may have his good leave to be Heretics and
Schismatics; let them but acknowledge his Supremacy, they may keep their
Religion, and be either Heretics or Schismatics: but if they prove
refractory, and refuse, then presently they are pronounced Heretics and
Schismatics.

For in Ann. 1594 Articles were drawn and concluded betwixt the Pope and the
Bishops of South-Russia, the main whereof was, he was to permit to them the
liberty of the exercise of their Religion, and they were in lieu of that to
acknowledge his Supremacy; which they submitted to, but with special reservation
of their Religion and Rites, Brerewood Inquiries, p. 138. taken out of Th. a
Jesu, What Arts the Popes have used to maintain their Reputation, the Author of
the Hist. of the Couno. of Trent has reported for fine stories of
Reconciliation, fol. 382, and 383, which he truly and properly styles shadows
of Obedience. For Saligniacus the Pope's Protonotary Itenr. to 8. c. 2. refert
Brerewood, p. 161. expressly affirms, that the Christians in Egypt never
yielded obedience to the Pope.

Let the Pope's Interest be either bettered or secured, he can with honor
allow Heresy and Schism; and so sober and moderate a man is he, he will not
stand with you upon the strict account of Religion.

Neither is N. N. certain that all the Catholics did take the Queen of Scots
to be true Heir to the Crown; yea it is false for not those sure who concluded
the Marriage of King Henr. the eighth with Katharine to be unlawful, and
Divorce lawful; not those sure who owned Elizabeth their natural Liege-Prince,
as Heath Archbishop of York, and Oglethorp Bishop of Carlisle who Crowned her;
not those who judged the Act of Succession valid, neither the Secular Priests,
who in their Book entitled Important Considerations, Printed An. 1601, and now
Reprinted An. 1675, bound with the other Treatises, did acknowledge her their
true and lawful Queen, and themselves her Highness natural born Subjects, p.
53. and 64; and as such did profess their Allegiance to her, as highly as the
most Loyal Subjects could or should do, p. 85, 86. Nay, nor Father Parsons and
his Comrades, who entitled the King of Spain, and the Infanta his Daughter to
the Crown, in his Book entitled Dolman, and as the Secular Priests affirm,
Import. Consid. p. 82.

Philip King of Spain treated with Queen Elizabeth to Marry his Son Charles,
which he would not have done, if he either valued the Pope's Declaration, Which
none of those Roman-Church (and there are great store of them) do, who deny his
Infallibility in matters of Fact and Right.
or thought the Queen of Scots to be true Heir, unless he had been assured of a
Dispensation, and by virtue thereof disseize and debar the right Heir. But this
project failing, he gave out words he would take her for his own Wife, insomuch
that the King of France feared a Marriage betwixt them, which moved many of the
more inquisitive and considering sort to believe, that the reason why the Pope
did not draw in his Declaration, proceeded only from the practices of the
French King, Hist. Counc. of Trent. fol. 411. An. 1558.

4. He fancieth Ordination of Bishops was not to be had, etc. why so? The Form,
etc. how comes it to pass? the Leases, etc. But if the Leases were adjudged not
good, yet consecrated Bishops they were, for the goodness of a Lease depends on
the Laws of a Kingdom, the validity of Consecration is derived from the Law of
Christ, according to whose Institution they were Ordained. But how is it the
Leases were not good? this does not appear; for Brooks does not say,
adjudicatur, but dicitur, it was so suggested, not it was so adjudged: but if
he and all the Temporal Judges had passed this Sentence and public Judgment,
yet it was null in Law; for sententia juris, etc. even a legal Sentence,
when pronounced by an improper incompetent Judge, is void in Law; and it is
certain they have no power to determine either the Regularity or the Validity
of either the Form, or the Ordination it self. It belongs to others to meddle
with the Institutions of Christ.

Alas, they did exceed their bounds in giving such a judgment: Pope Paul and
Cardinal Pool judged otherwise; for their ratification of the Ordinations in
King Edward's time could not be valid, unless the Ordinations themselves were
valid antecedently to the Pope's superfluous Confirmation. It implies to
confirm a Nullity, and ratify a Nothing. Hovvever N. N. is desired to declare
his private Judgment, how he likes the public Judgments which have palled
on his Fellows in, and since Queen Elizabeth's time; and so farevvel to N.N.'s
public Judgment, and his private Judgment to boot.

5. He conceives Queen Elizabeth endeavored to employ his Catholics, etc. as
if none else could consecrate but they. This is a false supposition in the
judgment of his Catholics, as after will appear, but this he vents at a
venture; for Mr. Harding, who had reason to know more of this matter than N.
N. could not say so; the ancient Bishops (said he) were not required, or else
refused, but if they did refuse, yet her concern could not be prejudiced
thereby; for she had sufficient in readiness to perform that office. N. N.
acknowledges Landaff and others were named in the Queens Letters Patents, if
it had been for his interest he could have named those others, those seven,
whereof six were Bishops, one a Suffragan, for whose Authority, see Bell. de
Sacr. Ord. lib. 1. c. 7.

6. He reckons Landaff among his Catholics, etc. But a Friend of his told Mr.
Harding, we had but one Fool, meaning Landaff, and him they have gotten, and at
last many of his good Catholics complied. Bishop Jewel told Mr. Harding so,
and he could not gainsay it. At first they subscribed against us with the very
same hands with which, not long before, they had openly protested, and solemnly
sworn against the Pope, and with which sithence they have received and embraced
our whole Religion. Bishop Jewel def. Apol. f. 521.

7. He suggests they prevailed with Landaff, etc. But he did not meet with
them, neither did they meet for Dr. Parker's Consecration, but his
Confirmation, at which he was not present himself, being confirmed by his Proxy
Dr. Bullingham.

8. But Bonner terrified Landaff, etc. But he was secure enough from his
thunderings, he himself being then secured and imprisoned for his obstinacy,
and legally deprived of his Bishopric. But had he been at liberty, and in
power, Landaff needed not to fear his Scarecrows; for the Bishop of London has
no Authoritative Jurisdiction over the Bishop of Landaff, they are Pares in all
accounts of Power; neither was Bow-Church subject to his Jurisdiction, being a
peculiar under the Archbishop of Canterbury, and this was the place where the
meeting was for Dr. Parker's Confirmation. But why should Bonner forbid the
exercise? especially if he thought (as N. N. seems to do) that the performance
of that action in that clandestine place, and irregular manner, renders the act
invalid; for Bonner would have rather connived at it, that thereby he might
take an occasion (as a subtle enemy would do) to make the scandal stick more
close to them.

9. He further adds, they were deceived in their expectation. But N. N. is
deceived in his Relation, which is false; for

[1.] They had no need of Landaff neither did he refuse, as that signifies an
obstinate Recusancy, such as is alleged in his Catholics, who, as N. N.
reports, refused.

[2.] He alleges they resolved to use Mr. Scories help, etc. If they did,
they resolved well; for Mr. Scorie did not only bear the name of a Bishop, but
was a regular valid Bishop, being Consecrated Aug. 30. 1551, by Canterbury,
London, and Bedford. But N.N. thinks they thought him to have sufficient power
to perform that Office: this is false too, for there were three besides him
ready to join with him in the performance, who were all employed, and did Act;
and he with others were sufficiently empowered by the Canons of the Church to
perform that Office, and yet if he alone had done it, his Consecration had been
as Canonical and valid as that of Pope Pelagius, who was but a Deacon, whom the
Western-Bishops refused to Consecrate, and had an un-canonical Only by two
Bishops and a Presbyter of Octia.
Consecration only, and yet he passed for Pope. And in some cases the
performance of Consecration by one Bishop only, is justifiable from good
Precedents, and the Authority of Gregory the Great to boot.

N. N. having cast off all scruples of Conscience, adds sin to sin, one lie to
another, in reporting he performed it in this sort, having, etc. For he only
did not perform it, neither in that sort he suggesteth, which is demonstrated
by as good Evidences as are to be found in the Vatican; for thus, as appears by
them, it was performed: On the 17th. of December. 1559, the Persons nominated in
the Queens Letters Patents, viz. Bishop Barlow, Coverdale, Scory, and the
Suffragan of Bedford assembled at Lambeth-Chappel for Archbishop Parker 's
Consecration, where first Morning-Prayer was read, then a Sermon Preached,
(this Bishop Scory did, and it was all he did along) then the Sacrament of the
Eucharist was Administered, then they (all four) proceeded to the Consecration;
whereat the Prescript-form in the Book of Ordination was strictly observed, not
laying the Bible, etc. (as N. N. falsely relates) though if so it had been
done, there is a Book-Case for it, Conc. Carth. 4. C. 2. But delivering to him
according to an old Roman rite; neither saying only, ( take thou Authority,
etc. which N. N. only takes notice of,) but using the solemn formal words of
Consecration, (Receive ye the Holy Ghost,) and then Remember, etc. according to
the method of the Ritual.

4. N. N. has the ill-luck to be still out, and deceived; for whereas he
surmiseth others were Consecrated when Archbishop Parker was, he is much
mistaken: For he only was Consecrated then, the others not till afterward, and
upon several days.

5. But N. N. is wronged, is being reproved for falsehood and misadventures, he,
good man, will say nothing but that for which he has good authorities, and
good proofs; which, whether they be regular, and valid, is next to be examined.

SECT. II.
N. N. THis Narration of the Consecration at the Nags-head, I have taken out of
Hollywood, Constable, and Dr. Champney's Works. They heard it from many of the
ancient Clergy, who were Prisoners in Wisbitch-Castle, as Mr. Bluel, Dr. Watson
Bishop of Lincoln, and others; these had it from Mr. Neal, and other Catholics
who were present at Mr. Parker's Consecration at the Nags-head, as Mr.
Constable affirms. The story was divulged, yet being so evident a truth, none
durst contradict it, notwithstanding both the Nullity, and Illegality was
objected against them in Print not long after, by the Famous Dr. Stapleton's
Counterblast, fol. 301.

SECT. II.
J. S. ALL this here presented, amounts to thus much;

1. Mr. Neal and Mr. Constable reported the story, therefore it is true. Neal
was an eyewitness, and Constable took it upon trust, and all the rest hearsay
men. So that the whole depends upon their credit and honesty, who have cracked
their credit by their holy Fraud, and lying Legends, and practicing the black
Art of Equivocation; and their honesty is justly suspected, who care not what
they say, so they say something for the advantage of the good old Cause, as
will hereafter be declared.

2. Dr. Bishop, a fast Friend to the Cause, in his Repr. of Dr. Abbot's
Defense, p. 120, confutes this way of Argumentation, saying; Any man not past
all care of his Reputation, would be ashamed to cite such late partial Writers;
it is either where their testimony is not contradicted by their Adversaries,
when they set themselves industriously to detect falsifications in their
Allegations, or else those Protestants do annex the Authorities and Reasons on
which their testimonies are grounded.

Testimonies of private men, or hearsay men, when crossed by Authentic
Records, are always slighted, and contemned. If the Homagers of a Manor swear
to a custom, (which is more than speaking to it,) yet if there be any
Court-Roll extant, and produced, which declares the contrary to their
Depositions, their testimony is thereby utterly invalidated. Baronius in the
point of Maxentius his Birth, presumed to correct all former Historians by the
discovery of an ancient Coin, certainly an ancient Record is better than an
ancient Coin can be; for standing Records have always by all Nations, and the
consent of Mankind, been esteemed the strongest human testimonies, and the best
assurances of Faith, which ought not to be disbelieved or disputed upon the
reports of particular men, because they have been purposely devised and
preserved for the discovery of Truth, and the decision of Controversies which
might arise in after-Ages, and the rectifying of particular men's several
apprehensions. Such as these we produce in this case, which have convinced and
fully satisfied more ingenuous Adversaries than N. N. or his Narrators seem to
be: When Dr. Reynolds showed these Records to Mr. Heart, he confessed they were
undeniable. The Bishop of Chalcedon acknowledged that Father Oldcorn, alias
Hall, took the leisure and pains to search the Records, who thereupon concluded
them authentic. Archbishop Whitgift, with four other Bishops, prevailed with
four Popish Priests to view these Records, which when they had done, they
declared to them freely that they were not to be doubted of.

3. It has been the common practice of such as these Narrators were, (as shall
after more fully appear) to divulge stories by an holy fraud, either to stagger
weak minds, or to settle the over-credulous Bigots of their party in a
detestation of. Archbishop Whitgifts life, (whom the Romanists may believe if
they please, if they will not take his word let them choose, and show the
contrary,) has given us a pregnant testimony hereof; for he informs us, that
that Archbishop going to Dover, at his entrance into the Town, an
Intelligencer from Rome landed, who wondered to see an Archbishop in England,
and so honorably attended: but seeing him the Sunday following waited on with
a nobler Train, and hearing the solemn Service of the Church, he was overtaken
with admiration, and told an English Gentleman, Sir Edw. Hobby, who accompanied
him, that they were led in great blindness at Rome by our own Nation, who made
the people there believe that there was not in England either Archbishop or
Bishop, or Cathedral Church, or any Church Government, but, etc.

4. These his Narrators could never agree in the most material circumstances of
the story, they cannot speak either to the number of the Consecrators or
Consecrated, nor to the determinate place and time.

5. The Story was contradicted, as soon as it was divulged, as hereafter will be
more fully declared.

6. Dr. Stapleton's Objection did not run on the Nag's-Head Score, he never so
much as mentioned it, and therefore may reasonably be presumed, either not to
have heard any thing of it, or not to believe it; the former is more probable,
for it was not divulged in his time.

7. If the matter had been performed clandestinely, or intended so to have
been, Mr. Neal and the other Catholics could not have been admitted, neither
should its clandestine performance have rendered the Act invalid. When John the
twelfth ordained a Deacon in a Stable, I demand, whether in N. N's private
judgment the Ordination were invalid?

SECT. III,
N.N. THey being not able to make good the Ordination against Catholics, were
forced to beg an Act of Parliament, whereby they might enjoy their
Temporalities, notwithstanding the defect of their Ordination against the
Canons of the Church, and Law of the Land. For albeit King Edwards Rite of
Ordination was established by Act of Parliament, 1 Eliz. yet it was notorious
that the Ordination of the Nags-Head was very different from it, and framed ex
tempore by Scories Puritanical Spirit. The Words of the Act are, Such from and
order for Consecrating Archbishops, Bishops, etc. as was set forth in Edward
the sixth's time shall stand and be in full force and effect; and all Acts, or
Things heretofore done or made by any person or persons elected to the Office
and Dignity of Archbishop, etc. by virtue of the Queens Letters Patents, or by
Commission, sithence the beginning of her Reign, be, and shall be by Authority
of this Parliament declared and judged good and perfect in all respects and
purposes, etc. See Poulton in his Calendar p. 141. n. 5. by which Act it
appears, that not only King Edwards Rite, but any other used since the first of
the Queens Reign upon her Commission was enacted good, and so consequently the
Nags-Head might pass. Hence it was they were called Parliament Bishops.

SECT. III.
J. S. THE chief Argument which N.N. framed in this Section runs thus.

1. Their Ordinations were defective, as not ordered according to the Canons of
the Church and Laws of the Land, therefore they were invalid: which is a gross
Non sequitur; for the validity of an Ordination is distinct from the
Canonicalness and Legality thereof: But the Antecedent is false, for Archbishop
Parker's Consecration was according to the Canons of the Church-Catholick, but
not of the Roman; which obviates one of Dr. Stapleton's pretended illegalities,
and according to King Edwards Rite (as has been proved) which was then
established by Law, as N. N. here confesses, which is another Counterblast to
Dr. Stapleton, who thought otherwise, and was the ground of Bishop Bonners Plea.

2. The Preamble of the Act (which N. N. misrepresents) shows the purpose of
it; viz. The Parliament finding by the reproaches of some, and the suspicion of
others, that many were not satisfied with the form then used, (therefore that
form was then used, and upon that usage the Parliament concluded their
Ordination Legal) conceiving and objecting it was not sufficiently provided for
by the Statute of Repeal, 1 Eliz. (though N. N. and the Author of the Anchor
with his Superiors think it was) to remove these surmises and slanders, they
did declare for the then, and after Consecrations made according to the Queens
Letters Patents (as they all were) that they were, notwithstanding these
surmises and slanders, good in Law, and if any such were, these also which were
made by Commission (as none were) provided they were performed by King Edward's
Rite, as they were directed; and so consequently the Act confirms no
Consecrations, nor entitles to Temporalities where the Rite was not observed.

The subsequent clause of the Act, (which N. N. cunningly conceals) clears
this, which restrains all former and subsequent Consecrations to the form, and
Order prescribed in the Ritual of Edward the sixth, and so consequently, if
there had been any such Consecration as is suggested, even by this Act they
were not Bishops in Law, and were debarred of the Temporalities, because by no
Law they could claim them, and by this Law disenabled to enjoy them.

3. N. N. falls here very flat and dull; in his vapouring humor he was
Positive and Magisterial (thus it was performed) but here he is so modest, ( it
might be, or it might pass,) will serve his turn: and so absurdly argues, thus
it might pass, therefore thus it did pass, endeavoring to prove a certain thus
it was, by an uncertain, thus it might be.

4. He adds, Hence it was, etc. This Calumny has been often confuted before he
vented it: for our Bishops depend not on Authority of Parliament, for the
validity of their Ordination; and was long before sharply retorted by Bishop
Jewel in these words: You had then ( viz. in Queen Mary's Reign) a Parliament
Faith, a Parliament Mass, a Parliament Pope, etc. fol. 521.

SECT. IV.
N. N. THE Story of the Nags-Head was first contradicted by Mr. Mason in the
year 1613, yet so weakly and faintly that he feared to be caught in a lie by
some aged persons that might be then living, and remembered what past in Queen
Elizabeth her time.

SECT. IV.
J. S. THis that is related by N. N. here, is another Falsity. For the Story
was contradicted by the Act of Parliament, and Archbishop Parker's Life, and by
Bishop Goodwin, who wrote his Book 1600, as he averreth, p. 534, the rest is
idle talk; however he contradicted as it was openly divulged.

SECT. V.
N. N. IN Ann. 1603, none of the Protestants durst call it a Fable, or a Tale
of a Tub, as some now do.

SECT. V.
J.S. THis also is false; for he cannot but know (if he know any thing
concerning this report) who called it so, and since has proved it a Fable.
That which was used as a pretext to Huckster it, was this: At Archbishop
Parkers Confirmation (where he was not personally) a Dinner (as the Lord
Chancellor Egerton related to Bishop Williams) was provided at the Nags-Head
for the Civilians who attended that work) according to Custom: this place was
pitched on as most convenient for its nearness to Bow-Church, where he was
Confirmed; and a Dinner at a Tavern Dr. Reeves utterly resused, for that he had
heard the Dining at a Tavern gave all the color to that malicious lie of Dr.
Parkers being Consecrated at the Naggs-Head, and for ought he knew captious and
malicious people would be ready to say the like upon the same occasion.

SECT. VI.
N. N. BIshop Bancroft being demanded by William Alabaster, how Dr. Parker and
his Colleagues were Consecrated; he answered, he hoped in case of necessity a
Priest (alluding to Scory) might ordain Bishops. This Answer was objected in
Print against him, and all the Protestant Clergy by Hollinwood, Bancroft being
alive then, but not a word replied.

SECT. VI.
J. S. 1. WHether this Relation have any truth in it, may be justly doubted,
many of the Popish Priests of those times, and both before and after trading in
Lies, some to gain Proselites, others to keep up their Credit, and the People
in heart, others to defame their Adversaries. The Secular Priests of that time
complained of the spite of the Jesuits And that often, passim in Import.
Consid. and Joh. Gee. Foot out of the Snare.
against the State. The pretended Brethren of the Society (say they) do in
their Writings calumniate the Actions thereof, be they never so judiciously
proceeded in, never so apparently proved true, and known to be most certain to
raise and nourish and manner of Reports to discredit their Adversaries, etc.
And if they were so bold with the State, they would not stick at the defaming
of great Persons, and eminent Offices of the Church. The like might be said of
them, one of N. N's Narrators Dr. Watson may be an instance. The Papists in
their Pamphlets gave out that Dr. King Bishop of London, was a little before
his death Reconciled to the Church of Rome, because Mr. Musket a Secular had
averred in a Book, entitled The Bishop of London 's Legacy. This being proved
a malicious Lie by the Testimony of eyewitnesses who were present at his
departure; being thus caught in it, they resolved to forge another, if
possible, to make it good, adding sin to sin; which was, That Father Preston
was the man who did Reconcile him, whereupon he was summoned to appear before
diverse Honorable Commissioners appointed to take his Examination, December 20.
1621: but the honestly declared (protesting before God, and as he hoped to be
saved by Jesus Christ) that he never saw that Bishop to his knowledge, nor could
know him from another man if he did see him, and he knew nothing of any such
Reconciliation,

2. If such a demand was proposed, probably he slighted it, as being a demand
full of ignorance and impudence.

3. His Answer (if any such was) was good and argumentative ad hominem, not
alluding to Scory, whom he knew to be a lawfully Consecrated Bishop upon every
account, and in every respect, but to the practice of the Sea of Rome, which
allows a single Priest both to Ordain and Confirm by Papal Dispensation.

SECT. VII.
N. N. I Have spoken both with Catholics and Protestants that remember near 80
years, and acknowledge that so long they have heard the Nags-Head Story related
as an undoubted Truth.

SECT. VII.
J.S. DOughtily argued! from the authority of the Common People (who as they do
not at all understand the matter, so they as little concern themselves in such
affairs, and what they have take all on trust) to conclude an undoubted Truth.
But if this will pass, then the Papists were guilty of the Barbarous Murder of
our late Glorious and Pious King, (though I am persuaded many of them abhorred
the Fact, and the Plot leading thereto) because it has been reported, that
they did devise and forward the Fact, and when the villainous Act was done, much
rejoiced at it. This Argument at the best, is a Topic from vulgar Fame, which
as the Lawyers speak, is praesumptie levis and temeraria, and so no proof in
Law.

SECT. VII.
N. N. THE Queens Dispensation seems to acknowledge it, which Mr. Mason is
willing to shadow with a distinction; The Queen (says he) did but dispense
with the Trespass against her own Laws, not essential points of Ordination, but
only accidental; not in Substance, but in Circumstance. But if the Consecration
was at Lambeth, and according to the form of Edward the sixth, what need was
there of any Dispensation, especially given not in conditional, but in absolute
terms, since both Substance and Circumstance had been according to the
Protestant Law.

SECT. VII.
J, S. THis is N. N's best seeming Argument, but the best is, it seems but so:
For,

1. Dispensations are granted ex abundanti, and in majorem cautelam, even at
the Court of Rome, though the work it self be exactly performed, sometimes they
are used to obviate sleeping defects, often for better security, and to prevent
Mistakes and Cavils, as in this Queens time it happened in another case; for
she passed a Bill for the restitution of Archbishop Cranmer's Children, who
needed none in strictness, for their Father was not Condemned for Treason, as
some surmised, but (as Mr. Harding confesses, fol. 574.) for Heresy, which
taints not the Blood, nor makes any forfeiture of Estate: yet because the
Archbishop had formerly been accused for High Treason, the Act was useful to
make sure work.

2. He pretends the Dispensation respected Archbishop Parkers Consecration,
which is a mistake; for it concerned only his Confirmation, which was eight
days before, on December 19. 1559.

3. He suggests, It was given not in conditional, but, etc. This is False, for
the words are, Si quid, etc. If any thing; etc. which heretofore has always
been taken for a conditional term.

SECT. VIII
N. N. BIshop Bonner excepted against his Indictment, because the Oath of
Supremacy was said to be tendered to him by Robert Horn Bishop or Winchester,
who was by no Law Bishop, and thereupon had no Authority to tender him the
Oath, and upon his Plea was never more troubled any further. See his Case
Abridgment of Dier's Reports, 7 Eliz. p. 234.

SECT. VIII.
J.S. 1. IF Bishop Bonner or N. N. by no Law, mean the Law of Christ, neither
the Judges nor Jury could take Cognizance of it; if they conceive the Law of
the Realm, which his reference only respected, they might, if the matter had
been tried.

2. The ground of Bishop Bonners Plea was, that King Edward's form was not
sufficiently received (which by the way supposes Dr. Horn was Consecrated by
it) by the Statute 1 Eliz. which a Friend to the Cause the Author to the Anchor,
p. 4. and with him his Superiors who approved his Book, has acknowledged it
was; saying Queen Elizabeth renewed the Form of Common Prayer Book much like
that in King Edwards time, and so has N. N. his own dear self, more than once,
and more fully.

3. The Exceptions against this Indictment show only that Bishop Bonner was put
to a desperate shift; for three of his Exceptions to this Indictment were
excepted against, and overruled by all the Court: this indeed, which was last,
(which he kept for a reserve, though it failed him too,) was allowed with a
restriction, and upon conditional terms, (which proves nothing till the
supposition be validly asserted) viz. That if the truth of the matter were so
indeed (that he was not Consecrated by King Edwards Rite) he might Plead it,
and the Jury Try it; which Resolution was according to Law. But it never came
to any issue, for the Parliament cleared his Consecration, and so stopped
further Proceedings: this being made good, that he was legally Consecrated by
the highest public Judgment should stand good with N. N. and his Colleagues,
because he once but falsely pleaded an Inferior public Judgment for his own
purpose, and the credit of his Narrators.

4. He alleges a reason for the goodness of Bishop Bonner's Exceptions (for
if it signifies not this it is impertinently inserted) he was never troubled
any further. Most absurd! for it is usual with Higher-Powers not to trouble
those any further whom they have secured, unless N. N. be as bloody as Bishop
Bonner and his Comrades were, who thought it was nothing to imprison those who
refused Obedience to their Orders, unless they burned them with Fire and
Faggot. Protestants are not so merciless and cruel as Papists; and such was the
Clemency of the then Higher-Powers (which N. N. had he been ingenuous would
have commended) that they thought, that Bishop Bonner being deprived, and
imprisoned for his Obstinacy, greater severity was more than needful, and would
rather argue Revenge than Justice. But whatsoever N. N. thinks, some men in the
world think, that deprivation and continued imprisonment is trouble enough, and
would be thankful in such cases they were troubled no further.

SECT. IX.
N. N. BUT to salve this sore Mr. Mason that quick-sighted Gentleman has spied
out Authentic Records, which for fifty odd years lay in a Saint-Solitude,
invisible to Mr. Jewel, Mr. Horn, and others of those times, who were severely
taxed for the Nullity and Illegality of their Orders. For questionless if any
such had appeared in their days, they would not have lost so great advantage by
concealing them, when the producing of them would have much foiled their
Enemies, if not absolutely routed them. Mr. Fulk denies ordinary Calling to be
always necessary, which he would not have done if he had known the Records,
which if they had been authentical and extant, would have saved him from that
desperate shift.

SECT. IX.
J. S. 1. THE Records were not hung out of the Registers Office as Haberdashers
and Milleners do their Wares, and so did not appear: but when the Office was
open at usual times, or perhaps upon a sudden emergent at other times, any who
had a desire might with the usual Fee (and perhaps without) have seen them, and
so they did appear they were not concealed.

2. Many Records by this account lie in a Saint-solitude for more than fifty
years ten times told over, as hereafter shall appear from a pretended discovery
of Turrians, who brought to light that which lay in darkness for a good store
of hundred years.

3. Bishop Jewel, and other Protestants of those times, were not required to
produce the Records by Dr. Stapleton, Dr. Harding, Mr. Rascal, and other
Romanists of those times, who never urged any thing in defense of N. N's Story,
and to the prejudice of the Records.

4. They were virtually, and in effect, produced by the Parliament in their
reference to them, and were alleged and mentioned in Dr. Parker's Life, as N.
N. acknowledges in the next Paragraph.

5. The advantage got by producing them, could only have proved their Legality;
and the advantage lost by concealing, might have brought their Legality into
dispute, but could not destroy their Validity.

6. The producing them would not have foiled their enemies; for produce them,
(unless it be to an ingenious Adversary,) the Sticklers have a despe^^te shift,
they were forged; if this be cleared, they produce another desperate shift, now
most in request with them, supposing (say they) there be material^ Mission in
the Church of England, yet it is not to the true intent and purpose, or, as
some express it, their Ordination does not enable them to offer true
substantial Sacrifice, and so from one desperate shift unto another in
infinitum.

7. They did not produce them, therefore they were not extant, is another of N.
N's absurd inconsequences; for it is an Argument from Authority negatively,
which, though in some cases it may hold, yet here it cannot; for it is as if we
should thus argue, Neither N. N. nor any of his Camrades were so quick-sighted
as to spy such a Sentence in St. Aug. therefore there is not any such extant
in his Writings.

8. What he affirms of Dr. Fulk, we are not directed where to find it: probably
if he had been at leisure, he would have referred to his Answer to the Rhemish
Annotators, and if there it he, then it is to be found in Romans 10. Sect. 5. p.
471. where he has so strongly proved his Position out of Ruff. Theodor. etc.
that all his Nags-head Narrators durst never undertake a refutation; neither
was this any desperate shift in him upon that pretended reason which N. N. has
alleged, for this he had bassed in the foregoing Sentence, (which N. N.
unworthily, and purposely conceals,) saying; No man ought to intrude himself
into that (Priestly) Office without lawful Calling. How lewd and desperate then
was N. N. to tell the World he was put to desperate shifts, when he gives God
thanks he had no temptation, nor occasion to use any thing! If it be suggested
he bluntly declared any such expressions, he will be found still to be the same
man, and of the same Judgment.

SECT. IX.
N. N. DR. Bristow, Motive 21. what Church is that whose Ministers are very
Laymen, unsent, uncalled, etc. Mr. Rainolds, Calv. Tarc. l. 4. c. 15. There is
no Herdman in all Turkey which does not undertake the Government of his Herd
upon better Reason, Right, Order, and Authority, than those your magnificent
Apostles and Evangelists can show for this Divine Office of governing of Souls.
Dr. Stapleton's Counterblast against Horn, fol. 7, 8, 9. To say truly, you are
no Lord of Winchester, etc. Is it not notorious that you and your Colleagues
were not Ordained according to the Prescript, I will not say of the Church, but
even of the very Statutes, etc. fol. 301. You are without any Consecration at
all, your Metropolitan himself (poor man) being no Bishop at all. Dr. Harding
in his detection against Mr. Jewel, fol. 129. You tell not half my tale, etc. I
ask you of your Priesthood and Bishoply Vocation and Sending, etc. These being
my Questions, you answor neither by what example hands were laid on you, nor
who sent you, etc. Those who took upon them to give Orders in King Edward's
days were altogether out of order themselves, and ministered them not according
to the rite and manner of the Catholic Church, as who had forsaken the
succession of Bishops in all Christendom, etc. and had erected, etc. Mr. Jewel
answers this with profound silence, only he says without any proof, our
Bishops, etc. To this Dr. Harding replies, your Metropolitan who should give
authority to all your Consecrations, himself had no lawful Consecration; the
Ancient Bishops were either not required, or refused to Consecrate you, which
is an evident sign you sought not for such a Consecration as had ever been
used, but such an one whereof all the former Bishops were ashamed. To this
sharp Reply directly affirming the Nullity of Mr. Parker's Ordination, and by
consequence of all the English Clergy, Mr. Jewel answers not one word to the
main Point, nor mentions Mr. Mason's Records; what then can any man of an
indifferent Judgment think in this case, but the Records were not then extant,
or forged? How is it they should not be produced by Horn, Jewel, Parker, and
the rest, whom it specially concerns to make proof of their own calling?
being so often and so earnestly urged thereto by their Adversaries, triumphing
over them for want of due Authentic proof thereof; yet the Records were never
mentioned by any of them. If they were extant, and not produced against the
Catholics, it was, because in Queen Elizabeth's time many were living who
could have proved them to be forged; so that the Act of Parliament, and
Parker's Life, makes them more incredible than if no mention were made.

SECT. X.
J. S. TO this tedious nothing, (for N. N. has now almost emptied his Budget
of broken Wares,) which deserves no return in it self, that shall be replied
only, which will discover how willing some Romanists are to fight with their
own shadows; and, like drowning men, to catch at sticks and straws to buoy up
their sinking Cause.

1. Those Authors he here mentions never touched at the Nags-head, if they had
known or heard of any such thing, they would have divulged it with open mouth;
neither did they in all these Quotations ever so much as hint at, or reflect
upon the Records, only Dr. Stapleton presumes they were not Ordained according
to the Prescript of the Statutes themselves, because he conceived (as formerly
has been said) that the Statute was not revived in Law primo Eliz. if
otherwise, he thought the Parliament may be presumed to be more knowing than he
was in that Case; and we may further and justly presume, that those who left no
stone unturned for the advantage of the good old Cause, would not overleap such
Stumbling Blocks; for the two first of these Authors, they were so deep in
rage, that they quite stifled reason; but Dr. Bristow met with his match, one
that paid him home in his own Coin; for Mr. Rainolds, he acted the part of a
Renegado, who would be sure by the fortiter calumniari, his high calumnies, to
decline the shame of his Revolt. Dr. Stapleton, by Catholic Church, meant the
Roman Enclosure, and so he fairly begged the Question; and what he affirms, he
proves not; for Dr. Harding, he was taken with the same beloved fallacy, which
they always make use of when they are put to a pinch. Thus their Argument
proceeds, they were not Ordained by Romish Bishops, nor after the Rite then
used in the Romish Church, therefore they were not lawful Bishops, which is all
one with this: Dr. Stapleton and Dr. Harding did not Commence Doctors at Oxon.
or Cambridg, therefore they were not lawful Doctors. The Antecedent is granted;
and for this reason it was improper and impertinent to produce the Records,
for to what purpose is it to produce them in proof of that which is confessed?
no more than for to produce the Registeries of Oxon. for a Doctor's taking his
Degree at Lovain; but the Consequence is denied, being impossible to be proved;
for there have been, and there are now lawful Bishops in the Christian World,
who were neither Ordained by Roman Bishops, nor according to the Prescript of
the Roman Church, as confessedly the now Bishops of the Greek Church are,
whom they all acknowledge for lawful Bishops.

2. Whereas he says, Bishop Jewel answered not a word to the main Point, it
will be found he searched the Point to the quick, both in relation to his
Priesthood; being Ordained Priest the same time Mr. Harding was, def. fol.
125, and 129; and in relation to his Episcopacy, saying, Our Bishops succeed
the Bishops that have been ever before our days, being Elected, Confirmed, and
Consecrated, etc. as they have been. Further adding, that Mr. Harding himself
was one of his Electors, none of this Mr. Harding could deny: and therefore he
fell to the old Game of Tergiversation, turning his back from the main
Question, and starts a new one for a desperate shift, having nothing else to
say but this; they were not (forsooth) Confirmed by the Bishop of Rome, which
is an implicit confession that all those recited Acts were performed, only they
wanted the Pope's Confirmation: which yet the Bishop with great evidence of
Reason, and Primitive Authority, proved to be unnecessary, and is contrary to
all Antiquity, and the Practice of the Greek Church; and withal told Dr.
Harding in civil terms, he would never give over that idle trade of begging.
Thus this Bishop Jewel maintained both the Regularity and the Legality, both of
his Priesthood and Episcopacy, though not with express reference to the Records
themselves, yet implicitly to the Subject Matter thereof, particularly,
Election, Confirmation, and Consecration to his Episcopal Dignity and Office;
and also propugned the Validity of both Orders from Scriptures, and the
perpetual Tradition of the Catholic Church, pursuing Dr. Harding in all his
shifts from Post to Pen, till he drives him to his Non ultra.

3. All that N. N. durst conclude from Dr. Harding, is only, that by his sharp
Reply he directly affirmed the Nullity of Dr. Parker 's Consecration; but
Protestants are not so lame as to take every Affirmation of Mr. Hardings for a
proof, they expect he should make his bold Affirmation good, by good Authority
or Reason: neither, by N. N's good leave, did any thing that he affirms, affirm
a Nullity; what he alleged (if it were true and home) would only have rendered
those Ordinations Irregular, or Illegal, but not Null; his (no lawful
Consecration) respected only the manner of the Catholic Church, that is,
theirs in their usual restriction, and such as they had used.

4. Whether the Records were extant, N. N. cannot affirm; but in his
indifferent judgment, if they were, then they were forged, which, in the
judgment of all indifferent men, will certainly pass for a desperate shift.
Just such a work Dr. Harding made about the From his counterfeit Athanasius,
Bishop Jewel's Reply. fol. 157.
Nicene Canons, they were burnt, yet falsified; they were falsified, yet burnt,
etc. Such a Blunder also Baronius made concerning a pretended Edict of the
Emperor Justinian, it was an Edict, and it was not an Edict; it was Baron. an.
564. n. 3.
an Edict put out by the Emperor in favor of the Aphthardokites, (who denied
the Body of Christ to be subject to Passions, and Death,) for these two Reasons
the Id. an. 564. n. 1.
Orthodox contemned it, and the Emperor persecuted all those Id. ib. and n. 3.
and an. 563. n. 12. vid. n. 3.8, 9.
who did oppose it; and it was not an Edict, it was only a Cabinet-paper; for
this Reason the Emperor indeed writ it, but never Id. an. 565. n. 4. so Evagr.
l. 4. Hist. Eccl. c. 40.
published it: if so, then no Edict; the Popes, as bad as they are, make a
Publication of their Decrees. But this is all mere impostures, for his Edict
oppugned that Heresy of the Aphthardokites, Edict Justin. p. 492, and 495.
which Pope Agatho witnesses in his Epistle directed to the Emperor Constant.
Pogonat. as it is to be seen Act. 4. Conc. genesis 6th. p. 21. which Baron.
himself confesses, An. 681. n. 21, 24. and n. 25. to be approved of the whole
Roman Synod consisting of 125 Bishops.

5. But N. N's Catholics triumphed, etc. Did they so? that is an old trick of
their Men of War, to do as Agesilaus commanded his Soldiers, still to shout
Victoria, to brag when they are worsted, which they must do to keep up their
Credit with their deluded Partisans and Proselytes. But who triumphed when his
Grave and Learned Divines pitched a Field, time, place, and order of Battle,
(contrary to the rules of all Combatants,) yet, like the Children of Ephraim,
who being harnessed, and carrying Bows, (as if they would do strange seats of
Chivalry, who but they!) turned their backs in the day of Battle? For did not
your old Friends both challenge and order a Disputation 1 Eliz. upon the Points
in Controversy? and did not they, upon the approach of the Enemy, after a
Pickeer or two, face about, and dastardly forsake the field? How often have the
Protestants triumphed over you with the story of Madam Donna Seamore, Pope
Joan? Bishop Goodwin has produced thirty several well-known Authors to attest
the Story, and it is not much above an hundred years since her Picture was
standing in the Church of Sienna in Italy, where Papir. Massin. de Episc. Vrbis
l. 6. in Pio. 3.
the Pictures of the Popes were set up; which so moved Baronius his patience,
that he solicited the Pope and Duke of Florence to take it down, which
accordingly at his intercession they caused Florimund Fab. Joan. c. 22. n. 2.
to be done. Such an ancient Picture in confirmation of other reports, is as
good an evidence that there was such a Madam Pope, as Baronius his ancient
Coin, in contradiction to all former Histories, was to prove the determinate
time of Maxentius his birth, and had N. N. and his Narrators such a proof for
their dusty weather-beaten Nags-head, they would do wonders with it, and pursue
it hotly with Hue and Cry from Country to Country.

6. Though several Reasons have before been assigned, and more might, why our
Writers in those times, such as Bishop Jewel, etc. did not expressly appeal to
the Records: yet I take the Chief to be this; The then Romanists did pretend to
a mixed Succession, but chiefly insisted upon the Moral and Doctrinal; so Dr.
Stapleton, Graeca Ecclesia, etc. The Greek Churches, though they have lineal
Succession, yet because of the Heresies which they hold, and the Schism they
make, they have not lawful Staplet. Princ. doctr. l. 13. c. 6.
Succession; and again, Successio de qua agitur, etc. The Succession of which
we dispute, is not of places and persons, but of true Id. relect. c. 1. qu. 4.
art. 1. and 2. notab. 5.
and sound Doctrine. Thus also Mr. Harding, def. fol. 119. Did Capon, Shaxton,
or ever any Bishop of that See before you, teach your Doctrine? whom have you
succeeded, as well in Doctrine, as in outward sitting in that Chair? To which
Question, if Bishop Jewel had appealed to the Records he had trifled, because
they are only evidences of mere matter of Fact, not at all of Doctrines taught.

7. But N. N. is a man of confidence, he believes there were many living in
Queen Elizabeth's time could have proved them Forged: this is strange! forgery
is a work of darkness carried on by a few, (these are too many to be privy to
the Fact) and very closely, with all the securities of secrecy; and therefore a
man of indifferent judgment will hardly be persuaded that many can be accessory
and privy to a designed Forgery.

8. On a sudden this great Undertaker grows dull, for he supposes that to make
the Records more incredible, which to all others makes them most credible. To
N. N. they are more incredible upon testimony of public Authority, which is
indeed to destroy all human security, and contrary to the common notices of
mankind. But N. N. is resolved to speak the Truth at last.

SECT. XI.
N. N. THE truth is, most of the Clergy of England in those times were
Puritans, and inclined to Zwinglianism; they therefore contemned and rejected
Consecration as a Rag of Rome, and were contented with the extraordinary
calling of God, and his Spirit, as all other Churches do who pretend to
Reformation: neither is it credible there was any other Consecration of Parker
and his Camrades, but that which passed at the Nags-head.

SECT. XI.
J. S. THE truth is, there is no truth in any of these Affirmations; for,

1. The Clergy of England then had a Liturgy with Rites and Ceremonies,
(witness N. N. in what he said before,) which they orderly observed: they did
own and defend the three Orders Bishop Jewel, Apol. c. 3. divis. 1. and
defense, fol. 85.
of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, (witness the Ritual which N. N. also
acknowledges to be the allowed Form of the Church of England,) to have been
ever in Christ's Church since the time of the Apostles, which the Puritans do
not: if they did, the Romish Emissaries would lose some Proselytes, and
therefore N. N.'s suggestion that the Clergy then did condemn Consecration as a
rag of Rome, is a most malicious untruth.

2. The Clergy then neither followed Zwinglius, nor any other Person, nor any
Sect, or Sectaries of Men, farther than they followed the Scripture, and the
Practice of the Primitive Church; these they took for their rule.

3. If by Zwinglianism he intends (as it is usually called Zwinglianism) the
rejecting that monstrous Figment of Transubstantiation, they were therein
followers of the Apostles and Doctors of the Catholics; if he conceive
Zwinglius opposed Episcopacy, he is deceived, for he and the Helvetians did
honor it. What he adds of other Reformed Churches, is most false; for most of
them have and do own Bishops, either name, or thing, or both; as in the
Dominions of the King of Sweden, Denmark, and the most of them in High Germany,
even as many as subscribed to the Augustane Confession, those under the Duke of
Saxony, Luxenburg, the Marquess of Brandenburg, the Prince of Anhault, and many
others; and those of the Reformed Churches which have no Bishops, account it
their want, an infelicity. It is a bad Cause which must be underpropped with
impious Frauds, and is supported only with hideous and palpable Lies.

4. In the close of this Section N. N. brings by head and shoulders his
Nags-head again, to show he can write as well against common sense, as without
common honesty; for his suggestion neither is it credible, and is contrary to
the apprehensions of all Impartial Judges; for it is morally impossible the
Fable should be credible, because Dr. Parker's Consecration was performed, as
is before related in the presence of four of the most eminent Notaries Public
in the Kingdom, one whereof was principal Actuary at Cardinal Pool's
Consecration.

SECT. XII.
N. N. HEar the Judgment of Whitaker and Fulk, who lived in and about that time
the English Ordinations were first called in Question; I would not have you
think (says Whitaker) we make such reckoning of your Orders, as to hold our
own Vocation unlawful without them. Cont. Dur. p. 821. Mr. Fulks more plainly,
you are highly deceived, if you think we esteem your Offices of Bishops, etc.
better than Laymen. Ans. to Counterf. Cath. p. 50. and in his Retentive, p. 67.
with all our hearts we difie, abhor, detest, and spit at your stinking; greasy
Antichristian Orders. Is it credible these prime Protestants would answer thus,
if they had not known that the Story of the Nags-head was true?

SECT. XII.
J. S. HItherto N. N. has been a fabulous Romancer and Legendary, he now falls
under the suspicion of a Plagiary; for in all probability he has by a trick of
Legerdemain filched these Quotations from some Puritan Pamphleteers, many of
which have made use of them upon another design. But,

1. In the different Judgment of N. N. the Question was started in Archbishop
Parker 's time, though not pursued indeed, nor moved for many years after, at
which time Dr. Whitaker and Dr. Fulk were either but Schoolboys or Freshmen;
but when they were Writers, the Romanists thought fit to let it lie in a
Saint-solitude, and smother it with profound silence, hoping to get a better
opportunity to market the Fable.

2. Supposing the English Ordination was first questioned in their times, by
what Magic will N. N. infer his conclusion, or prove his Fable credible? His
Argument ^^us from the Staff to the Corner, for thus he demonstrates; Dr.
Whitaker and Dr. Fulke defied and slighted; yea, scorned the Popish
Ordinations, therefore they believe the jolly merry Fable; Dr. Whitaker says,
We hold our Vocation lawful without their Form and Orders: N. N's wild
inference from hence is, Therefore he knew the Story to be true, which if it
had been so, would have rendered it unlawful. Dr. Fulk, The Romish Orders are
stinking, greasy, Antichristian, etc. therefore he full well knew the Story to
be true, and the English Ordinations naught; whereas their words were direct
proper Answers to the Romish Objections against them, viz. They were not
Ordained by Romish Bishops after the Romish Rite; and import no more but this,
Bishops and Priests are lawfully Ordained, who were not Ordained after the
Roman Rite, and by Romish Bishops, which is an undeniable truth, assented to by
the Romanists themselves.

3 To confirm this N. N. is admonished to hear this Judgment concerning
Episcopacy and Ordination: Bellarmine Objects against Protestants, that they
had taken away Bishops; Dr. Whitaker Contr. 2 de Eccles. q. 5. c. 3. makes so
bold with Bellarmine, as to give him the Lie, saying, We do not condemn the
Order of Bishops, as he falfely slanders us, but only those false Bishops of
the Church of Rome; near the same place, condemning the ancient Constitution,
that three Bishops be present at the Ordination of a Bishop, for a Godly
Sanction. Dr. Fulk in Tit. 1. fol. 781. speaks as fully, Among the Clergy for.
Order and seemly Government, there was always one Principal to whom the name of
Bishop was, etc. which in his defense against Gregor. Martin c. 6. Sect. 20. p.
182. he thus expresses; That the Title of the Bishop was a very old time used
to signify a degree Ecclesiastical, higher than Presbyter or Priest, or Elder,
we did never deny, we know it right well: and then will any man of an
indifferent judgment ever believe N. N. to be a lover or reporter of Truth,
when he has broached so prodigious a Lie, that most of the Clergy of England
in those times were Puritans? these two Prime Protestants were not, who thus
apologized for themselves and their Brethren the Clergy. But because N. N. will
have them Puritans, let him know that English Protestants are as far from being
Puritans (as he himself aterwards confesses) as his Catholics are; and the
rather because they beg their Principles of Rebellion and Sedition against the
King, and their Schism against Bishops from the rest of the Papists, the
Jesuits, and whatsoever else they hold contrary to sound Doctrine, either from
Regulars of another Order, or from some of their Schoolmen. But because perhaps
he will except against these two Prime Protestants, for his further
satisfaction, let him

4. Hear the judgment of the two Prime Pontificians: Cudsenius De desperata
Calvini causa. c. 11.
the Jesuit ingeniously confesses, The English Nation are not Heretics,
because they remain in a perpetual succession of Bishops, which Confession
totally destroys all N. N's Fabric; Monsieur To the King of Great Britain, p.
6. Charles the second.
Militiere is not much short of him, saying, The English Nation retaining the
ancient Order of Episcopacy (which is utterly inconsistent with the contempt
and rejection of Consecration as a Rag of Rome, and there being contented with
the extraordinary Calling of God and the Spirit) as instituted by Divine
Authority, have thereby preserved the Face and Image of the Church Catholic.

SECT. XIII.
N. N. AS to the Opinion of forgeing so many Records in several Courts, it is
easily answered, that is no more than that the Consecrators, and others
concerned, should have conspired to have given in a false Certificate, that the
Consecration was performed with due Ceremonies, and Rites, and thereby deceive
the Courts, or make them dissemble: and this is a thing more possible and
probable ( Protestants being so dexterous in falsifying of Scriptures, as
appears by Gregory Martin's Discovery of Corruptions) than that all the
Protestant Clergy should have conspired not to produce the Registers when they
were so hardly pressed by their Adversaries, or that so many Catholics should
be so foolish to invent, and maintain the Story, when if it had been false;
they might have been convinced by Thousands of Witnesses, or that so many grave
and learned Divines who for Conscience sake lost all, should without fear of
Damnation engage themselves and Posterities in damnable Sacriledg, by
occasioning so many sacrilegious Ordinations upon their charging Protestants
with no Ordination. No moderate or prudent man can suspect such Persons should
damn their Souls out of mere spite to the Church of England. If we Catholics
should reordain Protestant Ministers, which after their Conversion have been
made Priests, upon the title of Heresy, and not of their known Invalidity, we
should also reordain the Grecian Priests, which is against our known Practice
and Tenants: insomuch as we hold our selves obliged to examine with all
diligence, whether there be any probability, of the Persons receiving valid
Orders; and finding but my probable appearance thereof, the Practice is, and
has been for diverse Ages, to give Orders, not absolutely but conditionally;
whereas it is notorious, that all such Ministers receive their Orders in
absolute terms, without any condition adjoined, in the same manner we use in
the Ordination of Laymen.

SECT. XIII.
J. S. part 1. THis is N. N's last and worst Medium for his Fable, such as if
it held would destroy all human Faith, and the best assurance that can be had
for the confirmation of the Truth in matters of Fact. But,

1. This has been an Old desperate shift of disingenuous Papists; who have
forfeited all Christian Meekness and Modesty, when they are hardly pressed by
their Adversaries with a pinching Authority, to cry Forgery. Protestants assert
Pope Honorius the first was an Heretic, because they find him condemned of
Heresy by the sixth General Council under the Emperor Constantius Pogonatus,
to which Authority many learned Romanists have given credit. But the more rigid
sort have taken N. N's easy Answer for a subterfuge, Forgery was used; for this
Condemnation was maliciously inserted into the Acts of the Council by the order
of the Emperor, who having the Original in his hand by a Conspiracy with the
Actuaries consented to their satisfaction. Pighius is Hier. l. 4. c. 8. Sed
quoniam.
resolute it must be so, (for the Pope in despite of all evidences to the
contrary must be Infallible) for he would have it so. A certain learned man
wished Pighius diatrib. in Epist. ad lectorem.
Pighius to recant, and draw in his easy Answer; but he falls Id. ib. de act.
sextae Synodi.
. a-fresh on the matter, and scorning to retract what he formerly had said,
still puts in the same easy Answer: whereupon Bannes 22. qu. 1. art. 10. Dub. 2.
Bannes being troubled at the obstinacy of the man, jeers him for his ready
Invention, that after Nine hundred years, Pighius being but a man of yesterday,
could find all those Witnesses, which were produced against him to have been
Conspirators in a Forgery; and Loc. l. 6. c. 8. ad 11.
Canus puts this Question to him, How can Pighius clear him whom Usellus,
Epiphanius, and Pope Adrian, etc. affirm to have been an Heretic? At this
Baronius An. 681. n. 31. and n. 5.
is not a little moved, and like a sworn servant of the Papacy, grows Angry and
Witty, scoffs Canus, and playing upon his name wishes him more Gravity and
Judgment than to have been so rash as to pass a Sentence in so great matters.
Father Cambesis a modest and learned Dominican is as much troubled at the
Cardinal's mirth and wrath, seriously and soberly telling him, That course
which he took was of pernicious consequence, since there is not an Act of any
General Council which one may not with as much likelihood affirm to be Forged;
but for this his honest freedom of speech Theophilus Raynaud a Jesuit attacks
him, and not only bitterly inveighs against him, but writes a most bitter Satyr
against the whole New Heresy of the Jesuits, p. 90. and inde.
Dominican Order.

Part 2. Though N. N. be persuaded he has an easy Answer in readiness, yet it
is a part of zealous madness to produce such an easy Answer as is destructive
to human society; it is an easy Answer to say all men are Fools or Knaves,
which is the effect of his easy Answer, yet none will say so but mad men. But
N. N. is resolved to be mad with Reason, for he immediately subjoynes his
Reason in these words; It is no more, etc. That may be so in some new Atlantis
or Vtopia; but it is a great deal too much to impeach or suspect so many known
persons with so deep guilt, and to charge all the Courts at once, either with
Folly or Hypocrisy; it is just so much as to null the Authority of all Courts
and Records whatsoever. Let N. N. produce any evidence out of the Vatican, with
this easy Answer it will be evaded and baffled; for if it be produced, any that
is disposed to dispute it can soon say, it is Forged: and if he be demanded a
Reason why he said so, he will Reply with N. N's easy Answer, There has been a
Conspiracy, and this is no more, but that the Pope and all others concerned
have combined to give in a false Certificate, and the several Courts have been
so lame as willingly to enter into the Combination, or be gulled by it; and not
one among them can be found to have either so much common sense as to discover,
or so much respect and kindness to common honesty as to detect and divulge the
Cheat. Indeed this is as easy a way to invalidate Records as it is to confute
Bellarmine, with Bellarmine thou lie; but for this his easy Answer he has
Forged as easy Proofs.

1. Protestants (says he) are dexterous, etc. Who would have thought it! take
the charge home to your Romish Agents and Factors, who have often been detected
to be the most infamous falsifiers both of the Sacred Volumes, and
Ecclesiastical Writers, when they conceived any of these not to be favorable
to their pretensions and persuasions. Their own Camolensis or Carnolensis (call
him as you please) and Agrippa have informed us, that many of N. N's fellows
have been so bold with the Scriptures by adulterating and misinterpreting them,
for confirmation whereof only two instances shall be produced: Bellarmine and
Perer (adhering to the vulgar Latin, which they take themselves obliged to do
in their great kindness to the Trent-Assemblers, which defined it authentic)
read Genesis 3.15. in the Feminine Gender (thereby to countenance their Adoration
of the Blessed Virgin Mary) contrary to all old Translations, and all ancient
Interpreters, who have made it either in the Masculine or Neuter, as many
Pontificians do. The same Bellarmine (to prove the Pope Infallible) has often
corrupted that Text Deuteronomy. 17.12. reading ex Decreto Judicis, by the Sentence of
the Judge, instead of and, and of the Sentence, more of which may be found in
Dr. James his Tract of Corruptions, Part 4. p. 45. in Bishop Jewel's Reply to
Dr. Cole, p. 24. and Sermon at Paul's Cross, p. 54. and so these men which have
been so bold, are by their own Law condemned for falsaries; for by it, he is a
falsary that in writing adds, or detracteth, or alters any thing
fraudulently. What their own Canus, Espencaeus, and Ludovicus Vives thought of
their famous Fabulous Legends, needs not be exemplified: this may not be
omitted, the same Vives Lib. 1, de causis Cor. Art. p. 343. and Erasmus Censur.
in lib. Aug. have observed, that within this Four or Five hundred years last
past, it had been almost an ordinary Practice, either to adulterate true Books,
or to forge false; and since that a Secular Priest in his Notes upon the
Jesuitts Apology, in defense of the Ecclesiastical Page 123.
Subordination in England, has found the Gloss corrupted by them; adding, This
is no news for the Jesuits to alledg Authors corruptly, nipping and cutting off
that which confuteth the thing, for which they alledg them, which (he says) he
has noted out of his own experience. The Forgery of the Nicene Canons is
confessed by Bishop Tunstal and Dr. Redmaine, two zealous Pontificians, and it
is well known who were the Conspirators in it. Constantine's pretended Charter
has been proved another Romish Forgery, by Cardinal Cusan, Valla, Erasmus,
Marsil. Petavin. Paul. Cathol. Dantes, (who, poor man, for speaking what he had
asserted was after his death condemned to Hell by the Barthol. in extravag. ad
Rep. Romans Lancelot. de Imp. Sect. 2. Vol. 1. Qu. 2. n. 12.
Advocates of the Roman Court) Hittan. Wolph. Anton. de Rossel. Freker. Aciat.
Crantz. Heming. Arnis. (as John Gryphiander relates, tract. de Insulis c. 24.
n. 43, 44. p. 362.) insomuch as one Referente Felin. in c. fol. extra. de
major. and obedien. Eber. Top. in loc. 11. n. 15.
Pius Auditor of the Rota, was wont to say, He marvelled at those pitiful
Lawyers who would take upon them to dispute of the validity of that which was
never extant; and Aeneas Lib. dial. contr. donat. Constant.
Sylvius, who knew enough of the intrigues of the Court of Rome, spoke home,
Caute id provisum a Pontificibus, etc. The Popes craftily contrived for the
defense of this Forgery, that still a sharp dispute should be kept on foot
against the Lawyers to this end, that such his Donation might always be
supposed, and taken for granted, as if it had been in being. I shall add one
further Testimony from a leading Romanist for my Countrymen's sake, who honor
his memory in many respects, Mr. Roger Widdrington, reputed by Strangers as a
Secular, or Regular, but was only an active Lay-Gentleman: the Book entitled
Apologia pro jure Principum passes under his name, though when it was first
published, it was known to be the work of a far more learned, and sober man,
Father Preston; but whether Mr. Widdrington or Father Preston were the Author,
thus he, or he, or rather both, p. 343. Non solent Pontifices, etc. The Popes
are not wont to permit the Acts or Opinions of their Predecessors which are
favouarble to the Papal Authority, to be further oppugned or questioned, and
therefore both the Pope and the Ordinaries, and Inquisitors of Heresy, are very
careful, lest any Book which seems to derogate therefrom be published; and if
any do happen to pass the Press, they take a strict Order it be utterly
suppressed, or to be read of none without special License in writing, till it
be purged, etc. p. 344. It is a very hard matter, in these times especially,
either to find in the Books of Catholics any Clause, which may give the least
occasion of calling the Popes Right in Temporals in question; or certainly to
know what the Author of those Books thought of the Popes Power; but they are
oftentimes against the Hair compelled to deliver, not their own Opinions, but
such as the Inquisitors of the Books do father upon them. Neither Turks nor
Jews have gone so far in their presumptions, as to take authority over dead
men's writings to alter and change them at their pleasures. The same Author, or
Authors p. 35. of that Book has discovered a shameful Corruption in a Prayer
of the Breviary; For not long since (these are the words in that Page) they
have blotted out the word Animas, Souls, in that Prayer of their Reformed
Breviaries, by command of Clement the eighth. Thus also they corrupted Agapetus
his words in Bibl. SS. Pairum, Tom. 1. p. 108. Par. 1571, wickedly Index Romans
p. 200.
razing, and perversely glossing that Sentence, viz. Upon earth the King (the
Emperor Justinian to whom he writ Epistles, as Baron. testifies, Tom. 7. in
Append. p. 665.) has no man above him, contrary to his express words and
meaning: for thus he writes to him, c. 1. Whereas in honor thou, O Emperor,
hasta dignity far above all other men, honor him above all who gave thee this
honor, to wit God. etc. p. 27. impose upon thy self a necessity of observing
Laws, in as much as thou have no living Creature in the World to compel thee
thereunto. And so those words of Ludovic. Vives, Ep. ad Regem Angl. (Henr. 8.)
praefixa Com. Aug. de Civitate Dei, cujus potestas, etc. Whose Authority and
Majesty is greatest upon earth, secundum Deum, next after God, are commanded to
be expunged. But perhaps the case may be Iliacos intra muros, etc. Protestants
are as criminal this way as Papists, and a charge strongly proved against
these, will not clear them. N.N. has an easy Proof for this; For,

2. As it appears from Gregor. Martin, etc. But it appears N.N. either knows
nothing of Greg. Martin's Discoveries, or craftily concealed them; for Dr. Fulk
has discovered his Discoveries to be mean loose Cavils, in a full Answer
thereto, which hitherto has not been replied to another Discovery he made
which his own Fellows taxed him for, and with a lying Discovery and Relation
Bugbeared him for attempting new Discoveries, so unlucky was Gregor. Martin in
all his Discoveries.

Part 3. He adds a third Proof taken from the Topics of the Wisdom, Gravity,
and Learning, Piety, and Humanity of his Catholic Divines.

1. As to their Wisdom, it is confessed they were so wise as not to be taken
with a Lie, which they might be convinced of by Thousands of Witnesses. The
Children of this World are Wise in their Generation, therefore they took a
crafty Course not to excuse the Fable till about forty years after the supposed
Fact was perpetrated. Neither were there many of his Catholics who maintained
it, those who did, took it at the first rebound from a malicious Enemy, and
Parasitical Pickthank, Bishop Bonner's Setter. But supposing these Witnesses
had been called into a Court, and deposed, all that they could say to the
Article, or Quaere, was, they believed it, and believed it, because they had
heard it; if they had deposed it any further they had been right Affidavit-men;
but this Deposition being cast out, if N.N. had been a fee'd Proctor in the
cause, he then would have set up his possibles, probables, and credibles; if
these moved not the Witnesses, (as Ten thousand to One they would not) then he
would cast his easy Answers, there was a Conspiracy among the Thousands of
Witnesses, to give in false Evidence and deceive the Court.

2. For their Gravity and Learning, that signifies little, there are Grave and
Learned men almost of all Persuasions; yet it is notoriously known, that such
have been sometimes overcome with Lies, Visions, Revelations, Miracles and
Fables: there are such things in the world as over-credulity and Euthusiasm,
which have prevailed with men of known good parts and abilities.

3. As to their Piety, and good Conscience, that it was so tender in N. N's
opinion, that they would not engage, etc. Protestants cannot assent to it;
because they know that his Catholics did engage themselves and their
Posterities to take the Oath of Supremacy, which when they refused, not out of
Conscience, but Compact and Design, because by a Law whereto they were parties
and chief instruments it stood established; so with great reason and learning
they Preached and pressed the taking thereof upon the Conscience as a Duty.
They who can thus play at Fast and Loose with Oaths, without any violation of
any of the rules of Charity, may be judged to be either unconscionable
Jugglers, or wavering Weather-cocks. But those of them who in Queen Elizabeth's
time contrived her Murder, and to carry on the Plot with more security and
advantage, published a Book, wherein it was declared, that it was not lawful to
kill the Queen, that so neither She, nor any of her Council might fear any harm
from such Religious Cheats, and counterfeit Champions of Loyalty, cannot
possibly be excused. This was proved, and openly confessed at the Arraignment
of Babington and Ballard, when also the Letters of Cardinal Como written to
Parry were produced, which did testify that the Pope approved Fulk Rhem. Test.
marginal note on Jude, fol. 847.
the Artifice. Great Villainies are commonly attempted with great Hypocrisy, and
if Hypocrites may pass for tender-Conscienced men, or good Roman Catholics,
there are great store of these in the world.

4. However N. N. will have them well-natured persons, They will do nothing in
spite against Protestants. He must pardon the Protestants if they do not
believe; for they know they have been very spiteful one against another.
Stephen the sixth Plat. in vit. Steph. 6. Sabellic. Aenead. 9. lib. 1. and.
those ordained by him to be re-ordained, Baron. An. 897. n. 2. and Sergius 3.
who ruled the Papacy six years after him did the like, Baron 908. n. 2. which
is acknowledged T. R. P. in his Answer to some Letters writ by a Protestant, p.
786. and Bellar. de Pont. lib. 4. c. 12.
against Formosus, with Barbarous Inhumanity cutting off his three Fingers,
with which he was used to give Benedictions and Orders, and then causing his
Body to be cast into Tyber with rage.

It could be nothing less than Spite in your Popes to thunder out their
Interdicts, and publish their seditious and malicious Bulls, against this
Church and State. It might be error or mistake in your Grave Learned Divines to
pronounce Protestants Heretics and Schismatics; but it was the extremity of
Spite, to condemn them to Fire and Faggot without benefit of the Clergy, and
doom them to Eternal Flames without the privilege of Purgatory. Indeed the main
spite of the whole Sect is against the Church of England; down with it, cry
they, and the Puritan-rabble will soon be crushed and quelled, and the little
undersets which spring from them, either dwindle away into nothing, or drop
into their hands.

5. He assures us upon his word, (which is not worth a rush) they hold
themselves obliged to hold to their known Tenants and Practices; [this is
tattle and empty talk. According to their Tenent the Character is indelible,
yet Pope Stephen nulled the Orders of Formosus, and caused all those Ordained
by him to be Re-ordained. He tells us, it is their Tenent and Practice to
Ordain Lapsed Ministers in absolute terms as Laymen are, upon the sole account
of the invalidity of their former Ordinations; but Pope Paul and Cardinal Pool
either thought, or practiced otherwise, when they confirmed and settled the
Ordinations made in Edward the sixth's time. He says it is their Tenent, to
allow those to officiate who have not valid Orders, is to commit damnable
Sacriledg: but the Pope and the Cardinal did allow those who were Ordained (as
they speak qui ampullas jactant) in the time of Schism, to officiate; and
therefore either did think their Orders valid, or committed damnable Sacriledg:
N. N. dare not affirm the latter; if he take to the former, then all his
confused heap of Possibles, Probables, and Credibles, are at once blown up with
a Puff of the Popes breath, and are driven away like Down. It has been the
Practice of their Grave and Learned Divines, when any Protestants revolted, to
exercise them, as if they had been possessed, for thus was the Form, The
Revolter was brought to a Bishop, and falling down on his Knees before him, the
Bishop said, I adjure thee, thou unclean Spirit, by the name of God to depart
out of the Man. If thus they practiced now, they would mar their market, and a
half-gained Proselite, before he was thus charmed, would either start aside, or
wheel about.

Whatsoever their Tenants or Practices be, or have been, (which yet are not
heeded by Protestants) there is an old Sitter at Rome, who can change them at
his pleasure; which when he is disposed to do, all that N. N. or his Fellows
dare do, is to Bless themselves, holding up their hands, and some crying
Benedicite, others after the old Mumpsimus mode bennistee, or which is all
one, make use of a grave Nod, or discontented Shrug, and so sit down in
silence: This is no more than for the Pope to give out Orders to the contrary,
or impose Silence by a Decree of Taciturnity; then let the Tenent and Practice
be what it will, all is quashed, they are the Popes Vassals, and must most
tamely obey his Orders.

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I.
N. N. goes on, BUT suppose their first Bishops were ordained by Catholics,
another Nullity is found in the Form of the Consecration; To wave the Matter of
Ordination, let us examine the Form prescribed in the Protestants Ritual. It is
a known Principle common both to Protestants and Catholics, that in the Form
of Ordination there must be some words expressing the Authority and Power given
to the Ordained. The intention of the Ordainer expressed by general words
indifferent, and applicable to all, or diverse degrees of Holy Orders, is not
sufficient to make one a Priest or a Bishop. As for example, Receive ye the
Holy Ghost. These words being indifferent to Priesthood and Episcopacy, and
used in both Ordinations, are not sufficiently expressive of either in
particular, unless Protestants will now at length profess themselves
Presbyterians, making no distinction betwixt Priests and Bishops, but they are
as far from that as we Catholics. In the Form whereby Protestants Ordain,
there is not one word expressing Episcopal Power and Authority. The Form is,
Take the Holy Ghost, etc. Let Protestants search all the Catholic Rituals, not
only of the West, but of the East. they will not find any Form of Consecrating
Bishops that has not the word Bishop in it, or some other expressing the
particular Power and Authority of a Bishop, distinct from all other Degrees of
Holy Orders. See Joh. Morin de Sacr. Ord. Par. 1655.

SECT. I.
J. S. 1. IT seems N. N's former tedious Harangue at length comes to this,
Archbishop Parker, etc. were not Ordained by his Catholics, which is one
Nullity. But this is contrary to the Tenants of his Church; witness Bellarmine,
who Lib. 1. de Sacr. in Genesis c. 21. determines, that Sacraments administered by
Heretics are valid; and to its Practice, allowing the Ordinations of the
Arrians and Bonasiosi, and these of Acacius, see in Morin. de Sacr. Ord. and of
the Greeks, witness N. N. ut supra.

2. The other Nullity lies in the Form, he being contented to wave the Matter,
but why so? this has always been accounted an essential part of Ordination.
Bellarm. lib. 1. de Sacr. Ord. c. 9. Sect. ex his, truly relates, Concilium,
etc. The Council of Carthage makes mention only of Imposition of hands. His
quarrel then being with the Form, it is to be considered, after some use made
of his Concession in this Paragraph, which will by good consequence destroy his
whole former discourse: for he confesses,

1. That Protestants have a Form or Ritual; then undoubtedly they would use it,
and not Bishop Scories extempore Spirit.

2. They are as far from being Presbyterians as his Catholics; then they were
not Puritans, unless his Catholics be so too; then they rejected not
Consecration as a Rag of Rome, nor were they contented with Extraordinary
Calling; then they are as much for Bishops, and regularly Consecrated Bishops,
as his Catholics.

3. This Form is prescribed, and thereby they Ordained; therefore they did
Ordain by their Prescript Form, and not as N. N. surmiseth and suggesteth.

4. The Form has these words, Receive ye the Holy Ghost; therefore N. N's
feigned Form was not used at Archbishop Parker's Consecration.

5. The Form requires the Consecration of a Bishop to be public in the Church;
therefore his suggestion of a Clandestine Consecration is a Calumny.

6. The Form has the word Bishop in it; therefore it has sufficient to
express the particular Power and Authority of a Bishop.

7. The Form requires three Bishops to the Consecration of a Bishop; therefore
they did not think the help of one was sufficient: yet this is the Form N. N.
is pleased to quarrel with. For,

3. He pretends there is a known Principle common, etc. But this he
misrepresents, this Form must be used, and no other. Bell. inclines to the
Affirmative, Lib. 1. de Sacr. in genesis c. 1. Sect. 2. and 20. even the words are
determinated (says he) by God: yet withal he tells us, if they be corrupted,
(as suppose the Priest after the old Mumpsimus rate should say, In nomino
Patria, Filia and Spirito Sanctu,) or interrupted, (as if the Priest at the
Consecration of the Eucharist should first numble (hoc est Cor) and after a
little pause cough out (pus meum,) the Form would be good; but Alex. Hales, p.
4. q. 5. mem. 2. art. 1. states it otherwise; The Forms (says he) of Rome
Sacraments are determinate, the Forms of other Sacraments are not; The Forms of
Baptism and the Eucharist being appointed by Christ, are kept inviolably
without all change, but touching the words of Form to be used in any other of
the supposed Sacraments, there is no certainty, but they are diversely and
doubtfully declared; the reason whereof is, because they were of human
devising. It is declared otherwise by Pope Innocent the Father of the
Canonists, saying, The words of Form were instituted by the Church, Hist.
Counc. Trent, fol. 594. But Protestants stand not upon words, using only the
Form which Christ instituted, and is retained in Both in Episcopal and Priestly
Ordination, Filicius tract. 9. c. 2. ex Pontifical Romans and in the Roman
Catechism de Sacr. Ord. Bell. de Sacr. in genesis c. 21. and l. 1. de Sacr. Ordin.
c. 9.
the Western Church in terms, and in the Eastern to the sense. For the Grace or
Gift of God creating and promoting, which is the Eastern Form, is the same in
substance with receiving the Holy Ghost, for the Gift and Grace of God, Ephesians.
3.2, 8. 1 Cor. 15.9, 10. 1 Timothy 4. Heb. 12. Tim. 1.6. is exactly the same with
power from on high, assured Lu. 24.49. and the promise of the Father, etc. Act.
1.4, 5. which is the receiving this power, and v. 8. These Protestants use, and
trouble not themselves with nice Disquisitions and Disputes.

4. He affirms the intention of the Ordainer, etc. But it is very reasonable to
presume the General words are sufficient upon N. N's grounds, because they are
used and applicable to all degrees of Holy Orders; For if Episcopacy, and
Priesthood, be only diverse degrees of the same Order, as he intimates, and is
declared in the Roman Ib. n. 24. p. 266. and Bell. de Sacr. Ord. c. 5. Sec.
sequitur secunda, only by the extension of the Character, id. ib. Sect. tertia:
and Sect. seq. with this only difference, that the same efficacy is required to
the extension of the character, as to the first impression, id. ib. Sect.
respond.
Catechism, then the same Form will serve for both those disparate degrees of
the same Order; and the rather, because in their opinion the higher Power,
compared to Bishops, is only by extension of the Character; and Protestants
stick to this, because it was only used in the Ancient Roman Church, as it was
only prescribed in the Old Pontifical, and as the Church then answered the
Sophisters of these times, when this very Objection was writ against the
Pontifical, so do Protestants now the present Roman Cavillers, who have taken
it from them, for thus the Church of Rome defends her self.

1. The design was fully notified by words in the Pontificial, to which of the
respective Orders the Person presented was to be admitted.

2. The manner of Imposition of hands did sufficiently discover the intention
of the Ordainer, and diversity the Act; for in the Consecration of a Bishop
diverse Bishops impose hands, but in the Ordination of a Priest, one only
Bishop, with some assisting Priests. This is the Judgment of both the Ancient
Western and Eastern Church, that, that Form, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, which
is the Form prescribed both for Priesthood and Episcopacy in the Protestant
Ordinal, is sufficient to confer Power and Authority to both Orders; so that it
being duly applied, he that is presented to the Capacity of a Bishop, is
thereby enabled to do the Office and Work of a Bishop in the Church of God, and
he who is presented for Priesthood, is thereby warranted and empowred for the
Office and work of a Priest.

5. He surmiseth these words, (Receive ye the Holy Ghost,) are not, etc. this
is to oppose Christ's Institution, and in effect, to make his Form of
Commissionating his Apostles defective, and insufficient. For if that Form was
sufficiently expressive of Apostolical Power and Authority, then is it of
Episcopal, and it is most properly applied to them, because if not only, yet
principally they are the Apostle's Successors, even in the Judgment of many
Learned Romanists; and therefore this Form sealed by imposition of hands,
Constitutes a Person presented to Episcopacy a full Bishop by the Law of
Christ, without the supplement of any other auxiliary Form.

Father Davenport Expos. Paraphr. artic. confess. Angl. p. 322. ad 325.
alias St. Clara. has evidenced from great Authority, their new Additionals to
be unnecessary; Expos. Paraphr. Art. Confess Angl. p. 322. Alii putant, etc.
Others think (says he) Imposition of hands as the Matter, and those words
(Receive ye the Holy Ghost) as the Form, is as much as is required by Divine
Law to the Essence of Episcopal Ordination: and this they think from the
Authority of the Scriptures, which often and only makes mention of these two,
as Bell. l. 1. de Sacr. Ord. c. 9. says, we cannot convince Heretics that
Order is a Sacrament, because we cannot prove the external Symbol thereof from
Scripture, which is not possible for him to do of their new additional either
Matter or Form.
Arrudius largely proves.

6. He assumes, In the Form whereby Protestants Ordain, etc. But this his
Assumption is,

1. Frivolous; It is absurd to object that against Protestants, which, if it
were granted, would render all the Ordinations in the Romish Church for 800
years mere Nullities.

2. Fallacious; he equivocates in the word (Form,) which is either taken
largely, for the whole Office of Administration exemplified in the Ordinal, or
strictly, for an Essential part of his Discourse; and in the Conclusion he
uses the word [Form] in the most comprehensive sense, for the whole Rite of
the Ministry, which has in it for the more Solemnity, Prayers, Exhortations,
Interrogatories, etc. but in the Assumption and middle-part, he takes it in
the restrained sense, for the Essential words, which are the Constitutive Form,
as Imposition of hands is concluded to be the Matter: this is their own
distinction.

3. False; for in the Form, that is the Protestants Ritual, there are, and
always were express words for the Authority given in the respective Functions
of Bishops and Priests, for whose Ordinations there are distinct Forms and
distinct Words. The word [Bishop] oftener than three times used in the Office
appointed for his Consecration, and the word [Priest] sometimes in that
prescribed for his Ordination. Just according to N. N's after-instance of
Illustration, if the word [King] be used at his Election, this sufficiently
expresses all Kingly Power and Authority.

SECT. II.
N. N. farther adds; THE Form or words whereby men are made Priests, must
express Authority and Power to Consecrate, or make present the Body and Blood
of Christ, but their Form contains not one word expressing this Power: see
the Ritual Land. 1607. Deacons did minister and dispense the Body of Christ in
Ancient times, but were never thought to have Power of Consecrating, and making
present Christ's Body and Blood.

SECT. II.
J. S. THat which N. N. designs by this, is, that that Form (Receive ye the
Holy Ghost) is defective as to Priestly Ordination, which must be supplied by
their new one, viz. Take thou power to offer Sacrifice to God, and to Celebrate
Mass both for the quick and the dead. This he knows Protestants do reject,
because lately invented, and foisted into the Romish Ritual to foster their
gross Figments of Purgatory, Transubstantiation, and their Antichristian
Sacrifice of the Mass; and because some Romanists, as St. Clara, thinks it
unnecessary, and Bell. says it is Sacrilegious; for this he positively
delivers, It is Sacriledg to change the Form, because determinate, Bell. de
Sacr. in genesis l. 1. c. 21. Sect. apud haeret. etc. secunda prop. For Sacraments
are instituted by God, therefore the chief part thereof the Form; and to add
to, or alter the words of the Scripture, is not lawful, therefore not the words
of the Sacraments, Id. ib. in Fin. yet this great Champion never did prove
their new Form to be found in, or founded on Scripture, much less instituted by
Christ.

2. If that Form comprehends not all the Essentials of Priestly Ordination,
then the Apostles were not empowered to Consecrate, for our Savior used that
and no other to enable them for the execution of the Priestly Office, wherefore
Scotus l. 4. did. 24. has resolved verba illa, etc. those words, Whosoever
sins ye remit, etc. are declarative of the Power formerly given in these
[Receive ye the Holy Ghost,] by which Power is passed over all the Sacraments,
and therefore that of Sacrificing: Biel l. 4. did. 19. quaest. un. concurs
with him, cul datur, etc. to whom the Principal is given, to him also the
accessory is given; but by these words, [Receive ye, etc.] Christ gave the
power of the keys: therefore by them he conveyed the power of Consecration,
which is a branch of the power of the Keys.

3. What is added concerned Deacons, is a pure piece of impertinency, no way
advantageous to him, nor prejudicial to Protestants; if he were put to it, he
would find it a difficult task to prove Deacons were Dispencers of the
Mysteries, who were only Assistants to the Dispensation.

SECT. III.
N. N. IN all Forms of Ordaining Priests, that ever were used in the Eastern
and Western Churches, there is expressly, set down the word [Priest,] or some
other word importing the particular and proper Function and Authority of
Priesthood. If any State or Country should choose a Person to be King, in the
word King is sufficiently expressed all Regal Power and Authority. Therefore
the Greeks using the word Bishop and Priest in their Form, sufficiently express
the respective Power of every Order.

SECT. III.
J. S. EAch Clause of this Section has been sufficiently confuted.

SECT. IV.
N. N. BUT the reason why the English Form of making Bishops and Priests is so
notoriously defective and invalid, is, because in Edward the sixth's time, when
Zwinglianism and Puritanism did so prevail in the Church, the Real Presence was
not believed by them of the Clergy who bore the sway, therefore they did not
put in the Form of Priesthood any word expressing Power and Authority to make
Christ's Body present. They held Episcopacy and Priesthood to be one and the
same thing; wherefore in the Form for making of Bishops, they put not one word
expressing the Episcopal Function, only some general words which might seem
sufficient to give them Authority to enjoy the Temporalities and Bishoprics.
This is also the true reason why Parker and his Colleagues were content with the
Nags-head Ordination, and why others returned to extraordinary Vocation in
Queen Elizabeth's time.

SECT. IV.
J. S. THis also is another vain Repetition: Three who bore the sway in King
Edward's Reign held the Real Presence, but not in the Popish manner of
determination: Those in Queen Elizabeth's time had and did stand for ordinary
and orderly Vocation. The Church of England alwrys asserted the Divine Right of
Episcopacy, and her orderly Orderly Orthodox Sons have constantly maintained
it. If some have distinguished Priesthood into the degrees, the higher and the
lower, as the Romanists generally do, yet they still conclude the said
different degrees of the Acts and Uses (which could not be exercised in a due
subordination of the lower to the higher) for a distinct respective
Consecration thereto; and did hold those of them who should presume to exercise
the Higher Power not being regularly Consecrated thereto, were Schismatical
Transgressors of the Apostolical Order, and Catholic Practice; and that every
Act of that usurped Power (when no real necessity to abate or excuse it) to be
null and void. It is the Pope and his Colleagues who are the For it is not
resolved in the Congregation of the Cardinals, that the Pope's Legates should
not suffer the determination of the Article of the Institution of Bishops by
Divine Right to pass, Hist. Counc. of Trent, fol. 603. And it being perceived
that Laynez his Speech was displeasing, and opposed by the Spanish Bishops,
this distasted the Legates, ib. fol. 615. therefore Canons came from Rome, which
the Pope moved to have proposed, p. 657. which displeased the Fathers, etc.
after much contention, because the opinion of Divine Right was as displeasing
to the Pope, ib. fol. 737. it was waved.
leading Puritans. It was the Pope who said, the Absolute Divine Right of
Bishops was a false and erroneous Opinion; it was the Pope who slighted and
scorned those Bishops in the Trent-Assembly, who affirmed Ib. fol. 825.
the Institution of Bishops by Divine Right. It was the Pope who first divested
them of their Jurisdiction and Power, by his Commissions and Delegations Caran.
p. 869.
to inferior Priests.

SECT. V.
N. N. TO conclude the Matter, I say with St. Hierome, Ecclesia non est, quae
non habet Sacerdotem: How can the Protestant Church be the true Church, which
has not one Bishop or Priest? Though it were not evident it has no Valid
Ordination, yet so many doubts and uncertainties as they must acknowledge
concerning their Ordinations, do demonstrate the Nullity of their Church; for
if there remain one solid and prudent doubt of the validity of Ordination in
any Church, it is impossible it should be the true Catholic and Apostolic
Church, because a doubtful Clergy makes a doubtful Church, and a doubtful
Church is no Church: The step to Christian and Catholic Belief is the
well-grounded Credibility excluding all prudent doubts, of the Clergy, we have
the same of the Church, and of the Faith and Doctrine proposed by its
testimony; and the true Faith admits of no such doubts. Therefore Protestants,
before they can prudently believe themselves to have true Faith, or be in the
Catholic Church, must clear all the doubts objected against their Ordination.
For though any Person shall not be convinced of the Nullity of their
Ordination, yet he cannot but harbor a prudent doubt thereof, there being so
many Reasons and Motives for it. Now, to Receive Sacraments from Priests of so
doubtful Authority, is without doubt a damnable Sacriledg, it being in the
highest degree against the light of Right Reason, and Rule of Faith, to expose
the Reverence of the Sacraments, and Remedy of our Souls, to so manifest an
hazard.

SECT. V.
J. S. THis Conclusion is of the same temper with the Premises; these were a
confused heap of Incredibles, Improbables, and Impossibles; this is a wild
distempered Sorites carried on with an affected Obscurity to distract and amuse
the Reader, by multiplying, confounding, and changing the Terms, hudling up
many Conclusions in this one.

If St. Hierome, by Church, meant the Universal Church, this always has, now
has, and ever will have Bishops, (as Sacerdotes signifies with him:) but if he
spoke of a particular Church, then his [is not] is not to be taken absolutely,
but respectively; not simply to deny it is being and existence, but it is
integrity and complement, viz. there is no through complete Church which has
not Bishops. For we read in the Ancients of some Churches that had received
(...) the fullness of Dispensations, and of others which had not attained (...),
to the complement of Necessaries; though in St. Hierom's time all Churches were
complete, that he might truly affirm there was no Church without a Bishop. But
it may fall out also, that all the Bishops of a well-formed complete Church may
dye, or by Persecution be so Scattered that they dare not appear, or by an
Infidel Conqueror be Banished, or Murdered: but if the remaining Christians
in this distressed condition keep their first Faith, they are in a salvable
state, and continue true members of the Universal Church; as those Roman
Converts were, who believed upon St. Peter's first Sermon, Act. 2. which was
long before St. Peter came to Rome, Romans 16.7.

2. He suggests It is impossible they should, etc. For once he guesseth right,
It is impossible any Church of one denomination can be the true Catholic,
Apostolic Church, that is in the usual sense of the Romanists, the Universal,
as it is impossible for a Part to be the Whole, or their Catholic Church
(which is not the fourth part thereof) to be Universal, as they by their common
restriction assume; but it is possible a particular Church may be a true
Catholic and Apostolic Church, and the true Catholic and Apostolic Church
of such a Nation.

For the Title Catholic is either taken properly for the Universal Church,
which is the Congregation of all Believers dispersed over all the World, in
opposition to the Herds of Jews, Pagans, and Infidels; and then it is a
contradiction to apply or appropriate it to any particular Church, as the
Romanists industriously do to huckster off their false Wares, which otherwise
would stick on their hands; or else it is used in the more common signification
of an Orthodox Church, which participates in the true Faith with the Universal
Church, in a contradistinction to the Conventicles of all Heretical
Blasphemers: In this Notion the Protestant Church of England is not only a
Catholic and Apostolic Church, but in due Form of construction the true
Catholic and Apostolic Church of England, as several particular Churches,
viz. Rome, Carthage, etc. have been honored with the Title of the Catholic
Church of those respective Nations, For as the Roman Church was called the
Catholic Church of Rome, Leo Ep. 12. So that of Antioch, the Catholic Church
of Antioch, Conc. Constant. 5. Act. 1. That of Carthage, the Catholic Church
of Carthage, Aurel. Epist. Eccl. Cathol. Carthag. So Polycarp was the Bishop of
the Catholic Church of Smyrna. Eusebius. lib. 4. hist. c. 14. And that famous
Epistle to the Smyrnians was directed to all the Holy and Catholic Churches,
id. ib. in Princ. Greg. Naz. the Bishop of the Catholic Church of
Constantinople in his last Will and Testament, witnessed by four Bishops of
their several Catholic Churches, as of Iconium, etc.
Provinces, and Dioceses.

3. His doubts and uncertainties have a rare virtue (perhaps they may work
strongly on weak minds) they can demonstrate. This is the noble demonstrating
faculty of Romish Traditors, they can raise doubts and uncertainties where
there are none, and by their Magic demonstrate, first, that the Protestant
Church is not the Universal, and then it is no Church; first, absurdly without
Proof suppose the Nullity of its Ordinations, and thence conclude the Nullity
of its Christianity. The best is, this is but one Doctors opinion, if more
there be, yet all his Colleagues are not so Magisterial in their nullifying
Sentence. The Bishop of Chalcedon is more solid and Prudent. Persons As Bishop
Bramhal cites, Reply to the Survey, p. 33.
(says he) living in the communion of the Protestant Church, if they endeavor
to learn the truth, (which if they do not, they are neither good Protestants
nor good Christians) and are not able to attain unto it, but hold it
implicitly in the preparation of their minds, and are ready to receive it,
when God shall be pleased to reveal it, they neither want Faith, nor Church,
nor Salvation; which elsewhere he confirms by this reason, A Church may be
Heretical, and Schismatical really, yet morally a true Church, because She is
Bishop of Chalced. Survey, c. 2. Sect. 4.
invincibly ignorant of her Heresy and Schism.

Pope Innocent was so much offended at the irregularities of the Spanish
Ordinations in his time, that at first he inclined to null them; but upon
better thoughts be forbore declaring that, for the number of those who were
faulty therein, he would not question nor doubt of any of them any ways passed,
but rather leave them to Gods Judgment. Epist. ad Conc. Tolk. Car. sum. Conc.
p. 270.

4. But (says he) a solid doubt, etc. This is not Universally true, for a
Church which has a doubtful Clergy by irregularities of Ordination, if She
contend for that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and cannot avoid
those irregularities through not a pretended, or contracted, but a real
necessity, is a true part (such an irregularity not absolutely and totally
Un-Churching her) of the true Catholic Church: True, but not Complete; not
Complete, because it wants that which is required to the Integrity and
Perfection of a Church; yet True, because it has all things essential to a
Church. For this reason the most eminent Protestants, who still maintained the
Divine Right of Bishops, yet did they clear those Transmarine Churches which
have not Bishops from sinning against Divine Right, because their want was not
through their own default, but the Iniquity of the Times and Places they lived
in; which charitable construction should seem very reasonable to the Romanists,
for that the Court of Rome gave the first occasion of all the contests about
Episcopacy, by investing Priests with Episcopal Jurisdiction and Power by their
Commissions and Delegations: and without doubt Necessity is as strong
Dispensation for these Pastors to execute the Ministerial Office, as the Popes
Mercenary Bulls granted upon unworthy avaritious ends can be for their Priests
to exercise Episcopal Authority. Those Churches therefore under this want are
True, though lame and maimed Members of the Catholic Church: Just as Canus
Loc. l. 4. c. ult. ad 10.
determines of the Romish Church in a vacancy; It is then left Lame (says he)
and diminished, without Christ's Vicar, that. one Pastor of the Church, the
Pope; yet the Spirit of Truth should abide in it: and without doubt the Spirit
of Truth will as certainly abide in those Churches which want Bishops, as in
their Church wanting a Pope, at least, they should think so, because in their
account the Pope is as necessary, if not more, to the being of a Church than
Bishops are. To clear this more distinctly, some things are required to the
Essence This is Stapleton's distinction.
of a Church, as the Doctrine of saving Faith in the Profession and Practice
thereof; some only to the Perfection and Integrity of a Church, as the having
Regular Pastors by a due Form of Ordination: both these are necessary, though
not equally and in the same Degree; the former absolutely and indispensably,
the latter de congruo and possibili: viz. it concerns the Church, if possibly
it can be obtained to have lawfully Ordained Pastors, and every wilful
Omission, much more Rejection, of the Catholic settled Order in this kind is
Sacrilegious and Schismatical; yet those Pastors who highly esteem Episcopal
Ordination, and much affect it, but cannot obtain it through the Recusancy of
Bishops in present Place and Power (who will not Ordain them without sinful
compliance and submission to gross Errors and Corruptions evidently contrary
to the Law of Christ) if they hold and divide the Word of Truth rightly may be
accounted true Pastors, though not in a real Mission, yet by a moral
designation, as being deputed and separated to that Divine Office; because in
this case, the Necessity is invincible, which makes that allowable, which
otherwise would be unlawful, as Dr. Cracken. contr. Spalet. c. 4. observes from
the Gloss, and illustrateth from Scipio's Example, who when the Questors denied
him a supply of Moneys out of the Public Treasury, because it was against Law,
presently replied, Necessity has no Law. The Romanists confess the desire of
Baptism is sufficient to excuse the want thereof, and they have it in effect
who have it in desire; in all reason, the want of an undoubted Sacrament is
more dangerous, than the want of a Sacramental can be, especially where there
is a Desire to have the Impediment removed. The Jews were prohibited to build
private Altars, yet in case of Necessity, when they were not permitted to go to
Jerusalem, the learned Jews determined the Prohibition ceased as to its
present effect; and every one knows a Negative Prescript is not so dispensable
as an Affirmative.

It is the opinion of Cornelius a Lapide in Numb. 20.26. that Eleazar was m^de
High Priest, praeter legem and morem, otherwise than by standing Law and Custom
he ought; First, because his Father was then living; next, in that the right
only of putting on his Fathers Garment was used, without any Solemn-Unction or
Consecration to the Priesthood.

5. He subjoyns a doubtful Clergy makes a Doubtful Church. This is a Doubtful
Proposition: the most he can make of it is, that a Doubtful Clergy makes a
Doubtful Church only in Part, not in the Whole; for even Schismatics in those
things wherein they have made no separation from the Church (otherwise the
Romanists would be in a sad condition) do so far still remain uncorrupted to
the Church; so that if that Doubtful Clergy keep the wholesome words of sound
Doctrine, (if N. N. doubt of this, he may remember, there is a Clergy of a
Beyond Sea Church which has no Bishops, has made this good against the
choicest Champions of the Roman See) so far they are Catholics.

6. He is very positive, a doubtful Church is no Church. It is true, he who
harbors a doubt (which he will conclude Prudent, because the issue of his
own Imagination, or the suggestion of some over-admired Teacher) of that Church
whereof he is a Member, that Church to him is no Church; but where such a doubt
is entertained, the Case is only disputable, and questioning does not disprove
or destroy certainty and truth. But such doubtful Propositions as N. N. has
here conjured up, will without doubt damnify his good old Cause, because
thereby his Church will be concluded a no Church, by the demonstrating Power of
those many doubts and uncertainties, which her chief Members have conceived and
uttered against her instances of most important concern. For,

Part 2. 1. It is a rule with them, that a doubtful Pope, is no Crespet. in
verb. Papa; Caran. p. 827.
Pope, and that there cannot be two Popes at one and the same time, etiam ex
urgentissima causa (as Jac. Castellon. cites out of Navar -- verb. Papa p.
485.) no not upon the most weighty Consideration, because there is but one
Monarch, and one Monarchy only for Spiritual concerns by the appointment of
Christ: hence they generally conclude, that all those who are not united to
that one determinate Head are in the state of damnable Schism, and those who
are united to him, are united to the true Catholick-Church. viz. The Church is
a Society of men united in the Profession of the same Faith, and participating
of the Sacraments under the Government of lawful Pastors, chiefly of one Vicar
of Christ upon Earth, the Roman Pope. This then is obvious at the first view
from these Premises, that an undoubted Pope is as fully, and by the word
chiefly in the definition, more necessary to the being and Constitution of the
Church than an undoubted Clergy; and a doubtful Pope is as destructive to the
Church, as a doubtful Clergy; from whence it necessarily follows, that if a
doubtful Clergy makes a doubtful Church, a doubtful. Pope must do so too: and
then if this be proved, ( there has been a doubtful Pope, and no one undoubted
Pope, by N. N 's demonstration,) it is impossible the Roman can be the true
Catholic and Apostolic Church; but this is easily made evident from the many
doubts and uncertainties which of the several pretending Popes has been the
one undoubted Pope.

In the year 1378, upon the death of Gregory the eleventh, a grievous Caran. p.
823. Theodoric. de Niem. Bishop of Perda, Vrban's Secretary wrote the History
of this Schism, so did Bonin. Segino in the Florentine History, etc. Friar John
de Pineda, l. 22. c. 37. Sect. 3, 4.
Schism began which continued more or less till Ann. 1414. the Italians created
Urban the sixth Pope, who England. Almain, and Italy favored him.
resided at Rome; The French elected Clement the seventh, who France, Castile,
Arragon, and Catalonia owned him.
betook himself to Avignion. The Abbot of St. Pedest endeavored to prove Urban
was the true undoubted Pope: Joh. de Bigniaco, and the Council of Paris
defended Clement's title, Urban during this Schism had three Successors, Bon.
the ninth, Innocent the seventh, and Gregory the twelfth: Clement had but one,
Ben. the thirteenth, in Ann. 1409 a Council of Cardinals met at Pisa, who
thought fit for the peace of the Church to depose the two surviving Popes and
set up another; but for all the Cardinals could do to repair the breach, it
proved wider, the two contesting Popes, Gregory the twelfth, and Ben. the
thirteenth being unwilling to be so dishonourably ejected, kept their ground,
till at last in Ann. 1414, the three Popes, the Italian, French, and Pisan,
were Deposed by the Council of Constance, and Martin the fifth was Created. All
this while even in the judgment of observing learned Ramanists none could know
which of the broken Heads was the true Head of the Church, and lawful Marian de
reb. Hisp. l. 18. c. 1. Naucler. Val. 2. Gener. 46. for that every one of them
had learned Patrons, id. ibid. Gener. 480.
Successor to St. Peter. Azor Instit. Moral. part. 2. lib. 25. c. 14.
says, It was doubtful and uncertain which of the claiming Popes had the right
title; Caran. says, ut supra, It was not known who was the true Pope; and
Bellarm. Lib. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 14. So does Aemil. de Gest. Franc. lib. 9.
Aut. Sum. Hist. part. 3. tit. 22. c. 2.
adds, It was not easy to be determined; and the famous Chancellor of Paris,
John Lib de signis ruinae Eccl. Sign. of which the same is to be found in Otho
Fris. Hist. l. 6. Baron. Tom. 11. Ann. 1044. n. 2.
Gerson goes higher, The Church it self (says he) was then so full of doubts
in this case, that She could not know on what side, or party the Roman See was,
unless God himself had been pleased to reveal it to her. It then being proved,
that a doubtful Pope makes a doubtful Church, and that there has been a
doubtful Pope in the Romish Church, the conclusion is irrefragable, the Roman
Church has been for a long space of time a Doubtful Church, and by N. N.'s
Logic and Peremptory Position, the Church of Rome was then a no Church.

2. There are many Doubts and uncertainties harbored in the Romish Church
concerning the Church it self; as whether their Virtual Church (the Pope) be
that Church they would commend to us, for it is well-grounded Credibility and
Infallibility; or their Representative (a General Council), or the Essential
(the diffused body of the Faithful all the world over), or a body compounded of
some of these or any others. Some will be contented that the Pope and his
Conclave should be that Infallible thing; others will have him to sit in the
Assembly of the Bishops of his Province; others will go no less than he must
Head a General Council to pronounce an Infallible Sentence. If it be put to the
Vote, and most Voices must carry it, the Pope runs loose away with it; he has
the Patronage of the best and most Ecclesiastical Dignities and Preferments.
But be it so for once, upon this a fresh Fry of Doubts and uncertainties
appears in this very foundation of their Faith and Unity, whether this Man be
Pope or no? Whether Gregory the twelfth, or B^n. the thirteenth, or Alexander
the fifth, or Martin the fifth. Let Martin be the Man, presently a new Covy of
Doubts spring up, whether he be an Infallible Judge? and if so, whether as a
Doctor or the Pope? If as Pope, whether when he gives Laws de Concilio Fratrum,
by the advice of his College of Cardinals, passing his Decrees upon the Gates
of St. Peter at Rome, and in Campo de Flori, or when he speaks E Cathedral,
which is (as it is commonly interpreted) when he Proclaims his Decrees, however
he be assisted, for a general reception with an intention to Teach and Govern
the whole Church, though this be very uncertain? Let this also be presumed,
another Set of Doubts is started, wherein is he Infallible? Whether in matters
of Right, and Fact, or of Faith? The Jesuits of late will have him Universally
Infallible upon all these accounts, as they determined at Clermont, Ann. 1661.
but suppose with the soberer sort his Infallibility extends only to Definitions
of Faith, yet another Doubt remains unsatisfied, Whether this his restrained
Faith be conditional, or absolute? some conceive an absolute Infallibility is
too high an intrenching upon God's Prerogative; but others of them will not
have him tied to Conditions, viz. To observe the Order of the Primitive Church,
and use such holy and needful means as God by his Son Jesus Christ has
appointed for the finding out the Truth: For De Pont. Romans lib. 4. c. 2. Stapl.
relect. c. 4. qu. 3. art. 3. conclus. 5.
(say they) if Conditions be required to Perfect and Legitimate the Popes
Definitions besides his own Act of decreeing them, the Faithful (which is very
remarkable and apposite) would be Doubtful whether he had observed them or no,
and so their Faith would be wavering, and so it must needs be if Doubts do the
feat.

3. It is the Doctrine of their new-founded Church, that the intention of the
Bishop or Priest Officiating is so necessary to any Sacrament, that without it
none of them is perfected; but to receive the Sacraments from such of whom we
can have no assurance, that their intentions be serious and sincere, (and there
be many evident reasons and motives to persuade us the Priests are often Formal
in their Ministeries, and False in their intentions) is certainly to expose the
reverence (in N. N.'s Language) of the Sacraments, and remedy of our Souls to a
manifest hazard. For we are informed by their own Historians, that in some
Centuries the Clergy were so ignorant and wicked, that many of them knew not
what to do; others cared not what they did. In what a perplexed condition would
a prudent man be cast, who being married by a Popish Priest, soon after
detected to be a Villain, should consider with himself, very likely this wicked
man had no Intention to marry him, or an Intention not to marry him. It is a
wonder those Trent-Assemblers should be so rash, and yet so Magisterial in
their Definition, when they would not determine what Intention was necessary,
because they could not agree about the efficacy of the Sacraments, it being
impossible, there should be the same Intention of two who differ in their
judgments concerning it. The common Salvo was, that the Intention to do as the
Church does was sufficient, but this satisfied not the scruple, because men
^^ffered in opinion what the Church is, and their opinions herein being
different, their Intentions in administering the Sacraments would also prove
different. To evade this, it was pretended, all the Priests had the same
design; but as it is impossible for any to know the things (that is the
purposes) of Man, save the Spirit of Man, which is in him, 1 Cor. 2.11. so it
is unconceivable how they should have the same end and aim, who have different
Judgments, Humors, Passions, and Interests. At last they were driven to this
shift, perhaps there may be some such wretched Priest, yet this case is rare.
To this the Bishop of Minori replied, would God (said he) that the case was
rare, and that in this corrupt age we had not cause to doubt there were many:
but suppose there are but a few, or one only; let a Knave Priest Baptize, who
has not an Intention to administer the true Baptism to a Child, who being
after a grown Man is created a Bishop of a great City, so that he has Ordained
a great part of the Priests in his Diocese, it must be said, that he being not
Baptized, is not Ordained, nor they Ordained who are promoted by him -- Behold
Millions of Nullities of Sacraments by the malice of one Histor. Council of.
Trent. fol. 241.
Priest in one Act only.

4. To give full measures of Doubts and uncertainties in the most mysterious
act of their Religion; Dr. Holden Apendix of Schism, p. 445. Refert Dr. Ham.
dispatcher. Preface p. 14.
averreth, All Roman Catholics do believe and reverence the Sacrifice of the
Mass as the most substantial Act of their Religion; but if it be demanded
wherein the substance of this Sacrifice does consist, no substantial Resolution
can be expected from them: their Doubts and uncertainties about the Nature and
Essence thereof are so cross and various, There are diverse opinions concerning
it, (says Azor. l. 10. c. 9. or part 2. l. 2. c. 14.
Azor.) There are six Acts of which it is doubted, in which one, or more of
them the Essence of the Sacrifice consists, says Tom. 3. did. 75. art. 1, 2.
Suarez. Some place it in the one Act of Consecration, but the doubters dispute
against it; for, say they, Consecration belongs rather to the nature of a
Sacrament than a Sacrifice, and every external Sacrifice (such as the Mass is)
must be sensible, but the Conversion made by the words of Consecration is not
sensible, for the real change is not; and again, if the Act of Consecration,
then the outward Elements only are the Host and matter offered, but we may not
say the Species are the Host: others set it in the Oblation, but the
dissenting Brethren oppose this, because Christ used no Sacrificial Act at his
Last Supper; and if Christ did not, the Priest ought not, though some of them
grant it belongs to the intergrity of the Sacrifice. But how the Trent-Divines
were divided in their judgment herein, may be read, Hist. Counc. of Trent, fol.
544, etc. Some of them again conceive Consecration, Consumption, or Sumption to
be the Essence: this others contradict, because then (say they) the Body and
Blood of Christ must be destroyed, for that which is Offered in Sacrifice is to
be destroyed, but Sumption can be no part thereof, because the Act of Receiving
is not; for although Christ be not received after the Consecration, yet is he
truly said to be Sacrificed, and Doctors doubt whether Christ did receive in
his last Supper, and the Priest receiving does nothing in Christ's person but
his own: others stood for Fraction, but this the doubters easily disprove, for
it is (say they) an Act purely Sacramental, not at all Sacrificial, and
Fraction being before Consecration, the Substance of the Bread and Wine
remains.

When N. N. has solved all these Doubts, and satisfied all these Doubters, he
may be more confident of the demonstrative Power of Doubts and uncertainties;
in the mean time, he may apply them to his own Church in his own words, Mutatis
mutandis.

Therefore the Romanists before they can prudently believe themselves to have
true Faith, or be the Catholic Church, must clear all Doubts and uncertainties
(not objected by Protestants, but started and pursued by their own Divines)
concerning their Church, their Head of the Church, their Ordinations, and the
most Substantial Act of their Religion, the Mass, for though any Person should
not, etc.

7. N. N. goes one step forward, the step to Christian and Catholic belief is,
etc.

This has nothing of usefulness to his Conclusion, unless he prove, that a
Clergy not regularly ordained cannot believe all the Articles of the Christian
Faith, etc. that the Protestant Church has a doubtful Clergy, in which his
attempts have hitherto been unsuccessful and unlucky to him and his Church. If
his meaning be, the well-grounded Credibility of his Church is the foundation
of Christian belief, this is to beg the Question, and is false; for Christian
Faith is not an assent and adherence to the Objects thereof, upon the bare
Testimony of the Church, but on that of God: neither is its warranty derived
from the Church's Proposition, but Divine Revelation. True Faith is founded on
the writings of Moses and the Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.
which moved Durand thus to define it, It is an habit whereby we assent to the
Doctrines of the Scripture for the Authority of God revealing them.

But if he intend only, that the Church's Proposition is to her members the
first motive and preparative of Faith, it will not be gainsaid: but then he
must remember, that a prudent Christian will not take the Church for
well-groundedly credible, till he find by the Rule of Faith, She deserves to be
so esteemed; for it is impossible the Church can appear so to him till he know
the Faith it proposes, which he cannot do but by applying it to the Rule; for
every intellectual and moral habit must be sufficiently known before the Acts
resulting from them can be predicated of any subject capable to exercise them.
As I must know what Prudence is, before I can truly affirm of any man that he
is Prudent.

8. That which N. N. mainly drives at is, to seduce the members of the Church
of England from her Communion, and solicit them to Apostate to Rome. To effect
this, he took (as he conceived) a seasonable opportunity to perplex the minds
of men with his Doubts and uncertainties, by reason of our late sad divisions.
Then the Romanists bent all their forces to persuade easy seduceable tempers,
This Church was either a dead, or Bishop of Chalcedon Survey, c. 2. Sect. 9.
Dr. Holden, Anal. of Faith, saying the present State of the Protestant Church,
consisting of Protestant Bishops, etc. and their Protestant Flock, not being
likely to continue long.
no Church.

If this design prevailed with some crasy minds, they were as imprudent as the
Romish Solicitors were impudent. For the Romish Church has suffered as Tragical
and durable divisions, as This then did; for besides that long Schism formerly
related, in Alexander the third's time a Schism lasted till fere eversa, etc.
as Car. speaks, p. 794. That Church was at her last Gasp: and in this very
juncture of time, their contests were so high, that their great Head of Unity
was put to all his Pope-craft to smother them; the Disputes betwixt the
Jansenists and Molinists were then so hot, that both Parties pressed a
decision, and by consent referred the matter to the Pope, who because he did
not understand the points in debate, would fain have declined it, pretending
that his Predecessor Clement the eighth, after he had appointed Congregations
to discuss the Articles, waved it, and commanded silence to both Parties (which
pleased neither) and that he was an Old Man and had not studied Divinity: but
both sides still moving for a hearing, because each aspersed the other with the
guilt of Heresy, at last, being overcome with importunity he condescended. But
hear how the Infallible Judge determined the contest; at one Congregation he
rebuked the Molinists for corrupting 2 Congregation, July 8.
St. Augustine, at another for urging the Authority of the Schoolmen, and not
producing the Evidences of Scripture, Councils, 10 Congregation.
and Fathers. In all probability the Jansenists had the better of the day; but
it proved otherwise, the Pope passed his Sentence in favor Ann. 1653, whom
before he had branded and paradigmatized with Insincerity.
of the Molinists. All that can be said in excuse of this rash resolution, was
the most Christian King commanded the dull Canonist to dispatch, which so
startled him, that he durst trifle no longer; but the main reason was, he was
at that time so busily bent upon his Papal and Donna's concernments, that he
was not at leisure to attend the serious discussion of that too hard
Controversy for his soft Head. For then he and his Propagators were consulting
how to manage Campanella's Project, in fomenting our intestine broils to reduce
this Kingdom into a State. This is certain, his Nuncio Joh. ^lench. mot. nuper
in Angl. par. 2. p. 7. and inde.
Bapt. Renuncino, after his arrival in Ireland endeavored the destruction of
all that stood for the King and the English Interest, animating the Rebels to
the most villainous outrages; and because two Noble persons of the Roman
Communion would not be persuaded by him to join with the Rebels, he
Excommunicated them. This was not all, the Pope by the instigation of the
Barbarini's had another design on foot, as Abbot Gualdi p. 143. relates, even
to expel his Catholic King out of his Dominions in Naples upon Ma's Anello's
Rebellion, to add it to the Triple Crown. All is Fish that comes to St. Peter's
Successors Net; if the Kings be Guelphs, their Kingdoms are Gibelins; if they
be Catholics, their Crowns are Heretics. It is the Popes business to determine
emergent Controversies, but upon forced put, his main work is to rule over
Nations, to rout out, etc. Jer. 1.10. as his Parasites have profaned that
Text. But as the Pope and his Propagators failed in his Enterprises, so N. N.
and his Comrades were deceived in their design. For though some were gulled
with these Holy Frauds, yet in that levity of disposition and easiness of
change, they did not act according to the common received measures of Prudence:
which is, to stay where we are, till we know where to be better. For this
Church at the worst was much better than that they revolted to; this was a
Distressed Church, that a Depraved; this had Scars in the Face, that Ulcers in
the Heart; this Wounded in the Skin, that Rotten in the Vitals; this in it is
Constitution Orthodox and Sound, that Heretical and Corrupt. For to state the
case between the Church of England, and that of Rome impartially, the Quaere
will be, Whether for some defects in Rituals (be they really such or only
pretended) it be more prudent to desert a Church free from Schism, Heresy, and
Idolatry, at least less subject to a suspicion of any of these, or to lapse to
a Church most deeply Guilty, or most justly presumed to be so in all these
Carnalities and Corruptions. If Prudence must resolve the Quaere, the issue and
verdict will be, It is easier to remain in the Church of England than to
Proselyte to Rome; for no Prudent man will precipitate himself into more, more
apparent, and more real danger for fear of a less, less evident and more remote
danger. This only remains to be proved, that the Church of Rome is Guilty, or
justly presumed to be so, of dangerous Innovations and Corruptions, which will
be evidenced by these two Conclusions constringently asserted.

1. The Church of Rome as it is now ordered, and has been since the times of
Julius the second, and Leo the tenth, at least by the Pope and his Propagators
in the Court thereof, has chopped and changed the Apostolical Rule of Faith,
by Composing a new Creed, or which is as bad, has clogged and charged the
Catholic Creeds with new-patched Additionals, which She has defined to be
Essentials of Faith necessary to be believed by all Christians in order to
their Salvation.

2. This Church so managed has depraved and subverted the Catholic and
Apostolic Government and Dicipline, by setting up her Bishop as the Universal
Monarch and Pastor of the Church, claiming and challenging to him an unlimited
Supremacy over he whole Body of Christ, and exercising this Power by
Excommunicating full three parts of the Catholic Church, for not submitting
thereto.

CHAP. V.
SECT. I.
1. THE first Conclusion is fully evident from the famous Council C. 7. (
Caran. in can. Pelt. Jesuit. in summa illius capitis, difference as well as
contrariety) Conc. Flor. Sess. 10. Conc. Tom. 7. p. 641. D. and 644. B.
at Ephesus, for the maintenance whereof the Popes are sworn, and therefore
cannot without the guilt of Perjury reject its Sentence. This Decreed, That it
should not be lawful for any man to Publish or Compose another Faith, ( or
Creed) than that which was defined by the Nicene Council, and that whosoever
shall dare to Compose, or offer any such thing to any Persons willingly to be
Converted from Judaism, or Heresy, if they be Bishops and Clerks (as the Popes
be) should be Deposed, if Laymen, should be Anathematized. When this Authority
was urged by the Greeks to the Latins in the Council of Florence; they only
Answered, That this Canon did not forbid another explication agreeable to the
truth contained in that Creed; but did indeed forbid all Difference as well as
contrariety. Now it is clear, those twelve new Doctrinals of Faith defined by
the Pope Pius the fourth, and set at the foot of the Old Creed, if they be not
contrary to them, as most of them really are, (which might be proved by an
Induction) yet are they different from them; for they are neither implicitly
and virtually contained in them, nor can by any direct or immediate consequence
be deduced from them, and therefore have no respect or relation to them, nor
connection with them; neither are they applied to the Old Creed as Explications
thereof, but were designed as so many supernumerary Articles of Faith, (the
Catholic Church having only twelve Articles, the Roman Church twenty four, as
some of their own sticklers confess) which except a man believe faithfully he
cannot be saved. For they are dictated and proposed as so many distinct
material objects of Faith, to be believed in the same degree of necessity with
the other to which they are superadded, and therefore in the judgment of this
Council, and of the Latins themselves in their subterfuge, the composition
thereof is a dangerous Innovation and corruption in the Rule of Faith, and the
severe imposition of it is a Schismatical Presumption, and a tyrannical
Antichristian Usurpation.

2. The second Conclusion is firmly deduced from another Canon of the same
Council, C. 8. Caran. in can. Pelt. Jesuit. in summa illius capitis. Nicene
Council, c. 6.
which runs thus; Let the same course be observed in other Diocesses and in all
Provinces everywhere, that none of the Holy Bishops seiz upon another
Province, which was not of old, and from the beginning under his Power. This
indeed particularly respected the exemption of the Cypriots from the
encroachments of the Patriarch of Antioch; yet for-as-much as the Decree passed
in general words without any reservation to the Bishop of Rome, he is thereby
concluded as well as any other to be an ambitious Usurper, if he claim or
exercise any Jurisdiction over the Churches which from the beginning were not
under his Power. Some of N.N's quick-sighted Gentlemen have apprehended the
Decree to be so highly prejudicial to their pretensions and affections, who
therefore have endeavored by Legerdemain to juggle it out of the Acts of this
Council; though if this unworthy Artifice had succeeded, yet these Shufflers
had gained nothing by it, for the Nicene Council much earlier than this, had
confined the Bishop of Rome to his Bounds, giving the like Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to the Patriarchs of Alexandria and Antioch within their
respective Diocesses, which the Bishop of Rome had within his. The importance
of which Order is, That as certain Churches were consigned to the Bishop of
Rome, so were certain to the Bishops of Alexandria and Antioch, and as those of
his Diocese were not subject to them, so neither those of their Diocesses were
subject to him, upon this account, that it was not lawful (...) for any one to
Invade Nilus de primatu Papae, and Soz. l. 7. c. 9. takes this to be the Sense
of the second General Council in Constantinople, the words of the Canon confirm
Nilus his Interpretation, the Parilis mos, and the ancient Customs. As the
Bishop of Rome had Power over all his Bishops, so the Bishop of Alexandria was
to have over his, ex more, according to Custom, which Custom too was like;
which makes it appear the Roman Bishop was limited to his Diocese, for there is
no parity between an Universal Monarch and a Patriarchal Bishop; and as it is
absurd to say, Alexandria must have bounds as Rome has, if Rome then had none,
so it is good Sense to say, Let Alexandria be limited to her assignment and
partition, for Rome is: the Sense then is, Let the Jurisdiction of the Roman
Bishop be a Copy, Pattern, or Form for the Bishop of Alexandria, as Pope
Nicholas Epist. 8. ad Mich. p. 690, expresses it; The Nicene Canon took from
Rome an Example particularly, what to give to Alexandria; therefore if the
Bishop of Rome his Jurisdiction was over all the World, it could not be a Form,
or Reason for the limitation and distriction of Alexandria into Cantons; so the
African Fathers understood it, Ep. Afric. Conc. ad Coelest. c. 105.
another Jurisdiction. The Bishop of Alexandria was to have under his charge
Egypt, Lybia, etc. the Bishop of Rome had the oversight of the Churches of his
Neighborhood, the Ruff. l. 1. c. 6. Hincma. p. 6. c. 4. C. R. was one of the
seven Accidental Diocesses, Berer. Diatrib. 1. c. 1. and 3. and Britain was
another. id. ib. p. 198.
Suburbicarian Regions, beyond which his Jurisdiction did not extend, and which
made up his Diocese, viz. three Islands Corsica, Sicilia, and Sardinia, and
seven Provinces on the Continent, Campania, Tuscia, Vicenum suburbicarium,
Apulia with Calabria, Brutium, Samnium, and Valeria; and further yet, the
Bishop of Rome had but one of the seven Diocesses, (as they were anciently
called, or chief Jurisdictions which were appointed to the Western Church, and
for those other seven (or, as some Mr. Brerewod thinks there were but thirteen
Diocesses in the whole Empire, Enquir. p. 170.
number them, six) assigned to the Eastern Church, they were never subject to
his Jurisdiction. Pope Agatho about Confesses in 6 Synod. Act. 4. Conc. Tom.
5. p. 60, F. 64. E. and 65. B. So Zonaras.
Ann. 680. confesses his Authority did not reach. the East, but before that
time when St. Ignatius lived, the Church of Rome was only the Church of the
chief City of the Regions Inscription of his Epist. ad Roman.
of the Romans, and before him in St. Clements time, it was but the Provincial
Church of God at Rome, as the Church of God was but the Provincial Church
Clemens Title of his Epist. ad Corinth.
of God at Corinth; to both which that Form of Prayer observed in the Church,
and exemplified in the Author of the Apostolical Lib. 8. c. 10.
Constitutions, is very agreeable: viz. Let us pray for the Episcopacy of the
whole World, for our Bishop James of Jerusalem and his Diocese, for Clement of
Rome and his Diocese, for Evodius of Antioch and his Diocese. So just was that
Censure of a fast Friend to the Cause, once Aeneas Sylvius, Ep. 288. the most
was to preside over the West, as Zonar.
a Pope, which he bluntly delivered; viz. before the Nicene Council little
respect was had to the Roman See. But what Respect She had then and like time
after, was only Arbitrary at the Courtesy of the Church, which sometime gave
her a large Apartment, sometimes Cantoned it. For a time the Church allotted
the Bishop of Rome the Government of some Western Churches, which anciently,
and from the beginning belonged not to his Diocese, as the Macedonian, Zonar.
note on the 6 Sardican Canon.
Illyrian, Peloponesian, and the Church of Epirus; yet the Great Council of
Conc. penult. 28. Act. 16.
Chalcedon thought fit to remand this liberality, and enstate them upon the
Bishop of Constantinople, upon this ground, that then Constantinople was the
Imperial City: for thus the Order goes, The Fathers orderly gave the Privilege
of Chiefty and Headship to the Sea of Old Rome, because that Ally had the
Empire, and moved with like Consideration gave Evagr. ^. ^. c. ult.
the like Privileges to the Sea of Constantinople, thinking it agreeable to
reason, that the City of Constantinople being honored with the Empire and
Senate, as Rome had been, should enjoy the like Privileges. These Privileges
were not only some Honorary Titles and Dignities, (as some Romanists fancy) but
the like that Rome had, which in express words is said to be a Privilege of the
Chiefty, or Headship, which some learned Romanists have observed, and therefore
render (...), Anton. Salm. Dr. Ham. Schis. disarm. p. 94.
Privilegia, Dignitates, and Authoritates, Privileges, Dignities and
Authorities. It is true the Precedence of Place (which is merely Honorary) was
reserved to the Bishop of Rome, for which Respect and Honor there was great
reason, because the Church of Rome was a Metropolitical Church of long
standing, whereas the Church of Constantinople was not long before only a
Suffragan. This Canon has put the Romanists to all their Shifts, some
pretending the whole last Action to be Spurious and Clandestine; but why then
did the Popes Legates oppose it? a Spurious Act is of it self void, and a
Clandestine Act could not prejudice their Master and his Interest; and why do
they produce this Scandalous (as they judge) Act as a Proof for the Popes
Plenitude of Power over that of a General Council? These men will play at small
game rather than stick out, Counterfeit stuff must pass for the maintenance of
the Papal Prerogative. Others of them are so bold as to tell the World, that
after the Canon was passed, the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Antioch (for
he of Alexandria was dead, and that See vacant) were ashamed to move it: this
is a most disingenuous shameless falsity; for it is notoriously known, and most
certain they Conc. Tom. 3. p. 475. E.
both subscribed it; others would make the World believe, this Council was not
then free, and the Canon extorted by tumultuous importunity. This is another
scandalous Calumny; for all the Fathers did own it as their Ibid. p. 463.
Act and Deed both by Subscriptions and Attestations, before the Judges deputed
by the Emperor to see that Synodal Order was regularly observed, for
confirmation whereof they published a Manifesto. But they of all other
Shufflers seem to have taken the wisest course, who very cautiously and
industriously have left it out of their Editions of the Councils, which saved
them the labor of beating their Brains to invent such handsome Excuses, Cavils
and Calumnies, which yet were much more, than needed; for this Canon was not
Operative but Declarative, not Introductory but Confirmative, in Confirmation
of what fifty years before had passed at the first General Council of
Constantinople, which resolved, That the Bishop of Constantinople ought to have
the Honor of Primacy next after the Bishop of Rome, for that Constantinople
Conc. Constant. 1. c. 1, 2, 3. Soz. l. 7. c. 9.
is new-Rome. And if both these were suspected and failed, or not extant, yet
there is another Canon of this Council of Chalcedon, which the Roman Censors
have not as yet traduced, either as Spurious or Clandestine, or Forced, and is
received in their Editions, which will quite foil and rout out Monarchical
Sovereignty. It is this. Conc. Chalced. c. 9. Act. 15.
Si vero, etc. If any have a Complaint against the Metropolitan of the
Province, let him either repair to the Primate of the same Diocese (or chief
Jurisdiction) or to the Royal City of Constantinople, and let him be judged
there. Caran. approved by Bell. in his Annot. will have the Bishop of Rome to
be the Exarch; for (...), is not a Primate but a Prince, and the Roman
High Priest is that Prince. This shift is refelled in the third Council Conc.
26, juxt. Car.
of Carthage, which determined; The Bishop of the first See (which the Bishop
of Rome is acknowledged to be) shall not be called Prince of the Bishops. As
for the word Exarch in the Ecclesiastical notion, it is sometimes applied to an
Archbishop: thus in the Greek Euchologue, Notice being given to the Patriarch,
that a Church was building, and near finished, he directed a Letter for its
Consecration, (...), to the Metropolitan thereof, or in his absence, to some of
the Bishops in that (...), Province; but ordinarily or more frequently it is
attributed to the Dr. Ham. Ans. to the Animad. on the dissert. p. 177.
Primate, as here, which is confirmed by Anaclitus, who in a Decretal Epistle
received by the Romanists (which therefore is of good Authority against them)
thus informs us, viz. In the head of the Province Primates are placed by Divine
Ecclesiastical Laws, that to them the Bishops when it is needful may resort,
and make their appeals: this also is entered into, and recited in the Body of
the Canon Law, approved and published by Gregory the thirteenth. All which is
perfectly consonant to the directions for Appeals given in the Council of
Chalcedon, Let Appeal be made from the Bishop to the Metropolitan, from him to
the Primate or Exarch; and that Law of the Emperor Justinian, Let Patriarchs
according to the Laws and Canons hear and make an end: But the Bishop of Rome
cannot be this Exarch, for here are two Plenipotentiaries appointed in the same
Commission, strengthened with equal Power, and Authorized to act jointly and
severally in taking Cognizance of the Appeal, and to give Sentence upon it, and
the Pope was neither of these Plenipotentiaries or Commissioners, but only in a
reserved case, when the Bishop complainant should appeal to him; which Bishop
too must be one of his own Diocese, and so had no Power conferred on him, but
that which the rest of the Patriarchs enjoyed equally with him: for the
respective Bishops of their Diocesses might if they pleased Conc. Constan. 1.
c. 3.
Appeal to their own Primate, or the Bishop of Constantinople: (it was at their
discretion to choose which of these they liked, to hear and determine their
cause of Complaint) and were tied to make choice of one of these two, but not
at all to Appeal to Rome, and the Bishop agrieved, (though he were one of the
Roman Patriarch's Diocese) might vvave him, and seek remedy from the Bishop of
Constantinople; and therefore the Bishop of Rome had but the same Power which
the other Patriarchs enjoyed, and the Patriarch of Constantinople had the like
in a more ample manner, than either he or any of the rest; for as all those of
Rome might Appeal to their own Patriarch, so they might refuse, and those of
other Diocesses were prohibited to go to Rome, and were bound either to their
own Diocesan, or else to the Patriarch of Constantinople. But suppose the
Bishop of Rome had been one of these two Plenipotentiaries, the other joined in
Commission with him, had a Coordinate Power, because they were empowered to act
severally; and most certain it is that Coordinacy is inconsistent with
Supremacy, and Equality incompatible with Sovereignty.

But the Sultan Pontificians gave one of N. N's easy Answers to these Premises,
which their Wits will make use of, viz. They are but wordish Testimonies which
are easily despised, or disguised. Their great Achilles has told us in plain
terms, A ready Invention will quickly find an Interpretation to transform them:
but withal he is so civil as to show a ready way how to deceive and baffle
the Wits, which is to produce Matter of Fact, and Practice of the Church,
which is not so easily evaded, nor so liable to misconstruction. If therefore
the Usage concur with the standing Laws, the foregoing Conclusion is rightly
deduced, and the Romanists concluded guilty of those Crimes articled against
them; and what the Practice has been will be easily known by the ensuing
Instances. Fortunatus, Felicissimus, and others being troubled that St. Cyprian
having Intelligence hereof, Writ Lib. 1. Ep. 3. Ed. Pam. 55.
to Cornelius, and reproved him for assuming a Power to himself to judge of a
Sentence passed in Africa; telling him it was a Law amongst them, (and it is
fit and just) the Cause be there heard, where the crime was committed; which in
plain English is, The Fact was done in Africa under his Jurisdiction, and what
had an European to do to meddle with it? for it follows in that Epistle, A
certain portion of the Lords Flock is assigned to each Pastor, etc. and the
Authority of the African Bishops is no whit inferior to that of the Bishops of
Rome, Nisi paucis perditis and desperatis, unless some few desperate lewd
Companions think so. The same St. Cyprian dealt as sharply with Stephen, Bishop
of Rome, another of his contemporaries; whom he charged with Perfidiousness in
undertaking Cypr. Ep. ad Pompeian. Ed. Pam. 74.
the Cause of Heretics, and with Ambition and Tyranny, for that he made
himself Bishop of Bishops, and by Tyranny had driven his fellow-Bishops to a
necessity Conc. Carthag. inter opera Cypr.
of obedience. Baron. has confessed, that that Clause in the Council of
Carthage beginning at Neque enim, etc. relates Bar. An. 588, n. 24.
particularly to Stephen. But Firmilianus and Ep. 45. Ed. Pam.
the Eastern Bishops handled Stephen more roughly, calling him a Schismatic,
and one that had made himself an Apostate from the Communion of Ecclesiastical
Union, and one who thought he might Excommunicate all, thereby indeed
Excommunicating himself alone from all. St. Aug. Ep. 162. Conc. Milev. c. 22.
Codex Afric. c. 23.
in the case of Cecilianus and Donatus a nigris causis, severely rebuked
Melchiades, or Meltiades Bishop of Rome, for that he with his Transmarine
Colleague took upon them to discuss and reverse that Judgment which had been
determined by a Council of Seventy Bishops in Africa. Anastasius with the
concurrence of his Bishops of Rome Decreed, that the Donatists who had been
preferred to Charges and Dignities, though they should return to the Unity of
the Church, should not be continued, but the African Fathers in Council made a
Counter-Decree, that the conforming and repenting Donatists should be received,
and retain their Places and Dignities with a non obstante, Notwithstanding what
had been decreed in the About Ann. 401. Justel. in Cod. Conc. Eccl. Afric. c.
(...). Bals. c. (...) Aug. Ep. 50.
Transmarine (Roman) Synod. Julius Bishop of Rome pressed the restitution of
Athanasius, whereupon the Eastern Bishops met in Council, and signified to him,
that it was a Pragmatical presumption in him to Soz. l. 3. c. 7. to be ordered
by him, Socr. l. 2. c. 11.
interpose in their affairs: he ought not to contradict them, neither would
they endure (...) to be ordered by him? this was not the resolution only of the
Eusebian and Semi-Arrian Bishops (who yet were Conformists to the Orders of the
Church) but Soz. l. 3. c. 12. Epiph. haer. 68. Athan. or. 1. contr Arr.
of the Catholics also acting in the Council, who though they favored
Athanasius and his Cause, yet thought fit to check the Bishop of Rome's
insolency. Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem moved the Council of Chalcedon, that
his Bishopric might be promoted into a Patriarchate, which motion the Fathers
assembled did entertain, and referred the ordering of the matter to himself,
and Maximus the Patriarch of Antioch, who agreed that the Patriarch of Antioch
should hold the two Phenicia's and Arabia, and the Bishop of Jerusalem the
three Palestines, which Accord they represented to the Council, desiring them
to confirm it, which they willingly Conc. Chalc. act. 7. p. 105. Evagr. l. 2.
c. 18. Niceph. l. 5. c. 30. with the consent of the Popes Legates.
condescended to; and over and above procured the Judges to add the Royal
assent for its full settlement. Baronius relates, the Pope resisted what was
done thus in Council, and hindered the Execution thereof for a good while,
which was till the fifth Synod assembled, where Baron. Ann. 553. n. 245, 246.
the Pope gave his Placet, and then, and not till then was the Accord put in
execution; but this is one of the great Annalists mistakes, for fifteen years
before that fifth Synod under Mennas assembled, Peter Patriarch of Jerusalem
did summon all the Bishops of the three Palestines, two whereof were the
Metropolitans of Caesarea and Scythopolis to convene in Council, who
accordingly without demur Conc. Tom. 2. p. 472.
obeyed his summons. The Church and Bishops of Rome for a long time disallowed
and rejected the second General Council, yet the Catholic Church always owned
it, and as occasion offered, acted by it. That which moved the then Romanists
to this dissatisfaction and aversness, was, that that Council had settled the Sea of Constantinople into a Patriarchate, (which Honor they repined at)
giving to the Bishop thereof precedence to the Patriarchs Conc. 2.3.
of Alexandria and Antioch, and granting to him Power and Authority over the
Churches in Asia minor, In all 28 Roman Provinces, Brerewood's Enquiries, p.
125.
Thrace, and Pontus: and therefore soon after this Council determined, the
Resisted it, Baron. An. 553.
Bishop of Rome endeavored to invalidate this Settlement, for, Statim post,
etc. as soon as it was concluded, Damasus then Bishop of Rome indicted a Roman
Synod, in which a Counter-Decree was enacted, which (as Alias Turcelline, l. de
6, 7, and 8 Synodis p. 65.
Turrian relates) is extant in the Vatican: and it is very probable, for Pope
Leo seventy years after Conc. Chalc. Act. 16. p. 136, 137. Leo Ep. 53, 54. Car.
p. 201.
by his Legates in the Council of Chalcedon opposed it, though to no purpose;
for his resistance was not valued either by the Council or the Judges, who
indeed contemned it. These two Popes then did withstand it, but Caran. adds,
That the Church of Rome would not by any means receive it, though (welfare a
little touch of Ingenuity!) for the peace of the Church (which it seems highly
esteemed it), it was not contradicted; which in effect imports thus much, The
Popes and Church of Rome were so cunning as to dissemble their spite against
this Council, (and that Act especially,) but durst not show their teeth for
fear of the Emperor. For the proof of this relation he refers to Innocent the
third, and St. Gregory the great, whom he cites truly; for though in one
Epistle he professes to Lib. 2. Ep. 24.
embrace that Council as one of the four Evangelists, and testifies that the
Church of Ibid. Ep. 10.
Rome then owned it, yet in another Epistle he Lib. 6. Ep. 31.
confesses, that until his time, or age wherein he lived, that Council and the
Acts and Canons thereof were not entertained by the Roman Church, so that for
the space of two hundred years and upwards, (for that Council convened Ann.
381. and Gregory flourished Ann. 600.) it was opposed and rejected as far as in
safe Policy it could be done by the Church of Rome: but notwithstanding this
opposition, the Catholic Church still reputed it a lawful General Council, and
all the Acts and Canons thereof to be obligatory, and occasionally practiced
according to them, which is next to be demonstrated. For by warranty of that
Canon in this Council, which so perplexed the Roman Church, Anatolius,
Patriarch of Constantinople, in the right of his Sec, did take place before,
and above the Patriarchs of Alexandria In the Council of Chalc. Act. 1. Conc.
Chalc. p. 8. Synod. Ann. 553. Coll. 1.
and Antioch, and so did Eutychius in the fifth Synod, Ann. 553. And when it
was reported to the Fathers of Chalcedon that Flavianus Patriarch of
Constantinople in the reprobated Council of Ephesus neglected himself, sitting
below the Patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem, they were much offended, saying
in great zeal, Why did not Flavianus sit in his proper place? that was next to
the Bishop of Rome, or his Legates. By authority of this Canon, which so
troubled the Popes. Patience, St. Chrysostom when he was Bishop of
Constantinople Conc. Chalc. Act. 11. in fine; Soz. l. 8. c. 6. says 14. in
Ann. 400. Pallad. in vit. Chrysostom.
deposed fifteen Bishops in Asia the lesser, and ordained and settled others in
their Sees and Dignities; and in Ann. 400, the same St. Chrysostom celebrated a
Council at Ephesus, to which he called all the Asian Bishops, who readily
attended him. After this Justinian the Emperor commanded all the Canons of
this Council, which the Popes would (if they durst) have publicly rejected,
Dipticis inseri and praedicari, to be Recorded in the Eclesiastical Books,
Rolls, or Registeries, and publicly to be read in all Churches, in token of
their Novel. c. 1, 2.
Universal Approbation. But albeit both Law and Usage (the best Interpreter of
Law) concur for the proof of this Conclusion, yet the cry still goes, O the
Mother, O the Mother Church of Rome, which is hotly pursued by the Bigots set
on by the Boutefeu's of the Tribe. This has made a great clutter and bustle in
the world, which yet has nothing in it but folly, and disingenuity, and
impudence; for can any man in his right Wits, who is not tainted either in his
Intellectuals or Morals, ever hearken to such a Persuasion so contrary to all
Records Divine and Human? The Scriptures make Jerusalem the Mother Church, Gal.
4.16. But Jerusalem which is above (or the New Jerusalem as it is styled,
Revel. 21.2. and the Holy Jerusalem, ver. 10, whose wall had twelve
Foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb) which is
Mother of us all, Christians, Believers of the Gospel; where the Church of
Christ was first planted by the Apostles, and St. Peter Preached his first
Sermon, and begot many to the Faith, and from whence they all departed after to
execute their Apostolical Commission. For this Jerusalem is not that which
shall be, but that in which the House of God shall be built with a Glorious
building, and all Nations shall turn, and fear the Lord God truly, and bury
their Idols, so shall all Nations praise the Lord; and as old Tobit instructed
his Son, Tobit 14* 5, 6, 7, as it is here allegorically expressed, for that
City was a Type of the Christian Church, Psalm. 48.2. and 122.3. Isa. 31.5. In
the Old Testament it was foretold to be the Mother Church of Christianity; Out
of Sion shall go forth the Law, (of Faith, as it is universally Interpreted)
and the Word of the Lord (the Gospel) from Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3. Mic. 4.2. And
in the New Testament the Prophecy is accomplished and verified, where it is
plainly declared, that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be Preached in
Christ's Name among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, etc. Luke 24.47, 48,
49. Act. 1.8. and fully completed, Act. 2. per tot. So for Human evidences the
first General Council at Constantinople is clear, which expressly owneth
Jerusalem for the Mother of all Churches, to which Tert. Cap. 20. which Pam.
thus Gloseth, this is the first, from which the Church all the World over is
disseminated, so Hier. Interprets that of Isa. 2. and this is the Mother Church
from whence the Faith came to us, as the same Tert. lib. 4. adver. Marc. Rome
is but one of the Sister Churches which yet are Mothers in their Precincts, Id.
ib. de praec. c. 36.
may be added in his Book de Prescr. The Church was first founded at Jerusalem,
as the Seminary of the Churches all the World over; and ex abundanti, even in
St. Bernard's time, when the Church of Rome had exceeded her limits, yet had
she not the reputation of Universal Mother, nor the Honor of Lady Mother, at
least in his judgment; for thus he writ to Lib. 4. de Consid. Tom. 2. p. 141.
tit. L. Edit. Venet.
Pope Eugenius, Above all things consider, that the Holy Roman Church over
which thou art placed by God is a Mother of Churches; (some, not all, and so
every Apostolical Church is as well as Rome) not a Lady or Mistress, (of any)
and thou thy self not a Lord of Bishops, but one of them. It is true St.
Cyprian says, Rome is the (or rather a) principal Church, from whence the
unity of Priesthood first began; but this signifies nothing, if Polyidore
Virgil's Caution (as in reason it ought) be Lib. 4. de Invent. rerum.
admitted, Ne quis erret, etc. Lest any man hereby deceive himself, it cannot
in any other way -be said that the Order of Priesthood grew first from Rome,
unless we understand it within Italy only; for liquido liquet, it is clear, and
beyond dispute, that Priesthood was orderly appointed at Jerusalem, long before
ever St. Peter came to Rome. Polydore was in the right, for Rome's Principality
cannot entitle her to be Universal Mother, because if we read the sentence
thus, Rome is a Principal Church, this is as truly predicated of every
Apostolical Church; if the Principal Church, neither will that enstate her in
the challenged and claimed Motherhood, because it was only accidental. If a
younger Sister for her external accomplishment be advanced to be a Lady of
Honor, or married to an Earl or Lord, whereas her elder Sisters continue in
their first State only, or be married to Gentlemen, or others of meaner
condition, She by virtue of her Qualifications may take Place of them, but she
cannot exercise the Authority of a Mother over them. If Rome a younger Sister
of the Mother Churches upon a foreign and extrinsecal account (which was
merely contingent and arbitrary) became the Principal Church, the Principality
might justly give her the precedence of Place, but not precedence of Rule over
them; it made her the most Honorable of the Sisters, but could not create her
Mother to any, or all of them, because this Honor was Adventitious and
Precarious, which accrewed not to her till long after her first Foundation, nor
was derived to her by any Divine Institution. Neither will that subsequent
Clause (from whence Unity of Priesthood first began) be any relevant to her, if
we consider, that this is only spoken in reference to her own Precincts, for
then the whole Sentence would be verified of every Apostolical Church: to
instance in Corinth; this is a or the principal Church of Achaia, from whence
the Unity of Priesthood first began, viz. In the Regions adjacent and belonging
thereto, and so of any other, which were founded before her, as many were; for
these Churches being completely formed, when she was not in being, she could
not propagate the Faith to them, nor consequently be a Mother Church to them.
The soonest that is pretended St. Peter came to Rome was in the second of
Claudius, but certain it is St. Mark Preached the Gospel at Alexandria, and
over all Egypt, Lybia, Cyrene, Pentapolis, and the whole Region of Barbary, in
the Reign of Tiberius. And St. Aug. affirms the Africans (the more Western)
received the Faith not from Rome, but the East. The Southern Christians, as the
Abyssines and Aethiopians, were Converted when St. Peter was still at
Jerusalem; at least eight years before he came to Rome by the Romanists
account. The Eastern Bishops told Julius (as was before related) Rome received
the Faith from them; and in Britain the Christian Faith was professed five
years at least before ever St. Peter set his Foot in Rome, and therefore Rome
could not be Mother to those elder Sisters of Asia, Africa, Aethiopia, and
Britain, unless an uncouth Hyster^sis be allowed, or some Noble Roman would
undertake to prove that Claudius reigned before Tiberius, as a grave Burgess
once did to prove that Henry the seventh was before Henry the sixth; and
therefore these Churches could not from the beginning be under her
Jurisdiction, and therefore also can justly claim the Cyprian Privilege, and
plead it in the abatement of any Papal possession, or prescription. But to
confirm this Title they make their Plea from Eusebius in his Chronicle (or else
it is insisted upon very impertinently) who relates, That St. Peter sat at
Antioch seven years, after which (therefore Antioch is her elder Sister, and
Evodius Bishop there before. St. Peter ordained any Bishop or Priest at Rome)
he traveled to Rome, where he resided five and twenty years. It is very
probable this Book of Eusebius has fallen into the hands of Interpolators.
Canus Refert Rivet. l. 3.
their learned Bishop with much regret complains, It has been corrupted in
many places through the negligence, ignorance, or haste of the Transcribers or
Translators: this place is probably one of them, for in the Greek Edition
published by Jos. Scaliger, Printed Lugd. Bat. An. 1606. there is no mention of
any determinate time of St. Peter's coming, or his abode and residence at Rome;
all that is said there, is this, Peter the chief (as Aristotle is* Princeps
Philosophorum) having first founded a Church at Antioch, went to Rome to Preach
the Gospel there: and it is the more probable in that this Relation in the
corrupted Chronicle is contradicted by Eusebius himself, Lib. 3. Eccl. hist. c.
1. Peter (says he) having Preached the Gospel in Pontus, Galatia, Bithynia,
Cappadocia, and Asia, to the Jews which were of the dispersion (which in all
probability was before his residence at Antioch, for we find in Scripture he
was at Jerusalem, Ann. 19. Tiber. and Ann. 2 Claudii, Act. 8. and 12.) at the
last, or at the end, (near the approach of his death) being at Rome was put do
death; which makes some conceive that St. Paul, whose first coming to Rome was
in Ann. Dom. 58. Neron. secundo, had planted a Church at Rome ten years almost
before St. Peter came there; and others think, that St. Peter continued in
Judaea and in the adjacent Regions till Ann. 7 Claud. Ann. Dom. 49. and
therefore this Story that he presided and resided at Rome for five and twenty
years is hardly reconcilable with evidence of History in many particulars: to
which may be added what Onuphrius notes in Plat. de vit. Pont. in Pet. Apost.
placing his third and last return to Rome in the last year of Nero; and what
Epiphanius Haer. 3.
testifies, that St. Peter and St. Paul where they planted Churches ordained
Bishops to preside over them, (as St. Paul did Titus in Creet, and St. Peter
Evodius at Antioch) and after went to other Countries to Preach the Faith. All
these Reasons and Authorities being premised, the Conclusions are irrefragable,
and the Church of Rome as it is now managed, is found guilty of the Crimes
articled against her, and stands condemned of them by the four first General
Councils, which undoubtedly have so far convinced several ingenuous and
judicious Romanists, that they have not sticked to declare with Protestants,
that the present Church of Rome has swerved in sincerity of Doctrine from the
ancient Church whence it is derived; that the Pope has advanced his Authority
beyond the bounds Cusan. Consult. Art. 7.
set by Christ and his Church, yea far beyond the bounds Cusan. concor. l. 2.
c. 12. and l. 3. c. 13.
of Ancient observation, and that he has no Power over other Bishops either by
Gods Law or Man's, but such as was given him either absolutely or conditionally
for a time by Marsil. Petav. def. part. 2. c. 18.
the Nicene Council.

But because N. N. stands so much upon his points of Prudence, it may be
neither an imprudent, nor impertient digression to compare the Romish
Principles and Practices with the Protestant, and by discussing one of them
more largely to judge of the rest more clearly.

It is universally acknowledged, that the Doctrine of all Apostolical Churches
disseminated over the whole Christian World is Infallibly certain, because
attested by Universal Tradition, which in it self is so; but it is generally
confessed, that the Tradition of an Apostolical Church of one denomination, may
prudently be traversed, because often found certainly False. Now Protestants
rely upon Universal Tradition, truly such for Time, Place, and Persons, and the
Authority of all Apostolical Churches. Papists content themselves, and sit down
in security with the Tradition and Authority of the Roman Church, and which is
worse, of the present Romish Church of this age. Protestants prescribe for
Sixteen hundred years, there is no Law nor Custom to destroy or overruled a
Prescription of so long standing. Papists plead (as N. N. does) the
acknowledgment of the sixteenth Century, over-leaping all the rest, and that
but in our parts of the World. Protestants believe the Scripture to be the
adequate Rule of Faith, as to the essentials thereof. Papists hold unwritten
Traditions are to be received with the same reverence and respect. Protestants
esteem those Books to be Canonical Scripture which the Catholic Church has so
adjudged. Papists singularly superadd others to the Canon. Protestants believe
the Truths they profess to be Divine Revelation, because God by his Son Jesus
Christ has delivered and promulgated them to Mankind. Papists believe their
supernumerary Articles, which they assume to themselves, because defined by an
Infallible Pope with the advice and consent of a presumed General Council.
Protestants assert the Pope is not Infallible, for Pope Honorius was a
Convicted Heretic, as before has been proved: The Catholic Church has
always resolved against his Infallibility, and the Doctors of that Church
cannot agree about it, and some of them oppose it; neither was that Council
General, say the Protestants, because no Southern nor Eastern Bishops was
there, nor any Northern but one titular only, Olaus magnus the Goth, who for
that time passed as an Archbishop of Sweethland; no English Bishops, nor
Irish, save another blind Sir Robert the Scot, who for that time being was
reputed the Primate of Ireland; only two French Bishops, six Spanish, the rest
were Italians, who when they came to be arrayed were mustered but to Forty
three in all. This was a Plot of the Pope to keep what his Predecessor Leo the
tenth had got by the Lateran Assemblers, and after him others still maintained;
but he was for all this contrivance possessed with fears and jealousies, the
Council would be tampering with his Jurisdiction, as other Councils had done,
and therefore was very careful to have fresh supplies in readiness for a
reserve; and according as the Pope suspected, it happened, for the Council began
to form Canons for the redress and reformation of several abuses, and to abridg
the Popes unlimited Power in granting Dispensations, of which design he
received early intelligence from his Legates, and thereupon moved the Council
to desist from any further progress therein for six weeks, which being accepted
and condescended to, he dispatched his new recruits of Auxiliaries (forty
Italian and Sicilian Bishops) who within the time limited ariving at Trent
over-voted the reformers in the Council, and quite quashed their attempts,
which made the Apulean Bishops cry out in open Council, O we are the Popes
Creatures, we are the Popes Carol. Malin. l. de ton. Frid. n. 21.
Slaves! Protestants rely only upon the Mercy of God and Merits of Christ for
their Salvation. This Bellarm. says, is the safest way, and therefore it is
the most Prudential; Papists will join in their own Merits of Works done by
Grace, which Bellarm. confesses is a more uncertain way, and therefore less
Prudential. Protestants ascribe all Religious Worship to God, and to God only;
Papists give it to Images, and the Consecrated Host. Protestants know it is an
indispensable duty to Pray to God for all things necessary both for Soul and
Body, and direct their Prayers only to God the Father, through, and for the
Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ alone; Papists Pray to God by Jesus
Christ, for which Duty Zanchee entertains a charitable opinion of them, but
withal they invocate Angels and Saints departed, as Conductors, secondary and
subordinate Mediators, for which Practice Protestants aver there is no warranty
in Scripture, no Authority from Primitive Antiquity, nor any rule in Reason to
approve it either a necessary, lawful, or an expedient Duty. But because some
eminent Protestants have declared that Papists have more to say for this
particular, than in any of their other eleven additional new forged Articles,
if this Principle and Practice of theirs be cogently proved unscriptural,
unpractical, and irrational, the same may be concluded of the rest.

CHAP. VI.
SECT. I.
IT is Unscriptural. The Scripture teaches us, and commands us to ask the
Father in the name of his Son Jesus Christ; it prescribes no rule to ask in
any other name, but declares against it, For it proposes Christ to us as our
only Mediator, and Intercessor; there is one God to whom we are to make our
requests known by Prayer and Supplication, and there is one Mediator between
God and Man, 1 Timothy 2.5, the Godman Jesus Christ, by whom we have boldness of
access to the Throne of Grace. The Greek (...) is emphatical, importing thus
much, as there is one God only, and no more, even so there is one Mediator
betwixt God and Man in reference to our Prayers, Supplications, Intercessions,
and Thanksgivings, ver. 2. one God, and no other besides him, even so one
Mediator and none but he, who is our Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, 1 John 2.1. who as he performed all Righteousness for us, so the
virtue and value thereof, qualifies and capacitates him for the Office of being
Advocate for us, viz. to recommend, open, and plead our Cause for us, and
procure our Prayers to be granted; none can effectually Mediate for us, but he
who did Redeem us; he only can be our Advocate who is the Propitiation for our
Sins, which was Jesus only, who for the more effectual execution of his Office
of Advocate after he had offered himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice for our Sins
was advanced to sit on the right hand of God the Father, Romans 8.34. where it
may be observed, that it is the same Person that died for us; and therefore as
Jesus alone died for our Sins, and rose again for our Justisication, so for the
application of these Benefits, and Privileges to us, he only sits at God's
Right Hand, and makes Intercession for us; this Office being as proper, and
peculiar to him, as to be the firstborn of the Dead. For as the honor of
sitting on the Right Hand of God follows his Resurrection from the dead, so
the Office of Intercession follows the Honor of sitting on the Right Hand of
God, and is inseparably united and annexed to it; and therefore none can assume
or exercise that Office for us, but he who was honored which is Jesus only) to
sit on God's Right Hand; and none can be entitled or admitted to this Honor,
but he who humbled himself to death, even the death of the Cross, and thereby
merited this Exaltation, that at his name every knee should bow, and every,
etc. Phil. 4.8, etc. for this Office of Intercession is the consequent effect,
and ultimate end of his Exaltation, as the Apostle proves, Heb. 7.25.
Wherefore (because he is our eternal High Priest) he is able to save them to
the uttermost [to the full] that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make Intercession for us. Whene it follows, we are to come to God by his Son
Jesus Christ our High Priest, and for our encouragement that we may come with
Confidence, and a full assurance, we have this strong Consolation, He is able
to save us to the uttermost; and this he is able to do, for that He our
High Priest ever lives to make Intercession for us, which the same Apostle
has repeated, and further expressed, Heb. 24. He has entered into Heaven it
self, now ( viz. to this end, and on this errand) to appear in the presence of
God for us, viz, as our Intercessor and Advocate, from all which premises we
may be bold to argue in the Apostolical Form, used by the same Apostle upon
another, but not unlike occasion, Heb. 1.19. To which of the Angels or Saints
departed said God at any time, Sit thou on my Right Hand to make Intercession
for man? or, Sit thou on my Right Hand to appear in my presence for him? or, be
thou Advocate with the Father for him? Or, said God at any time, Whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in the name of Angels or Saints departed, it shall be
given you? certainly God never employed any the most excellent Creature in any
Office betwixt himself and man, but he first signed a Commission for it; but
neither God nor his Son Jesus Christ did ever make any Grant, Substitution or
Deputation of this Honor and Power to any, either Angel or Saint departed. It
is true the Blessed Spirits are affirmed to stand about the Throne of God, and
the Holy Angels to behold his face, but it is never said, they sit at Gods
Right Hand, or live for ever to make Intercession for us. The Holy Angels are
Gods Ministering Spirits, and the Spirits of just men departed are his Glorified
Saints, but God has made Jesus only to be Lord and Christ, to whom all things
in heaven and earth must bow; and let all the Angels honor him, and all the
Saints fall down before, and all men Honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father, Joh. 5.23. because to set up any subservient subordinate Lords in this
Office of Intercession, is such a piece of Heathenish Idolatry, that the
Apostle St. Paul thought it fit to caution the Corinthians against it, and
instruct them in the pure Worship and Service of God as becomes Christians, 1
Cor. 8.5. Though there be many that are called Gods (as there be Gods many and
Lords many) but to us there is but one God the Father, and one Lord Jesus
Christ; in which words there is a direct opposition betwixt the Heathen Form of
Application to their Supreme fictions Gods, and the Christians way of
Supplication to the only true God. The Heathens address themselves to their
Sovereign Gods by their under Gods or Godlings, which the Greeks called (...),
Demons, the Scriptures of the Old Testament Baalims, or Lords, who were reputed
Agents, and Mediators betwixt their chief Gods and them: Their Sovereign Gods
they styled (...), Lords in, of, or from Heaven betwixt whom and men they
supposed there was no immediate intercourse; their mean Inferior Lords were
accounted (...): Celsus phraseth them (...) Lords on, or from the Earth, whom
they honored with a relative subaltern Worship, as their Mediators and
Advocates, thinking thereby they more highly honored their Supreme Gods. But
Christians know, and profess there is but one God the Maker of all things in
Heaven and Earth, to whom they are to make their Prayers and Supplications, and
they have but one Lord, Advocate and Mediator, by whom they present and offer
their Petitions to the Almighty Father. For the opposition lies in the
Heathenish plurality both of their Supreme Gods, and Subordinate Mediators,
viz. Heathens have many Gods, and many Lords Mediators; and in the singularity
of the Christians God, and Lord Mediator, viz. they have but one God, and one
Lord Mediator, even Jesus whom God has made both Lord and Christ, Act. 2.36.
Thus Origin understood this Text, for to it sure he refers Orig. Ceis. lib.
8.381.
, when he tells Celsus, The Scripture indeed does call God the God of Gods, and
Lord of Lords, but withal says, to us there is but one God the Father of whom
are all things, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by
him; which the Apostle speaks of himself, and all other whose minds are raised
up to him, do Worship him inseparably and indivisibly in his Son. Therefore
there being many Gods and many Lords, we endeavor by all means, not only to
carry our minds above those things on Earth, which are Worshipped by the Heathen
for Gods, but above those whom the Scriptures call Gods, viz. Angels. For these
reasons, and many more, deducible from Holy Writ, Protestants have often urged
and pressed the Papists to produce one positive Precept, clear Example, or
plain Promise from the Scripture for their Saint or Angel Mediatorship, but
hitherto they have not been very forward to accept the challenge, only some of
them who were resolved to say something for themselves, have pitched upon some
places of Scripture for proof of their Principle and Practice, which yet others
of them being more judicious and ingenious, have not conceived Argumentative
and satisfactory; nor indeed that any thing can be evinced or deduced thence
that is cogent and convincing, which will appear by these particulars.

1. From the Testimony of their Grave and Learned Polemick Divines, who have
acknowledged, they have no express Scripture for this Doctrine and usage, and
if so, it was too much confidence to form the Doctrine into an Article of
Faith, and to impose and exact the Practice as a profitable duty, yea so
profitable, that the omission was Sin. Implications and remote deductions were
never before thought sufficient Mediums for the superstructing of an Article of
Faith, and an Essential to Salvation. Eckius Enchir. de ven. Sanct. c. 15. sub.
finem.
has freely confessed, Explicit non est, etc. Invocation of Saints departed
is not expressly delivered in Scripture, for which he assigns his Reasons, such
as they are. Not in the Old Testament; because the Jews were inclined to
Idolotry (therefore there is danger of Idolatry in the Practice) and the
Fathers were in Limbo, not then in Heaven; Bellarm. De Sanct. beatit. c. 19.
Sect. Item, etc. 20. Sect. atque ex his.
herein is of his mind. Not in the New Testament, for two reasons; First, Lest
the Gentiles should upon their Conversion think themselves (therefore the
Practice may be justly suspected, and is scandalous, which the prudent and
charitable Romanists should avoid) obliged to Worship the Inferior Godlings or
Demons, as formerly they have done, or which is all out as bad, a new set of
petty Vnder-Gods in exchange of the old ones: The second is, Because if the
Apostles had delivered this Doctrine (or which is all one, had ordained and
observed the Practice) they might be concluded ambitious, and vainglorious
self-seekers, who designed, and after death expected the honor of Religious
Invocation; This reason beside other inconveniences it is liable to, thwarts
the Trent determination, that the Practice was Apostolical; for if in their
time it was current, then they did institute an observation and usage for their
own Honor and Worship. Cope Dial. 3. in Script. Nov. Test.
alias Harpsfield is of the same Opinion. But Bannes Bannes 22. qu. 1. ant. 10.
speaks the whole truth without mincing the matter, Invocation of Saints is
neque express, nec involute, Neither clearly nor covertly declared in
Scripture; which is also Which is also affirmed to be unknown in the Old
Testament. Pigh. contr. Ratisb. l. 13. Suar. m. 3. Th. q. 52. disp. 41, 42.
Sect. 1. p. 514. Not in the New, Salmer. m. 1. Tim. 2. disp. 8. Sect. postremo.
Not in the Gospel, Horantius loc. Cath. l. 3. c 1.31. Not used in the Apostles
days, Peers. de Trad. p. and de cult. Sanctor S. Clara, expos. Paraphr. Divines
of Collen, Censur. p. 250. and antid. p. 34.
affirmed by Pighius, Suarez. Peers. de Aiala, Sanct. Clara, and the Divines of
Colen.

2. From the Judgment of their Learned Interpreters who expound those Texts of
Scripture (which the bolder sort presume not without the guilt of Perjury to
wrest and corrupt to their own sense) as the ancient Doctors of the Church have
done, and as Protestants do now; which will appear by viewing the most
considerable produced by them. The first is fetched from Genesis 32.24, etc. but
Bonfrer. confesses many of the ancient Fathers understood this Text of Jacob's
wrestling with God, and so did the ancient Rabbis, which is confirmed by the
following words, and by Hosea 12.3, 4, 5, in the opinion of Vatab. and Ar.
Mout. to this they add Genesis 48.16, insisting first on that clause, The Angel
which redeemed me from all evil, bless the Lads. But Com. in Genesis 23. Piega,
Com. in Apoc. 8. Sect. 2. p. 343.
Pererius acknowledges that many of the ancient Fathers interpreted this of
Christ, though he thinks otherwise, and is resolved (without any respect to his
Oath binding him to follow their Interpretations) to understand it of an Angel
properly so called, because (says he) Christ is never precisely styled an
Angel, but always with an additament, as the Angel of the Covenant. But other
Romish Interpreters conceive this to be a groundless conjecture; Viegathus
censures it, Some (says he) of our Writers affirm that Christ is never called
an an Angel Absolutely and simply in the Scripture; but this is a mistake in
them; it is sufficient, that it be collected and inferred from the consequents;
and therefore he is confident the Angel mentioned Rev. 8.4, was Christ, and
Pintus Pintus Conc. in loc. Riber. com. in Hebr. 7. n. 81.
that the Angel spoken of Dan. 3.28, was Christ, and Ribera that the Angel
spoken of Zech. 1.12, was Christ; hereby then it is manifest the Protestants
follow the ancient Catholic Doctors in their Interpretation of this clause,
and Perer. with the other R^manists who urge these words in defense of their
practice of Angel Invocation desert and reject them, and most certainly side
with the Arrian Heretics. But they go on to the next Period of the Verse, Let
my name be named on them, and the name of my Fathers Abraham and Isaac. But
Protestants expound these words by Verse. 5, 6, and so do Learned Romanists, Ar.
Arias Mont. in loc. Riber. com. in Amos 9. n. 42. Cajet. etc. in loc.
Mont. Riber. Fonsec. Cajet. Lyra. Hucard. Pintus, Esthius. Then Luke 15.7, and
10, is alleged in the Roman Catechism, Par. 3. Cap. 2. Sect. 5. p. 297. Ann.
1606. to prove the Practice, for thus it is argued, They [the Angels] rejoice
at the conversion of a Sinner, therefore (Rogati) being supplicated, they can
obtain pardon for our Sins, and procure Gods grace for us; this is a strange
inconsequence, for from hence it would follow, because Protestants rejoice at
the Conversion of a Papist, therefore the Papists should Religiously Invocate
them as coadjutors; and being thus Invocated can purchase those Benefits for
them; but our late Apostates urge them to another purpose, viz. to prove
thereby that Angels know the Secrets of men's Heart; this no way follows,
because they know the Repentance of a Sinner by its Signs and Fruits, and so
rejoice at his Conversion, therefore they have the intuitive knowledge of the
Heart: But in the judgment of many ancient Fathers, this Rejoicing of theirs is
not for the Conversion of a Particular Sinner, but for the Redemption of all
mankind, which is the lost Sheep, for all that sinned in Adam, and so lost both
their Innocence and Felicity; and they rejoiced, that God had discovered a
means equivalent to Innocence, viz. Repentance in order to their recovery and
future happiness, and with them concurs Titus Sostr. and Cajet. in loc.
Tit. Bostr. and Cajet. And lastly supposing it were to be understood of
individual Sinners, yet is this Rejoicing not to be ascribed to Angels, but to
God, who confessedly is the Shepherd looking for the stray Sheep, and the
Woman seeking the lost Groat. Next they produce Matthew. 22.30. Luke 20.36. but
first it was incumbent on them to prove the Angels are to be Invocated before
they can conclude from hence, ( viz. from the Saints departed equality with
Angels) they are to be Invocated, and so the whole may be granted. and yet it
appears not from the Text that they receive this equality with the Angels at
their first admission to the Beatifical Vision, but only that they shall
receive this similitude* of condition at the Resurection of the just; and so
their now Reigning in Heaven does not qualify them for this Duty, nor will do
till the day of Judgment: and even then they shall be equal to Angels not in
every respect; for as they differ in nature and kind, so they shall have
distinct natural qualities and operations; for then the Angels shall remain as
they are, more Spiritual substances, the Saints departed shall have Bodies,
though these also in some respect Spiritualized and incorruptible; but some
only, and these specified and intimated in the Context, in that Spiritualized
state they shall not need Matrimony for the propagation of their kind, nor Food
for the preservation of their numerical persons, as Alphonsus Alphonsus a
Castro, l. 3. c. haer. Jansen. Harm. Evaug. c. 117.
a Castro and Jansen. understand the words, and so they shall be as the Angels,
or equal to them in being the Children of God, for that they are Children of
the Resurection; which in effect amounts to this, they as the Angels shall be
free from all the necessities of a temporal human life, and from all material
and corporeal affections, and (which is more) shall be equal to the Angels in
the participation of eternal bliss, and the immovable possession of that
Inheritance which is incorruptible, undefiled, and fades not away, and
reserved for them. Again they produce Rev. 5.8. four and twenty Elders fell,
etc. but Viega, Lyra and Haimo will tell them, these four and twenty Elders are
not the members of the Church Triumphant, Saints reigning in Heaven; but of the
Church Militant, and principally the Pastors Viega in Apoc. c. 4. Lyr. in 8. pl
1.
and Bishops thereof: And lastly they cite Rev. 8.4. but several of their
learned Expositors will satisfy them that that Angel is Christ, Albert. Viega.
Hug. Card. Haimo. in loc. Aug. Hom. 4. in Apocal. Neither were these
Supplications for Pardon and Grace, but for Thanksgivings for the redemption of
the World, as appears by ver 9, and 13. August. Hom. 6. in Apocal.
Haimo, the Glosses, and Diouys. Carthus. says the Catholic Doctors
understand it so.

SECT. II.
IT is unpractical. Indeed the Tridentine Assemblers affirm it is a good and
profitable Practice to* Invocate Angels and Saints departed, and their great
reason of this their affirmation is, that it is a Custom received from the
Apostles, and perpetually has been retained in the Church of God; and
agreeable hereunto, it is so resolved in the Roman Catechism, Par. 2. c. 2.
Sect. 5. p. 297. and yet it is most evident that St. Paul when he instructed
the Christians of his time in the Duty of Prayer, not only for the Substance
thereof, but descending to a consideration of its convenient circumstances,
never hinted the expediency of this so supposed profitable Practice, which
certainly he would not have omitted if he had entertained such a conceit of the
profitableness of this Duty as the Romanists do. For he professes that he kept
nothing back that was profitable to the Asians during the time of his residence
with them, but that publicly and privately (which is all one with in season
and out of season) he taught them Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord
Jesus Christ; now because it is impossible to make it appear by any one
instance, that either he taught this Doctrine of Invocating the Blessed
Spirits, or prescribed the Practice, or ever exemplified it to them by his own
usage, it necessarily follows, he never deemed either the Doctrine or Practice
to be any profitable Duty, or any part of Repentance toward God, or of Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ. But as it was no Apostolical practice, so neither
could it be the constant Custom of the Church in the Primitive succeeding
Centuries. For the Doctrine and the present. Practice of the Church of Rome
being grounded on this supposition, that the Saints departed do now Reign in
Heaven, and enjoy the Beatifical Vision, whereby they are capacitated to have
cognizance of the Devotions of their humble Petitioners, those Primitive
Doctors who did peremptorily deny the supposition cannot be supposed to assert
the Doctrine and Practice founded thereupon, because he that denies the
supposition must consequently deny the Doctrine and Practice established upon
it, unless he be presumed to be so inconsiderate and interested as to believe
and act contrary to his received Principles; and it is hardly to be believed
that those ingenious Romanists who profess great reverence to antiquity, will
think so hardly of the ancient Fathers. Now Learned Romanists do confess that
Eighteen Catholic Doctors and Fathers of the best note both of the Western and
Eastern Church have constantly affirmed the Saints departed do not enjoy the
Beatifical Vision, but after death are kept in certain hidden receptacles in
Rest and Peace till the General Resurrection; and they were great names who are
confessed to be of this opinion, viz. Clem. Romans Just. Mart. Orig. Tert. Ambr.
Lact. Hill. Chrysostom. Prud. Theod. Theod. Theoph. Euih. Oecum. Ar. Caesar. and
Bernard. Neither could those eminent Fathers who from the Catholic Practice of
Invocating God by his Son Jesus Christ, and praying in the Holy Ghost be
supposed to Invocate the Blessed Saints because they concluded from this
Practice the Divinity of the Son, and the Holy Ghost, disputing against the
Arrians and Macedonians, viz. Catholics did Pray unto them; the force of which
argument depended upon a received rule among them, that God alone was to be
Invocated; neither could those Ancients have justly condemned the Arrians of
Idolatry for Invocating Christ, whom they conceived to be a Creature, but that
they had resolved that no Creature was capable of the Divine honor of
Invocation. But both Bellarm. and Vide Infra.
Petavius confesses, we must not say their Argument was weak and inconclusive
(and it was so, if a distinction would have invalidated it) for then the
Arrians would by such evasion have worsted the Catholics because they could
have retorted upon them with great advantage. For if the Catholics had
practiced this invocation of the Blessed Spirits, the Arrians would have galled
them with this return; You Catholics, or who would be reputed so, charge us
with the guilt of Idolatry in that we Pray to Christ whom we judge a Creature,
whereas you give the same honor to Blessed Spirits, the Angels and Saints
departed; and therefore take the guilt home to yourselves, and object not that
to us, wherein you your selves are more criminal; if the Catholics had replied
in excuse of this their Fact (as the Romanists now do) We indeed Invocate those
Creatures with indirect, subaltern and relative Prayer, but direct, sovereign
and final, we render to God only, and when we Pray to him, we have more high
and hohourable Conceptions of his Divine Majesty, than we have to those
Creatures when we Pray to them; The Arrians would have smartly rejoyned, even
so do we Invocate Christ, and in our inward thoughts we honor him above all
other Creatures, and we have better reason to Invocate Christ than you have to
Invocate Angels or Saints departed, because confessedly Christ is superior to
them, and deserves greater Honor than they can expect, or is due to them; if
Doulia or Hyperdoulia belong to them, or any of them, much more is due to
Christ, who if he be not God equal with the Father, yet is far above all
Angels, Principalities and Powers, and every name which is named in Heaven and
Earth; besides we have clear Text that we should Honor the Son even as we do
Honor the Father, and not the least intimation in Scripture we should so
Honor the Angels, but on the contrary that all Angels should Worship him, in
that he by Inheritance has obtained a more excellent name than they. It is
altogether unnecessary to multiply Quotations from the Ancients, or to cite
those numerous places which are to be found in the Writings of the Fathers of
the Catholic Church, to prove what the Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic
Primitive Church has been in this instance; it is sufficient for the
satisfaction of any considerate disinterested person to let him know that the
Testimonies which the Protestants have produced from them are so forcible, that
the great Cardinal Never any Author before him had invenred those Authors. Ep.
ad Bell. See Bellarmin's life l. 2. c. 7. R. 3.
Perron has confessed, he was forced to strain his Invention and great Parts
to frame Answers to them, and when he had racked them to the height, all that
he could Apologetically feign in excuse of the present Practice of the Romish
Church, was, to accuse and impeach the Fathers of deep dissimulation and
Imposture; For first Upon the Head of Invocation of Saints, p. 1044, 1045.
he says, The Fathers in their Writings against the Gentiles said those
things, not which they did believe, but dissembling and disguising their
Practice* said those things which served their cause to refute the Gentiles
Objections. This Scandalous Imputation is enough to crack their Credits for
ever in the judgment of honest minds; for who will ever believe them who for a
color to their cause are so wicked as to speak Lies in hypocrisy? or ever
esteem them as the chiefest Apologists and choicest Advocates of Christianity,
who were egregious Prevaricators, and mean contemprible Proctors in their own
and the Churches concern? Or, who will ever rely upon their Testimony who were
so weak and sottish, as to attempt the dissembling of that which could not be
concealed, and the disguising of that which could not be denied or evaded; For
the Gentiles as they were Artists enough to find out any Sophistical shufflings
in their discourses and disputes against them, so they were malicious and
active Adversaries, having their Spies and Trapanners abroad to give them
intelligence of the Christians Practice both in their Civil and Religious
Conversation; and if these failed, there were too many lapsed Christians who
would inform them to the full, and too many false Brethren who industriously
pretended to Christianity, that thereby when occasion served they might accuse
them to the Higher Powers; such as those of the Circumcision were in the
Apostles time, who were unawares brought in, and came in privily as Spies, Gal.
2. and after Ages have been all out as bad, if not worse, after Nero's Reign.
In the second place the Cardinal tells us, The Fathers in their Writings
against the Heathens declined to speak of the Churches Prayers, lest the
Gentiles might think there were some appearance of conformity, (though but
false and fallacious,) betwixt the Churches Practice herein, and that of the
Heathen, and thereby take an occasion (though upon no just ground) to retort
upon their Practice. This insimulation is somewhat more modest or less
irreverent than the former, but as false and fallacious. For,

SECT. III.
[1] THE Fathers in their Writings to the Heathens did not decline, but declare
what the Churches Prayers were both for matter and form: witness Just. Apol. 2.
Clem. Alex. l. 7. Strom. p. 717. Tert. Apol. c. 30. p. 27. and de O^at. Domini,
c. 1, and 12.
Mart. Clem. Alex. and Tert. and it appears from Flinies Epistle to the
Emperor Trajane, The Heathens were well accquainted with the Christians
Practices in their Assemblies: in this therefore the Cardinal dissembleth, and
in the next Period of his Sentence, he disguiseth and glosseth the matter. For,

[2] The Churches Prayers then were not the same with those now in use in the
Romish Church, as he fallaciously suggesteth, but perfectly Protestant, as the
Prayers of the Holy Martyr Policarp recited in Eusebius lib. 4. c. 15. to which
may be added, that when the People of Smyrna desired to have the Body of their
Martyred Bishop for its Burial, the Jews persuaded the Governor not to grant
their Request upon this unworthy pretense, the Christians would Worship it; to
which false suggestion the Christians replied, We can never be induced (...),
to Worship any other with Religious Adoration but Christ, him we adore, others
we worthily love and respect. This Protestation was thus rendered in the Ex
passionario, M. S. 7 Call. Febr. in Bibl. Eccl. Sarisb. and Dom. Rober. Cottoni.
Latin Edition, Nunquam Christum, etc. We Christians can never forsake Christ,
who did vouchsafe to suffer so great things for our Sins, nor impart precem
Orationis, the Devotion, Religion, or Supplication of Prayer to any other; and
accordingly as it was thus Translated it was publicly read in all the Churches
of the West.

[3.] If they did forbear to speak of the Churches Prayers, lest the Gentiles
should retort it upon them, then because the Gentiles had good intelligence of
their Practice, as has been proved, but never did retort it upon them, it may
safely be concluded, their Practice was not the same with that of the present
Romish Church; and that Reason assigned by some Pontificians, why in the
Apostles time they and their Disciples abstained from this Practice cannot
hold, unless we take in the Three hundred years succeeding; for so long time
did the Christians and Heathens live promiscuously, as Fellow*Subjects to the
same Higher Powers, and the Heathens knew what the Christians practiced; during
which space of time, if that had been the Churches Practice, which is surmised
by the Romanists, the Heathen would have looked upon it with jealousy, as a
politic trick cunningly contrived by the Christians to set up a new modelled
Court of Requests, and take just occasion thereby to retort upon their
Practice, which because they did not, therefore so long time there was no such
practice in the Church. But if their, and the Cardinal's reason be good, it
will render the Romanists very imprudent, or uncharitable, or both, in that
when they endeavor the Conversion of the Heathen to their Church, they do not
conceal, and forbear this so suspicious and offensive Practice to them.

[4.] The Cardinal* dissembleth, in that he pretends, there is but some
appearance of Conformity betwixt the Practice of the Romish Church and their
Heathen Ancestors. For if we may believe the reports and complaints of some
learned Romanists, the Practice of the common People in that Communion (either
approved, or connived at in their Church, and cheated thereto by lying Miracles
and Impostures, purposely invented to countenance the Practice) has been an
exact conformity with that of their Heathen Predecessors. Espenceus In 1 Timothy
2. digr. 17. p. 118. Cassand. Consul. art. 31. p. 1541.
and Cassander witness for their times, that the vulgar did put more confidence
in the Merits and Intercession of St. Patrons, than in the Mercy of God, and
Merits of Christ; so far that the only Office of Christ's Intercession was
obscured; and Ludovicus Iu Aug. l. 8. de Civ. Dei, c. 17. p. 494.
Vives thought so too, for he avoucheth, Divos Divasque, etc. they Worship
Saints both Men and Women in the same manner they worship God, and I cannot see
(said he) that there is any difference between the Opinion they have of the
Saints, and that which the Gentiles had of their Gods. Here was no dissembling
nor disguising, but plain dealing, and therefore the Inquisition must pass on
this Sentence, and accordingly by the Order of the Divines of Lovain it was
left out, in the Paris Edition of St. August. Ann. 1613. A plain matter of Fact
makes this notorious; Thomas Becket was Canonized a Saint by the Pope Alexand.
III. Baron. Ann. 1073. n. 1.
, and albeit the Nobles and Peers Gerald. Cambrensis Hibern. expugn. l. 2. c.
33.
of this Realm gave in charge in Henry the second's time, that no man upon pain
of Death should be so hardy as to call Becket a Martyr, yet did Popular Fury
and Folly so far prevail by the insinuations of Popishly affected Bigots, that
a Shrine was erected to him in the Cathedral of Canterbury, whereto oblations
of so great value were brought, that Pope Radul. de Diceto Ymag. Hist. p. 631.
Urban ordered a distribution to be made thereof, which he might very well do.
For as the account stands upon Record the Oblation at his Altar one Year with
another amounted to eight hundred, or a Thousand Pounds per Annum, (which in
those days was a vast Sum); but at the Virgins Altar there, the Oblations came
but to Two hundred Pounds, and at Christ's Altar there, some years to Twelve
Pounds, others to Five Marks, and one year to just nothing. This was the
Devotion of those times, it went less to Christ than to the Virgin, and less to
her than to this new dubbed titular Saint. Saunders De Schis. Angl. l. 1. p.
167, 168.
relates, that in Henry the eighth's time Six and twenty great Wainloads of
Gold, Silver, Jewels, Ornaments and Vtensils were taken from this Monument and
carried away. But this is not only the Practice of the Vulgar, but of all
members of the Romish Church, Witness their Missals and Breviaries in common
use amongst them, the Ladies Psalter, and in horis Beatae Mariae secundum usum
Sarum; This they cannot deny, and therefore to color the matter, they have
devised fine quirks, which are far beyond the vulgar apprehensions, and it may
be believed, that as the conceit never entered into their heads; so neither
into the heads of their Apologists, but when they are in the jollity of their
disputing and demonstrating humor; and this subterfuge is, They have higher
conceptions and intentions of honor to God in the exercise of their Offices
than to any Angel or Saint departed; and if this relieve them not, the guilt of
Idolatry sticks to them; but it mends not the matter, for in effect it is, as
if they had said, we give the same Honor to both, only we have not the same
apprehensions of both; we think the one more worthy of Honor than the other,
and this is all one as if they said, We Honor both St. Martin, and St.
Katherine, but we count St. Martin more worthy of Honor; for we have learned
in our Accidence that the Masculine is more worthy than the Feminine. This is
no fair excuse, but a certain aggravation; for set the mind be what it will,
the Prayer it self is Divine Worship, and all Religious Invocation of any
Creature, in what opinion or apprehension soever, is Divine Adoration, neither
can the meaning and intention of the Supplicant in the limitation of his Words
and reservation of his Thoughts, dispense with the Commandment which ties him
to God alone, Tert. de Orat. c. 12. If good meaning will serve their turn, the
Heathen are excusable, for they did not think their Idols were God, but
resemblances of the true God, nor their Demons to be the Supreme Power, but
Advocates and Mediators to God, Act. 17.23. Athenag. Legate. p. 20. Div. Chys.
p. 145. Alcin. de Doctr. Platon. c. 15. p. 79. Apuleius part. 2. p. 209. and
inde, Porphyr. de abstin. animal. p. 40. For,

1. All Mankind of all Nations, Judgments and Persuasions, have still taken
outward Services to be the indicatious and declarations of the inward Devotion
to that Object to which those Services are directed, so that they concluded the
inward apprehensions and intentions always to go along with the outward
expressions thereof; for all solemn public Offices, having their use, purport
and real effect, either from Institution or Custom, and the Institution or
Custom thereof being designed and settled for this end and purpose to express
and evidence the inward Veneration and Reverence of the Soul, therefore they
who perform those outward acts of Religious Worship to any Object were
concluded thereby to exhibit the conceptions of the Mind and intentions of the
Heart to it, and acknowledge thereby their subjection and obedience to it; but
to acknowledge subjection and obedience to any Creature, and to resign and
surrender the Devotions of the Heart and Soul to it, is confessedly Idolatry;
for as the outward acts by the tenor of the Institution and reason of the
Custom demonstrates the surrender of the Soul, so this surrender of the Soul to
any Creature is in it self an act of Idolatry. To clear this by some Instances.
Those brutish Israelites who observed the Offices (whatsoever in particular
they are conceived to be) used at Sacrifical Idol-Feasts are adjudged by the
Apostle Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10.7. though it cannot be conceived that they so far
forgot God, that they did not believe him to be the first beginning, last end,
and chiefest good; and halting Israelites, who in part followed Baal were taken
to be Idolaters for bowing the Knee to Baal and kissing his Mouth, 1 King.
19.18. because thereby they were presumed to expose their inward Reverence,
Subjection and Obedience to Baal, though for any thing appears to the contrary,
they had higher apprehensions of God than Baal; and the same may be affirmed of
those who feared God, and served their Graven Images, 2 King. 17.41. And the
Apostle St. Paul declares, those (whether Gentiles or Gnostics) who worshipped
the Creator, but besides him the Creature, God but not God only, turned the
truth of God (of whom they had true notions) into a lie, viz. into an Idol,
Romans 1.25. and that they who conceived an Idol was nothing, 1 Cor. 8.4, had
nothing of Divinity, or Divine Power to relieve its supplicants, yet presumed
upon this persuasion to communicate in the Idol-Feasts, did thereby communicate
(though with no such intention) in that Idolatry for which those Feasts were
instituted, for all they did was in Civility and Complement, they placed no
Religion in the compliance. So those Libellatici, who neither by promises, nor
threatenings could be moved Religiously to Worship any but Christ; yet because
they procured some Heathen Friends or their Servants to offer Sacrifice for
them at the Emperors Command, lest they should suffer Persecution for the
Testimony of Jesus, are charged by St. Cyprian as guilty of implicit Idolatry;
and those in Sozomen who were trappanned by Julian to offer Sacrifice, as soon
as they discovered the cheat, bewailed the Fact as an Idolatrous abrenunciation
of Christ. These are sufficient to show that outward acts instituted and
customarily observed for Religious Worship, and by the Institution and Custom
intended for it, if performed to any besides God, though with a mental
reservation to keep the Heart to God, are an Idolatrous Practice; because the
intentions of the Heart ought to be notified, and are universally interpreted
by the outward offices. Men may be Idolaters who do not conceive they are, nor
intend so to be, external acts prove Idolatry as well as overt acts be
evidences of Treason; we have heard of some, who did acknowledge the King their
Sovereign Liege Lord, declared themselves his Faithful and Loyal Subjects,
protested they intended to make him a Glorious King, and Covenanted for the
preservation of his Life, Honor and Dignity, yet these Acknowledgments,
Declarations, Protestations, and Subscriptions will not clear them from the Sin
of Rebellion and Treason. So neither can some men's Acknowledgments that they
own God as the Sovereign Supreme-being, free them from the guilt of Idolatry,
so long as they do acts contrary to his Sovereignty.

2. Supposing the inward apprehensions and intentions may excuse or abate the
Crime of Idolatry; yet they cannot clear and absolve it from the appearance of
evil, which by all Christians is carefully to be avoided; nor from the Sin of
Scandal; which the Apostle dehorts from, 1 Cor 10.31. Give none offense neither
to Jew, nor Gentile, nor yet to the Church of God; but the Popish Practice is
offensive both to the Jews and Gentiles, and to the Church of God. For 1. It is
offensive to the Jews, which is granted by Salmeron Vbi prius.
a Jesuit, and one of the Tridentine Assemblers, who assigns this as his first
reason why the Practice is not prescribed in the New Testament, because Judaeis
durum esset, It had been too rigorous and harsh to impose this yoke upon the
Necks of the Jews, which neither they nor their Forefathers would endure. For
albeit they were well acquainted with the Ministry and frequent visits of
Angels, yet they knew nothing of this Duty of Invocating them; as Origin truly
observes, None that observed the Law of Moses did Worship Angels, for so to do
is not a Custom of the Jews, but a transgression of their Custom; and although
they had great respect to Moses their Prophet, and highly reverenced their
Forefathers the Patriarchs, yet did they never Pray unto them, to Pray for
them. Jacob and David requested deliverance of none but God, says Ath. and we
never find any of them say, Sancte Abraham Ora pro me, says Bell. Then 2. It
would have been offensive to the Gentiles, in the judgment of the same
Salmeron, who makes this his second reason, for it is non expressum in the New
Testament, because, Gentibus, esset periculosum, which if it signify any thing
amounts to this, that the Gentiles would be so scandalized thereby that it
would either obstruct their Conversion to the Christian Faith, or being almost
most persuaded to be Christians, would induce them to revolt or stand; for if
this Practice had been pressed upon them, they would thereby have taken
occasion to retort upon the Christians, that Christianity was only a cunning
contrivance to pull down their old Officers and Lords Advocates, but to keep up
the Office and Duty in the substitution of their new ones, for their own ends
and interests. And 3. It is offensive to the Church of God, which as it was
always zealous for the Worship of God, so it was still jealous lest it should
be impaired by being imparted to any the most excellent Creatures, which the
Papists do; for they build Altars to Creatures, Sacrifice to them, Pray to
them, and it is notoriously known that the matter, gesture, and devotion of
Prayer is all one in their Creature-Invocation, and that to God and Christ
Jesus. For they perform this Duty to them in the House of God, in the time of
the public Worship of God, with set solemn Services, Offices, and Postures of
Adoration; they kneel, uncover their Heads, elevate their Eyes to Heaven,
prostrate their Souls and Bodies, and with sighs and tears cry unto them for
Pardon, Grace, and Salvation; offering up their Merits to God in the same form
of words which they present the Merits of Christ, yea and sometimes they offer
Incense to them, frequently make vows to them, which some of them say, may and
ought to be Bell. de tu Sanct. l. 3. c. 9.
terminated in them, and constantly Swear by them, and Confess their sins to
them. If notwithstanding all this they do protest, as usually they do,
(especially to the Vulgar, and those whom they study to pervert,) they intend
nothing derogatory to the Honor of God, and the Office of Christ's
Intercession; yet those overt acts make it evident, that this is Protestatio
actui contraria, a Protestation contrary to the evidence of plain matter of
Fact, which must not be admitted. For,

3. All Religious Worship, such as confessedly their Creature-Invocation is,
does comprehend in it some Act or Acts, whereby we profess the devout
subjection of our Soul, Will, and Affections toward the Object that is thus
Worshipped, but to subject our Souls to any Creature is to make it our God; for
this kind of subjection is the best and most we can exhibit to God, and this
and no other fundamentally we must or can exhibit to God, and therefore to
render to any other besides him, is to give it that which is God's due and
peculiar.

4. In the opinion of Schoolmen, the Worship of God is the object of Religion,
which is thus defined by them, Religion is a moral virtue which exhibits due
Worship to God as the principle of all things; which excludes all Creatures
from having any share in Religious Worship; so that Religiously to Worship the
Creature with a secondary respect (which is all the Romanists can pretend to in
this case) is secondarily to ascribe to the Creature that Worship which is due
to God, which at the least is secondary Idolatry. For Idolatry consists in
giving Religious Worship, due to God, to that which is not God: and a primary
and secondary respect cannot relieve them, because these are Duties of the same
kind; the higher or lower conceptions of the Object toward which the Religious
Office is exercised, cannot alter the kind or species; and it is impossible to
assign any real difference betwixt them; Bellar. could find none either in
respect of the internal Act of the Will, or the external Offices (excepting
that figment of a sensible Sacrifice) but only in operatione intellectus, in
the apprehension of the understanding, which renders the difference only
rational, nor real.

5. Press the Papists with that Text with which our Savior Christ confuted the
Devil; Matthew. 4.10. Thou shall Worship the. Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve; they will return, this is meant of Latria, not of Doulia; but if
this exclusive Particle [only] bar Latria only, then the Devil could have
replied, the Answer is not sufficient; confessedly there is none good but God,
and then if he had been as subtle a Sophister as a Jesuit or an Apostate, he
would have added, it is not Latria, or Primary, Sovereign, and Terminative
Worship that I expect or demand, for I acknowledge the Sovereign Almighty Power
of God, verse. 3. and 6. and him to be the Author and donor of this Power which
I challenge over the Kingdoms of the earth to give them; all I have, or can
dispose of, were first given me, for they are delivered to me, v. 4.6. and this
therefore thou answerest is a mistake, keep thine heart, thine elevated
conceptions to God, Doulia and the outward acts are sufficient for me, if thou will fall down and Worship me, that is, by falling down Worship me, for the
Text reaches not that, and indeed that is all I desire; but surely this were
to corrupt the Text, which must be understood of the exhibition of the outward
acts agreably to other places of Scripture, in which the Worship and outward
acts are used as Synonyma's; for the Leper, who came to Christ and Worshipped
him, Matthew. 8.2. is said to beseech him, and kneeling down to him, Mar. 1.40.
and to fall on his face, Luke 5.12. and so the plain meaning of the sentence
is, Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, not
only with Latria, but with Doulia, be it by Incurvation, Genuflexion,
Prostration, or any other external act expressive of inward Devotion or
Subjection.

Part 3. 3. It is Irrational. For,

1. To determine that a necessary or profitable Office of Religion, and Practice
it as such, which is neither founded on the Law of Nature, nor prescribed by
any positive constitution, is Irrational, because all perpetually and
universally obliging Duties of Religion, are either Natural, which by the
tenure of our Creation we are to perform in gratitude to, and for the Honor of
our Creator; or instituted, such as we are bound to observe, because commanded
so to do by our Lord Jesus Christ, who only has Power to order perpetually and
universally obliging observations to all Christians; Now forasmuch as there is
nothing in the Law of Nature to enforce this supposed profitable Duty (for then
both Jews, Gentiles, and Christians did sin in the omission of it, if it were
by the the Law required) nor is there in the Discipline of Christ, either any
Precept or Promise to authorize and legitimate, either as a necessary or
profitable Duty, therefore both the imposition of the Duty, and the practice
must be Irrational.

2. Invocation of the Supreme God, the Almighty Maker of Heaven and Earth, is
an act of Justice as well as Religion, we wrong God if we pay not this tribute
and Homage to him; and we wrong him too, if we offer or determine it to any
other besides him: For Invocation is of common right antecedently to any
positive order due from man to God, and therefore no man, nor Society of man
can on their own heads without his allowance or consent dispose thereof without
Sacriledg. Indeed if God had permitted this Honor to be given to any besides
himself, it would not be an injury to him to pass it to them he should grant it
to. But in that there is no such assignment extant or producible by any Letters
Parents or Settlment from Heaven, it is an high Injustice to determine, or
invade his Original right by an arbitary presumption: But admitting (which is
the most that is by some, or can by any be pretended) that God had granted to
Angels or Saints departed, Reigning in Heaven, a privilege to solicit for us
at the Throne of Grace, and make motions for us in his Court of Requests, yet
did he never give them leave to pass an Act of Indemnity and Grace for our
security and preferment; This is a Prerogative which he has reserved to
himself, and therefore it is repugnant to right reason to sue for Pardon and
Grace from them who have no Power to grant the one or give the other, or make
good either of them. It often proves a profitable good policy for one who seeks
a Pardon for a capital offense, or affects places of trust and honor in the
State, to oblige and employ some Favorite Courtier to mediate in his behalf to
the King; but it would be extremely ridiculous and absurd in the Petitioner to
fall down on his knees to that Courtier, and beseech him to command a Pardon
under the Broad Seal to be assigned for him, or to beg an Act of Grace, as to
make him an Earl or a Baron of the Realm, because these Powers, and
Preheminencies in right belonging to the Kings Prerogative, are inherent to the
Crown, and inseparably annexed to it.

3. The ascribing this Duty to any the most excellent Creatures, cannot be
profitable to living men, because upon several other accounts it is injurious
to God; for it entitles Creatures in those incommunicable attributes of his,
upon which also the Duty is founded, his Omniscience, in fixing a Power in them
to hear the mental As it is approved by the Council of Trent, Sess. c. 1. and
exemplified in rheir L^turgy in this form, with the desires of our heart we
pray unto you, receive the ready service of our minds.
Prayers of living men, and his Omnipresence in supposing and asserting they
understand the vocal Prayers of Petitioners at the greatest distance removed
one from another, though it be most certain, that the life and virtue of these
Prayers lies not in the outward expressions and postures of Devotion, but the
inward Veneration and affection of the heart, which by the way obviates that
vain pretension, that by Praying to those Creatures in Heaven, they do no more
nor otherwise, than in begging the assistance of the Prayers of Holy men upon
Earth; for it was never heard, nor can it be conceived that any living man in
his right Wits would vocally beg of another at a Thousand miles distance, that
he would pray for him, because he knows it is impossible he should hear him;
nor can it be supposed, that any man though standing by, can know the Heart of
men when they utter nothing with their Tongue to interpret it. In sum, no man
ever directed his mental Prayers to another, nor his vocal to another as far
distant from him as London is from Rome. But to return then, to acknowledge such
an excellency in the Celestial Creatures as to apprehend the mental Prayers of
mortal men, or the sincerity of their vocal, either by their original Power, or
by any derivative, as it is an Irrational conceit in it self (there being no
reason to warrant it, nor ground of reason to countenance it) so it is
injurious to God.

1. It is Injurious to God in respect of his Omniscience; for he even he only
knows all the hearts of the Children of men, 1 Reg. 3.39. and this both
collectively, and distributively, and this also with reference to their Prayers
and Supplications, v. 38. both their public and private Prayers, both mental,
the cries of the Heart, and vocal, expressed in Words, to which the truth of
the Heart (for God requires truth in the inward Parts, and will be Worshipped
in Spirit and truth, with activity and sincerity) must be adjoined, to make it
an holy acceptable, reasonable service of God; and then both kinds are only to
be presented to him, because he only knows the Heart when the mind is
secretly elevated to God, and the truth of the Heart when it is notified by
Words; because he only knows whether there be an Act of Conformity betwixt
the Words and the Heart; I the Lord search the Heart, I try the Reins, Jer.
17.10. challenging thereby this privilege as a peculiar to himfelf: neither
will their futerfuge any way clear them, viz. that God only naturally knows
the Heart of the Petitioner, but Angels and Saints departed by a derivative
Power, having it communicated to them, either by way of Revelation from God,
looking upon him as a voluntary Glass, who makes the Prayers of Supplicants
known to them when he pleases; or by the Vision of God, looking upon him as a
Natural Glass, that reveals all that God knows without any choice or act of his
Will: for these are frivolous suggestions, having neither Reason, nor
Revelation to support them; for it without all ground limits a proposition
which in the Scripture is delivered in universal terms, and to admit such
limitations of universal propositions, without great evidence that the nature
of the subject requires them, or that such from other places of the Scripture
may be deduced and inferred, is Irrational, because the proposition would not
be absolutely true, but true only with a restriction; but the vanity of these
speculations will further appear by these Considerations.

1. The Romanists themselves cannot agree which of these ways they propose are
to be taken, and dispute them by multiplicity of Questions, as whether God
immediately by himself give the Blessed Spirits the knowledge of our Prayers, or
by the Ministry of others? if by others, then whether by the Angels that attend
us, or the Spirits of just men, that go from hence, and inform the Saints in
Heaven, what our Prayers are? if immediately by himself, then whether directly
and formally, seeing in him what is in the Creature? and if so, then whether
instantly upon their Glorification and admission into Heaven, or successively,
seeing by virtue of his Vision one thing after another in the Creature? or only
accidentally, that is, God lets them know our Prayers, so far forth as it
pleases him by his peculiar will to notify unto them? because God is a free
Agent, respectu omnis actionis ad extra, In respect of every external action.
And further, they which pitch upon any of these ways, take them only for the
more probable, and it is somewhat odd, to found an Article of Faith, and a
Catholic profitable Duty, upon such unprovable speculations; and it is very
hard to believe, that the seeming Opinions of men brought in with Ifs and Ands,
and Metaphysical niceties, can be of sufficient strength to support an Article
of Faith, or commend a Catholic profitable Practice.

2. This is certain, the one way destroys the other; If by Vision, then not by
Revelation; if By Revelation, then not by Vision; if the Natural Glass will
serve, the Voluntary is needless; if the Voluntary be required, then the
Natural does not do the work; for God in their opinion does not multiply forms
without necessity, nor does any thing frustraneously; but God does not impart
the knowledge of our Prayers either the one great way, or the other.

1. Not by Revelation, for confessedly there is no Revelation (unless a
Legendary will pass current, or some ostensions, as they call them, may be
allowed) for this conceit, that the Blessed Spirits know our Prayers and Hearts
by Revelation.

2. The poor Petitioner must be at a loss and stand if this way be supposed,
because he cannot be assured, that God is pleased to reveal his Prayers to
them, and he is sure if God do not, they can take no notice or cognizance of
them, and so their Prayers become fruitless and unprofitable, because he
knows not whether God will reveal his Prayers, and if he do, how far.

3. How can they be proper Mediators for men, who cannot know what men desire
of them, without the Mediation and interposition of another, viz. God? and why
should we be persuaded to go thus about, when we may go straight forward to God
and his Son Jesus, who needs no Mediator to inform him?

4. What a strange circular motion must be observed in following this way;
first the Petitioner must make his suit to Angels and Saints, then God must
reveal them and their contents to the Angels or Saints, if he please, or else
they are for ever ignorant of them; then the Angels and Saints must back again
and present them to God, but if the Petitioner mistake his Angel Guardian or
Tutelar Saint, as very likely he may, then it is to be doubted whether the
Angel or Saint will own the Client, though God should reveal his Prayer.

2. Not by virtue of the Beatifical-Vision, the other supposed way. For,

1. The Scripture says No man knows the things of God, [the purposes and
thoughts] but the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2.11. which the Apostle infers from
this reason and ground, the secrets of the Heart of man no man knows, but the
Spirit of of man which is in him; upon which he concludes, therefore none knows
the things of God, but the Spirit of God, and therefore neither Angels nor
Saints, though they enjoy the Beatifical Vision, which does not confer on them
the knowledge of the things of God, for this we know, that the Angels did not
know the Mysteries of the Gospel, those great things of God, till made known to
them by the Church, Ephesians. 2.10. 1 Pet. 1.12.

2. The Angels and Saints departed, by enjoyment of the Beatifical Vision, look
not upon God as Omniscient or Omnipresent, but as the chiefest good; their
happiness is from his infinite Goodness, not from his infinite Wisdom or
Immensity.

3. If upon their admission to their state of Glory, they by virtue of the
Beatifical Vision know all things which God knows, then they should know
future Contingents (which the Romanists will not grant) for the Beatifical
Vision can capacitate them for this knowledge, as well as the knowledge of the
Heart, and no reason can be assigned to the contrary, but that it is the Will
of God, for which there is no attempt of Proof.

4. It is not necessary, nor essential to the Beatifical Vision, that the
participants should know our Prayers, for without knowing them they have all
the privileges of the Sons of God, and Children of the Resurrection, agreeable
to their state, the Vision makes them eternally happy, not Omniscient.

5. Those Ancients who denied this supposition, knew nothing of this
speculation, and those of them who proved the Divinity of the Son and the Holy
Ghost from their Omniscience, might easily have been baffled, if this
excellency were communicable to any other besides God; for if the knowledge of
the Heart were not so proper to God, that it could not be communicated to the
most excellent Creature, their argument from thence, even in Theol. dogm. Tom.
3. l. 1. c. 7. Sect. 3. p. 39.
the judgment of Petavius, Omnino nullum esset, Was none at all.

2. It is Injurious to God in respect of his Omnipresence. For Bellarm.
disputing against those of his own side, who imagined that the Blessed Spirits
were Quodammodo, after a certain (unintelligible) way, every where by the
wonderful swiftness of their nature, resolves the contrary, and asserts, that
Celerity is not sufficient to capacitate them to hear the Petitions of far
reremoved Supplicants, who direct their Prayers to them at one and the same
time from several distant places; and that true Bell. de Sanct. Beat. lib... c.
20.
ubiquity is required, which they having not by nature, as is generally
concluded by all Pontificians, they must have it by communicated Grace, or be
without it; But the same Bellar. will not allow this, for he disputing against
the Vbiquitarians assures us, that their Salvo (viz. that Christ in his human
nature is every where by accident, viz. by a real communication of that
property) is naught, for then (says he) the argument of the Fathers for the
Godhead of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost grounded upon their Ubiquity, plae
concidit, is quite abated, and falls to nothing: from which premises laid to
our hands by this great Name, the conclusion is irrefragable, the Blessed
Spirits cannot hear our Prayers; and then the Practice is Irrational, because
by the concession of the chiefest Advocates and Proctors of the Cause, to Pray
to them who cannot hear or understand our Prayers, is an Act Superfluous, if
not Superstitious; and so some of them assign as a reason why they do not pray
to the Inhabitants of Purgatory, because they cannot hear them; though it be
most certain, that God if he pleased, can as easily reveal the Prayers of
Mortal men to them, as to the Saints in Heaven; for his assertion affords us
this argument, True Vbiquity is required to hear the Prayers of numerous
distant Orators; but the Blessed Spirits have not true Vbiquity, for this is so
proper to God, that it cannot be affirmed of, or attributed to the most
excellent Creature by communicated Grace, therefore the Blessed Spirits connot
hear the vocal Prayers of their numerous distant Orators.

4. If the end for which this Practice is pretended behooful and expedient, may
be attained by a more clear and undoubted way than that purposed, right Reason
will direct us to leave the indirect and crooked way, and follow the direct
straight forward road; for every prudent man will take and pursue that course
which is most effectual for the accomplishments of his intentions and desires,
and for which he has so great assurance that greater cannot be had for the
event and success. Now we have such assurance to come to God by his Son Jesus
Christ, that will not fail, nor disapoint us, for we have the sure word of
Promise, Joh. 16.23. that whatsoever we ask of the Father in the name of his
Son, it shall be given us; and by him we have boldness of access to the Throne
of Grace; but we have no word nor warranty for the impetration of our requests
by the Mediation of Secondary under-Solicitors for us; and who will seek that
at the second hand which he may have upon easier terms at the first? or look
for that in Cisterns, and in danger to be broken Cisterns, which is ready and
prepared for him in the Fountain which never fails. None but Phantasticks and
Vainglorious Prodigals will complement or Fee a Courtier for admittance into
the Kings presence, when by his Proclamation he is aforehand ascertained, upon
his aproach he shall have entrance, present. Audience, and his Petition (if
drawn according to Law) shall be signed and granted.

5. But suppose it were both lawful and behoosefull to Invocate undoubted
Saints, now reigning in Heaven, as the blessed Virgin, and the holy Apostles;
yet a Prudent Man will be shy and unwilling to exhibit that honor to all whom
the Pope has Canonized, or shall Canonize for Saints. For some great Romanists
have not sticked to Affirm, that These were a Knack of late invention,
contrived by the Pope 800 years after Christ, Bellarm. de Sanct. beat. lib. 1.
c. 7, 8. Sect. dices and Barth-fumus in his Armilla aurea tit. Canonizatio,
tells us, that it is not lawful to Worship any Saint publicly without the
Popes License, (so that before Bellarmin's Period of time it was not lawful
publicly to Worship any, because till that time none were Canonized) yet what
he adds is somewhat odds, if one believe his departed Friend is in Heaven, he
may Pray to him secretly, etc.
the Popes Canonizations are doubtful, and Summa Rosell. Verb. Canonizatio,
Can. loc. lib. 5. c. 5. c. 5. qu. 5.
subject to Error. Thomas Becket was solemnly Canonized by Alexander the Third,
who thereupon passed for a good while as a precious Saint (as before has been
related); but about 40 years after his Saintship Caesarine a Monk, Dial. l. 8.
c. 69. Acts and Monuments.
was questioned, for in Ann. 1220. an hot Dispute concerning it, was held at
Paris bebetween Roger a Norman, and Peter a Parisian; Peter took the more
Moderate part of the question, and affirmed he was saved because Canonized; but
Roger was for the more uncharitable part, that he was Damned, because he was a
Rebel to his King. This indeed was too high a question, altogether unfit to be
discussed; and therefore our Prelates, though stiff Romanists, declined it in
Henry the Eights time; but withal publicly declared, he had been a Rebel and
a Traitor; and therefore deserved not the Honor of Martyrdom: whereupon they
procured the Kings Injunction to blot out his name out of all Public Prayers,
Hours and Missals; to demolish his Shrine and Picture Erected at Canterbury;
and strictly forbad any to call him Hist. Conc. Trent. fol. 87.
Saint and Martyr. Other Pontificians there be, who although they resolve the
Pope may err in matters of Fact, yet will not endure to hear that he can err in
his Canonizations, which is very strange, because the inerrability of his
Canonizations depends wholly or chiefly on matters of Fact; but their Reason is
remarkable, which is this, for Particularly Catherinus advers. nova dogm.
Cajet. p. 125.
(say they) if any one Saint Canonized by the Pope, may be called in question,
then all the Saints which have been, or shall be Canonized by the Pope may be
doubted of, and then no man can invocate or worship them without peril of
Idolatry. Then let Cajetan and Canus be taken at their words, that the Popes
Canonization is subject to Error, and thank we Catherinus and Bell: for their
inference; and conclude from both laid together, that because many Canonized by
the Pope have been doubted of, as Tho. Becket, St. Francis, St. Dominick, St.
Ignatius Loiola, and Father Henry Garnet, etc. therefore all the Pope has
Canonized may be doubted of, and therefore none of them can be Invocated
without peril of Idolatry. But then how comes the Invocation of a doubted Saint
to be Idolatry? this cannot be, unless the Invocation of all Saints be Latria;
for Doulia (as it is by the Romanists contradistinguished to Latria) is not
contradictorily opposed to Idolatry, Latria is; for as Latria imports the
Honor proper to God only, so Idolatry consists in the exhibition of that
Honor to that which is not God; but Doulia according to them is not part of
Religious Worship due only to God, and therefore the erroneous Supplicant, who
pays this Homage of Doulia to a doubted Saint instead of an undoubted one
(which doubted Saint he believes a real one) may fall under the censure of
Folly, Rashness, or Error; but the well meaning Petitioner in this case, who
makes his addresses to a mistaken Advocate, and with relative Worship only
according to their Principles, cannot lie under the guilt of Idolatry, because
in their account the conception and intention abates it, and to attribute
Doulia or Relative Worship is not Idolatry, if it be, the Sin lies at their
doors who confessedly Practice it.

To Conclude, It is therefore the most prudent and profitable course to follow
the advice which the Holy Martyr St. Ep. ad Philadelph.
Ignatius gave to the Virgins of his time, and by consequence to all who
profess the name of Christ, viz. (...), O ye Virgins have Christ alone in your
eyes, and his Father in your Prayers, being enlightened by the Spirit; which in
effect is an exhortation to all who are Baptized according to the form of the
Institution; for being enlightened and being Baptized, are still Synonyma's both
in Scripture and Primitive Antiquity, and therefore the advice concerns all
Christians as well as those Virgins, and so Epiph. 79 Haeres. (...); and again,
(...). Therefore,

Glory be to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, three
Persons, one God. For thine is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for
ever and ever. AMEN.

Lact. lib. 4. de Vir. Sap. c. 22. Quanquam apud bonos Judices satis habeant
firmitatis, vel Testimonia sine Argumentis, vel Argumenta sine Testimoniis, nos
tamen non contenti alterutro sumus, cum suppeditet nobis utrumque, ne cui
perverse ingenioso aut non intelligendi aut contra disserendi, locum
relinquamus.

Aug. de Trin. l. 4. c. 6 Contra rationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturas nemo
Christianus, contra Ecclesiam nemo pacificus senserit.

THE JESUITS LETTER.
Hon. etc.
THere have been many Discourses betwixt us for matter of Religion, wherein
little profit did accrue, in regard of my inabilities, having to deal with a
person of your Knowledge and Parts, so fully accomplished and fraught with
Arguments: But seeing the true Religion is the sole mark we ought to aim at,
the disquisition thereof cannot be too much searched; and I am confident you
wish and desire my eternal good, and in the integrity of my heart I wish the
same to you; wherefore I shall only desire to receive solution to two
Questions, and I shall totally decline to scruple all others; the Questions are
these:

1. To nominate the Professors of the Protestant Faith successively since the
Apostles. 2. To evidence, that the English Clergy has a lawful Mission; for it
is said, No man takes this Honor upon him, but he that was called, and Faith
comes by hearing. The holy Scripture does fully express, that upon the Walls
of Jerusalem Watchmen should be day and night for ever; that the Word should
not depart out of the mouth of his Seed for ever; our Blessed Savior says, Go
tell the Church, and that he would be with them to the end of the World, which
is not verified, unless there were such persons in the World.
Answer to the first Question.
1. IS it not sufficient, Protestants prove their Faith Apostolical from the
Monuments and Records of the Apostles? were not the Apostles assisted by the
HOLY SPIRIT in an higher manner and measure than any of their Successors can
pretend to? did not they deliver the whole will of GOD by their Preaching while
they lived, and by their Writings for ever? and are not their Writings as clear
and comprehensive, and more authentical than any of those of the following
Pastors and Doctors? are not the Decrees of Councils, and Works of the Fathers,
as liable (if not more) to fraud and forgery, to misinterpretations and
wrestings, as the holy Scriptures? Is there any Record or Writing extant which
can equally pretend to Apostolical and Original Tradition, or has such an
universal and constant attestation as the HOLY BIBLE? I conceive, the
Apostolical Writings are the best evidences of Apostolical Doctrine; and in
causes of Religion judge them Criminals, who decline a Trial by them; but since
this way of Probation will not please you, (a shrewd suspicion all is not right
with you) I add further,

2. Supposing, not granting, Protestants were not able to nominate the
successive Professors of their Faith since the Apostles, would this conclude
them Heretics, and their Faith not Apostolical? no sure; for suppose we, one
Philosopher to hold all the opinions of Plato, another those of Aristotle,
would you determine the one not to be a Platonist, the other not an
Aristotelian, because neither of them could present you with a list and line of
successive Academicks and Peripateticks? this among Philosophers would be
adjudged irrational. But where has Christ or his Apostles tied us to this nice
scrupulous disquisition? or commanded us to be Annalists and Historians? though
Christ has promised there shall be a perpetual visible Church, (which yet in
your sense of visibility you will never be able to prove,) yet did he never
assure us there should be Histories and Records of Professors in all Ages,
neither did he ever command us to search and read them, (he has commanded both
you and us to search and read the Scriptures,) that we may be able to bring
them in evidence. You might, if your leisure or somewhat else had permitted,
have remembered what has been returned to this demand long before you proposed
it. It is your usual rant, it is unanswerable; you may know the contrary, if
not, I shall inform you after I have premised some Considerations to clear the
procedure.

1. What do you mean by [Protestant]? if you intend to hook in all who
challenge that Appellative, the return is short, all that call themselves
Catholics and Saints, are not such.

2. What by [Faith]? if every Doctrine which has been maintained by some
Protestants, as a probable Opinion, or as a pious profitable Truth, then you
trifle and sophisticate; but if by Faith, you understand the object of Faith,
or things necessary to be believed by all, that they may be saved, as it is
usually taken in Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels, then the Protestants
assert, their Faith is the Faith of all good Christians who lived before them,
who all professed to believe, as they believe, which they thus evidence.

3. Protestants earnestly contend for the Faith which was once, or at once
delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. Which you by the addition of your new
super-numerary Essentials had corrupted, and changed; as Anthony of Valtelina a
Dominican Friar affirmed in the Council of Trent, and was seconded by the
Bishops of five Churches therein; Hist. of Council of Trent, ad An. 1562. Fol.
548, 549. Their Reformation was not to compose a new, but to retrieve the old
Faith which you had so confounded and changed; not to form a new Church, but to
free the old Church from your new Essentials. The corruptible and incorruptible
body are one in substance, differing only in perfections and purities; their
Faith is the same in substance with the Faith of the whole Christian World,
differing from some part thereof in quality and goodness. The end of the
Reformation was to separate the precious from the vile, the chaff from the
wheat, to refine the Gold mixed with dross, to dress the Garden overgrown with
weeds, to cure the body which was diseased, to regain and recover that Faith
which the Christian World had reputed and received for true and saving Faith,
even the same that has the attestation of the universal Church in all Ages,
which is dispersed in the Scriptures, but contracted and summed up in the
Apostles Creed, which was designed by them (witness your own authorized
Catechism) to preserve Believers in the unity of Faith, to be a badg and
cognizance to distinguish Believers from Unbelievers and Misbelievers. This,
and nothing but this has been professed always, everywhere, by all persons,
ubique semper, ab omnibus in Vinc. Lyr. Golden Rule of Catholicism. This is
evinced by Practice; the Profession of this Faith, and of this only, was, and
is required of every person, either by himself, or Sureties, before he be
admitted into the Church by holy Baptism. That Question and Answer (do thou
believe? I do believe) had always respect to this, and no other; into this,
and this alone, both you and we are Baptized; by this, and this alone, you and
we are made Christians; by this, with the advantage of an holy Life, according
to the Precepts of Christ, the Christians of all Ages have gone to Heaven for
1400 years, without the knowledge or belief of your 12 new coined Articles. For
this, they have the sentence and determination of the Ephesine Council, which
your Popes have been solemnly sworn to observe; the judgment of the Ancient
Fathers, the concurrent suffrage of many of your Learned Divines and Schoolmen,
and (which will weigh most with you) the Remonstrance of your Trusty and
Well-beloved Tridentine Assemblers, who once in their good mood thought fit
thus to express themselves; The Apostles Creed is the shield of Faith by, etc.
the firm and only Foundation, against which the Gates of Hell shall never
prevail. This Protestants profess, with the whole Christian World, in its
several Successions and Centuries; this they believe too, as it is sensed by
the four first General Councels, and the traditious interpretation of the
universal Church. And for us of the Church of England, as we admit no new
Creed, so we reject all new senses of the Old, which thus sensed, they own for
the true Catholic Apostolic Faith. Indeed other Articles we have, but they
are Articles of Peace, not of Faith, not all of them to be respected as
Essentials of saving Faith, but as pious Truths, which none of the Pastors of
the Church are to contradict or oppose.

4. To retort your Question; the Protestants offer these Proposals to you; to
nominate successive Professors since the Apostles of the whole Faith of the
present Roman Church, or a succession of Professors, who since the Apostles
have received these 12 new distinct Articles (which Pius the 4th added at the
foot of the 12 old ones) as Essentials of Faith, absolutely necessary to be
believed by all, necessitate medii, without which they could not be saved. We
are sure they were never reputed for such for 1400 years. Prove those your late
forged Articles at Trent to have any relation to, or analogy with those of the
Apostles, that they are evidently concluded from them, or virtually contained
in them, as conclusions in their premises.

Lastly, that the Apostles did deliver, or teach by Word or Writing your
newfound Faith, or passage to Heaven. Till these be satisfactorily performed
by you, we desire you to be wise unto sobriety, and to consider whence you are
fallen.

Answer to the second Question.
1. WHat mean you by Mission? if Ordination to the respective Functions. of
Bishops and Priests, etc. then such a Mission our Bishops and Priests have, if
you have any.

2. What by Lawful? what you fancy, or the Pope resolves to be so, you know we
neither value your conceits, nor the Pope's Bylaws: the English have received
and rejected them at their pleasure, take and leave as they like, with us those
things pass for lawful, which are so by the Law of Christ, which gives them
validity; or by the Laws and Constitutions of the Church, which makes them
Canonical; or by the Laws of the Kingdom, whereby they become Legal;
accordingly as we averr.

1. The English Clergy has a lawful, (that is) a valid Ordination by the
Institution of Christ; for the English Church in conferring Holy Orders,
observes all the Essentials of Ordination by Authority of Holy Scripture,
Matter and Form, (as some of your own fast Friends have confessed,) Imposition
of Hands, and the solemn words of Investiture, [Receive ye the Holy Ghost.] The
Scripture knows no other Essentials but these, (which is also acknowledged by
some of your Learned Partisans,) and these are constantly used by our Bishops,
who received their Ordinations from their Predecessors by an uninterrupted line
of succession, whether from British, or French, or Roman Bishops, is not
material, because each of these had their Mission (in your expression) by a
continued succession from the Apostles who planted the Faith, and laid hands on
their first Successors of these Nations. Cardinal Pole the Papal Legate by his
Dispensation, and Pope Paul the 4th by his Ratification, settled the Ordinations
in King Edw. the 6th his Reign, with this only Proviso, that those then so
Ordained would return to the Unity of the Church, (that is sure in their and
your sense) to adhere to the Pope, and acknowledge his begged Sovereign
Monarchical Power. This they could not have granted, neither would they, if
they had suspected any defect in the Essentials of their Ordination. It is not
in the power of the Pope or Cardinals to ratify their Orders who had none, or
dispense with them to execute any Function in the Church, who had no Authority
from Christ or his Apostles for it; if they did, your Church has concluded the
Act sacrilegious and null, if we may believe some of your Controvertists.

2. By the Constitutions of the Church, what has been universally observed,
and was decreed by the Council of Carthage in St. Aug. time, has been, and is
still retained in the Church of England.

3. By the Laws of the Kingdom, both this and the others will appear by the
Records; upon both these accounts Bishop Jewel defended this Church against Mr.
Harding, Fol. 129. I am a Priest by the same Order, etc, you were, and after,
our Bishops succeed the Bishops before our days, being Elected, Confirmed,
Consecrated and admitted as they were. Mr. Mason has proved this beyond all
cavil, your own Associates, Mr. Higgins, Mr. Heart, Father Garnet, and Father
Old-corn, took the pains to search the Registers, and after that Archbishop
Abbot caused them to be showed to four more, who after they had perused, did
acknowledge them Authentical and undeniable. Ex abundanti; Cudsemius the Jesuit,
Lib. 11. de Desp. Call. causa, has freely confessed; the English Nation are not
Heretics because they remain in a perpetual succession of Bishops. Monsieur
Militiere in his Letter to his Majesty Charles the Second has declared the
same.

Lastly, look to your own Succession, in which by your own Laws there be
several Nullities, by Vacancies, Schisms, and Simonies, which if they were
fully charged upon you, would puzzel you to clear.

Having dispatched your Questions; the Texts of Scripture are to be considered.
No man takes this Honor, etc. True, but this Honor is to be had in any
Apostolical Church as well as yours, which has Elder Sisters, particularly the
British here in England, confitente Baronio. Faith comes, etc. Very good! But
the Object of Hearing is not the Pope's decrees, or Trent definitions, but the
word of Faith, as before, Gal. 118.

The rest were true before there was a Church at Rome, were true, when she
became an holy Church; are true, now it is an unsound rotten member of the
Church, would be eternally true, if there were no Church at Rome, nor Roman
Bishop.

The Church shall not fail, but Christ never settled this privilege on the
Roman, or any Church of one denomination. Christ's Church never fails so long
as there are Confessors through the World, who contend for the Faith once
delivered to the Saints.

BEWARE OF FALSE PROPHETS.
FINIS.
Some Books Printed for Henry Brom, in Defense of the Church of England, since
the Year 1666.
A Companion to the Temple, or an Help to Devotion; being an Exposition on the
Common Prayer, in two Voll. By Tho. Comber, A. M.

Lex Tallionis, or an Answer to Naked Truth.

The Popish Apology reprinted, and Answered.

A Seasonable Discourse against Popery, and the Defense on it.

The Difference betwixt the Church and Court of Rome considered.

Considerations touching the true way to suppress Popery; to which is added, an
Historical Account of the Reformation in England.

Friendly Advice to the Roman Cath. of England, enlarged.

Dr. Du Moulin's Answer to the Lord Castlemain his Papal Tyranny in England.
With two Sermons on November. 5th.

Fourteen Controversial Lords for and against Popery, in quarto.

Beware of two Extremes, Popery and Presbytery, octav.

The Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus, or a Sure Way to Heaven.

A Guide to Eternity; by John Bona. Extracted out of the Writings of the Holy
Fathers, and Ancient Philosophers.


