EXAMINATIONS, OR, A DISCOVERY Of some Dangerous Positions delivered in A
SERMON OF REFORMATION Preached in the Church of the Savoy last fast day, July
26. by Tho. Fuller B. D. and since printed.

2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. By
John Saltmarsh, Master of Arts, and Pastor of Heslerton in Yorkshire. Raptim
Scripta.

LONDON, Printed for Lawrence Blaiklock, and are to be sold at the Sugar loaf
near Temple Bar, 1643.

Nihil invenio in hoc libello, cui titulus (Examinations or a Discovery of some
dangerous Positions delivered in a Sermon of Reformation, preached by Tho.
Fuller B. D.) quin utiliter imprimatur.

Charles Herle.

An Advertisement returned to the Author by a Reverend Divine, to certify him
touching the Licensers allowance of Mr. Fullers late Sermon of Reformation.
Sir,
TO satisfy you concerning Mr Downams approbation of Mr Fullers. Sermon of
Reformation, I can assure you I heard him complain that he was wronged by
him, in that he having taken exception at some passages of that Sermon Mr
Fuller promised to amend them according to his correction, but that he did not
perform what he promised.

To the Reverend Divines now convened by Authority of Parliament, for
Consultation in matters of RELIGION.
I Have but the thoughts of an afternoon to spread before you, for I examined
the same pace that I read; that if it were possible, a truth might overtake an
error ere it got too far. It is not a little encouragement that I may sit
like the Prophetess under the Palmetree, under such a shade as your selves;
and what weakness soever may appear in these my assertions, This ayring them
under your Patronage will heal them, for so they brought forth the sick into
the streets, that at least the shadow of Peter might touch some of them. Thus
have I suddenly set up my Candle for others to light their Torch at; and I hope
you will pardon me, if my zeal to the truth, made me see another faults
sooner than my own.

Your Servant in Christ Jesus JOHN SALTMARSH.

THE POLICY OF THE Sermon of Reformation.
THe Scope of the Sermon, is Reformation; but it so moderates, so modificates
and conditionates the Persons, and Times, and Business, that Reformation can
advance little in this way or method: As our Astronomers who draw so many lines
and imaginary Circles in the Heavens, that they put the Sun into an heavenly
Labyrinth and a learned perplexity; Such is the Zodiac you would make for the
light of the Gospel, and the Sun of Reformation to move in; it was one of the
Policies of the Jews Adversaries, that when they heard of their buildings,
they would build with them; They said let us build with you, for we seek your
God as you do: But the people of God would have no such helpers, there is no
such Jesuiticall way to hinder our work as to work with us, and under such
insinuations set the Builders at variance, when they should fall to labor; and
how easy is it to reason flesh and blood back from a good way and good
resolutions; I remember the old Prophet had soon persuaded even the man of God
to return, when he told him, I am a Prophet 1 Kings 13. 18.
as thou art.

I find there are three Principles animates the Sermon.

1 How imperfect a Church will be and a Reformation, do the best you can. 2
That the light which the Fathers had formerly, was as full and glorious as the
light of these aayes, or rather brighter. 3 That none, but the Supreme
authority, or authority Royal and that alone ought to begin and act in this
Reformation.
These are your principles, and let any judge if this be a qualification fit
for him that judges or writes of such a truth; for first he that conceits
there can be no perfection of a Church on earth, will scarce labor to make
that Church better, which he is sure will be bad at all times, nor will he
care for any new light, while the old is in best reputation with him: Nor will
he seek to advance the work, but stay for a supreme authority alone; a good
policy to stay the Reformation till his Majesty's return, and then there is
hopes it may cool in their hands.

Sermon Page 9.

Withal, we flatly deny that Queen Elizabeth left the dust behind the door,
which she cast on the dunghill, whence this uncivil expression is raked up.
The doctrine by her established, and by her successors maintained in the 39
Articles, if declared, explained, and asserted from false glosses, have all
gold, no dust or arosse in them.

Examination.
I will not detract from the Religious houswifery of such a Queen of famous
memory, but we know her Reformation is talked on now in a politic reverence,
and we are commended back into her times, only to hinder us from going forward
in our own; for I am sure till this engine was contrived, she was not such a
Saint in the Prelates Calender.

For the Doctrine established from her times, though it be not the business
so much of our Reformation as the 39 Articles where it dwells, yet this we
know; either the light of the Doctrine was very dim, or the eyes of our
Bishops and Jesuits, for one of them would needs spy Arminianisme, and Bishop
Montague, Frans. a Sancta Clara.
the Jesuit Popery, and some will make it a Problem yet, whether their gloss
may accuse the Article or the Article their gloss; such Cassanders found so
much latitude in our Doctrine, as to attempt a reconciliation of their Articles
and ours together.

Sermon page 9.

Again we freely confess that there may be some faults in our Church in
matters of Practice and Ceremonies, and no wonder if there be, it would be a
miracle if there were not, besides there be some innovations rather in the
Church than of the Church, as not chargeable on the public account.

Examination.
These are but subtle Apologies and distinctions for the superstitions in the
Church, and to take off the eyes of our Reformers, and entertain them into
changeable discourses; as if they were faults, and no faults; and those that
were, were irreformable, and could not be made better: and thus, while the
errors of our Church should call them to reform; your difficulties and
impossibilities would call them off; you say, it were a miracle to have none;
this is such Sophistry as the malignity of your Clergy would cast in the way of
our Reformation: and for the Innovations, they have been made by your most
learned, the immediate issues of our Church; our Rubric and Practice have been
called to witness it; therefore go not on to persuade such a fundamental
integrity, and essential purity; you know in what a poor case that Church
was, when she thought her self rich and full and glorious, he is no less an
enemy to the patient, than to the Physician that would persuade him that all is
well; or at least incurable.

Sermon. page. 9.

A through Reformation we and all good men do desire with as strong
affections, though perhaps not with so loud a noise, as any whatsoever.

Examination.
If your thorough Reformation in this page be compared with your 14. 15. 16.
17. pages, where you have bound it up with so many restrictions; the falacy
will soon appear: You would smoothly tax some brethren for clamor and noise
in their desires after Reformation: indeed if you could persuade the Prophets
of God into silence or slight endeavors; half your design were finished: but
they have a fire which flames into stronger expressions; if the zeal of the
Prophets and Martyrs had given no further testimony to the truth then their own
bosoms, we had not had at this day such a cloud of witnesses; you know these
loud importunities awakens and hastens men into that holy business you would so
feign retard: if you think it your virtue that you can be silent in the midst
of our importunities, and loud cries after Reformation, I am sure it is your
policy too, for should you make too great a noise after it, you might be heard
to Oxford; and perhaps you are loath to speak out till you see further.

Sermon page 10.

But with this qualification, That by thorough Reformation, we mean such a one
whereof we are capable* pro statu viatorum, made with all due and Christian
moderation.

Examination.
You write of the Reformation of a Church like Bodin, not like Bucer; you make
it a work of Policy, not of Piety, of Reason not Divinity: such Counselors had
Jeroboam and Iehu, and they made a Church as unhappy as a Kingdom miserable.
This moderation and qualification you speak of, is not so consistent with
spiritual essences and operations; if the spirit of God should not work in the
souls of unregenerate, but expect an answerable compliancy first, who should
be sanctified? if God had expected any such congruity in our business of
salvation, we had yet been unredeemed. To speak closer, what Qualification did
Queen Elizabeth expect, when she received a Kingdom warm from Popery? what
Qualification did Henry the eigth expect, in his attempt against the Supremacy,
when all his Kingdom was so universally conjured to Rome? such moderation and
qualification is no other but a discreet taking so much as will serve your
turn: to the Law (says the Scripture) and to the testimony; Moses wrought
according to the Pattern, so Solomon too: godly Bucer makes it his work to
persuade Bucer in l.^ de Regno Christi.
King Edward to build up a perfect Church, and he prophesies sadly, that he was
afraid Popery would succeed, because the Kingdom of England was so averse to
the Kingdom of Christ, and we know the Marian days followed; me thinks we are
too like his prophecy, and our Marian times approach too fast.

Sermon, page 10, 11.

Such who are to be true and proper Reformers, they must have a lawful Calling
thereunto: duties which God has impaled in for some particular persons;
amongst these actions, Reformation of Churches is chief: Now the Supreme Power
alone has a lawful calling to reform a Church, as it plainly appears by the
Kings of Judah in their Kingdom.

Examination.
I had not known your meaning by the lawful Calling you name, but that you
expound it in the lines that follow to be the Calling of the supreme
Magistrate, as if no calling were warrantable at first to premove a reformation
but that; but you must take notice, there is an inward and outward Call; the
inward is a special excitation from the spirit of God, and such a Call is
warrantable to be active: I am sure it has been sufficient always to set holy
men on work. Another Call is outward, and that is either of Place and
Magistracy, or public relation: now though Magistracy be of public relation,
yet when I speak specifically of public relation, I mean that in which every
man stands bound in to God and his Country; now all these callings are
Commission enough, either to meddle as Christianly inspired, or Christianly
engaged: in ordinary transactions: I know the ordinary dispensation is to be
resorted to; but the business of Reformation, as it is extraordinary, so God
gives extraordinary conjunctures of times and circumstances, and extraordinary
concurrencies, and extraordinary incitations. In the building of the Temple you
shall see in Ezra and Nehemiah such workings of God; when the people were
gathered (...) 8, 1.
together as one man, they spoke to Ezra the Scribe to bring the book of the
law of Moses; here the people put one even Ezra to his duty.

And whereas you say, Reformation is of those duties that are impaled in for
some particular persons; I answer, this were a grand design, if you could
heigthen Reformation into such a holy Prodigy, as you would of late the Church
into the Prelacy and Clergy, and excluded the Laity, as a profane crew, and to
be taught their distance. Luther will tell you this is one of the Romish
engines to make such an holy business like the mountain in the Law, not to be
touched or approached to, but by Moses alone; Thus you might take off many good
workmen, and honest laborers in the Vineyard, whom Christ has hired and sent
in, and to whom he has held out his Seepter, as Ahasuerus to Esther.

And whereas you tell us, that the supreme Power alone has the lawful
Calling, as appears in the Kings of Judah; I answer, that if so, the Parliament
were now in a dangerous Praemunire, for you know that is suspended from us, and
yet our state goes on in their work, enabled (as they say) by their
fundamental power, and constitution; I shall not here dispute the e^^^ations
of this power in ordinances, votes, and orders, they have made it appear in
their own Declarations; only this, I read of an ordinance made by the Nobles
and Elders of Israel, those Lords and Commons, That whosoever would not come,
according to the Counsel Ezra 10, 8,
which was taken for Reformation, all his substance should be forfeited, here
is no King of Iudahs hand, nor a Cyrus King of Persia's, but an ordinance of
their own to their own people, only they have King Cyru's writ for their first
assembling and consulting. Had Christ and his Apostles waited in their
Reformation for the consent of the Roman Magistrate, the supreme power, they
had not made that holy expedition they did. Had Luther and Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius stayed for the Emperors Reformation, they had not shed half
that light in the German Hemisphere. There was a time when God took part of the
spirit of Moses and put it upon the Elders.

Sermon, page 12.

Mean time mere private men must not be idle, but move in their sphere till
the supreme power does reform; they must pray to inspire those that have
power: secondly they must reform themselves and their families.

Examination.
Still you drive on your design through many plausible insinuations; you would
keep private men doing, but still doing in their own circle: I confess I would
not improve their interest too high, nor too soon, for the early settings forth
of private men is apt to exceed into a tumultuary motion; yet I would not put
them so far behind, as they should lie like the lame and the diseased at the
Poole of Bethesda, waiting till a supreme power came down amongst them: there
are many public engagements which they are capable on, and which providence
will often guide them to, as in finding out ways of facilitation, and
advancement for the business: besides some other arcana and secret
preparations, we see every thing naturally is spirited with an instinct of
ayding the whole; water and air will part with their own interests to serve
the universal, in the danger of a vacuity; the very Romans by a moral
principle would contend to be first in the service of their Country; and it
remains as a crime upon record, that Gilead abode beyond Jordan, and that Dan
remained in ships, and Ashur abode in his breaches, that is, that they would
sit down* circled with their own interests and affairs.

And though you would put private men upon such duties here as are godly and
commendable, the policy is to keep them exercised in one good duty, that they
should not advance another; and thus you would cunningly make one piece of
Divinity betray another, and make the friends of the Reformation do it a
discourtesie in ignorance.

Sermon, page 19.

Lastly, with carfulness not to give any just offense to the Papists.

Examination.
I wonder you should here express an indulgence which is not allowable, and
the memory of the Parliament will be honorable for that; they knew so much
Divinity as taught them not to value their offense, and to proclaim to them
both in Ireland and England an irreconcilable war; this carfulness and
tenderness you plead for, was the first principle which embased our Church so
far as to take up their Altars and Ceremonies to avoid offense. Saint Paul
was of another spirit, who forbore not a Disciple and Apople, When I saw, says
he, that they walked not uprightly, according to the truth of the Gospel.

You do much mistake the Divinity of Christ in matter of offense, who never
forbore to preach or publish any necessary truth; nay, when his Disciples were
scandalized and said this is an hard saying, does this offend you? says he,
what and if, etc. he goes on and pursues the offense, till they left (...) 6.
60. 61.
him, and his Doctrine too, and for the Papists, they are much of the relation
and constitution that the Scribes and Pharisees were; not without, as you say,
nor within; and yet fee if you can find our Savior or his Apostles letting
out themselves into your restrictions and moderations and cautions; those
truths which are essentially, universally, always, and at all times holy,
ought not to be measured by the umbrage and scandal of the Adversary; indeed
in things merely civil or indifferent, our use and liberty may appear more,
but for such truths as our Reformation brings, they will be always an offense
to the Adversary; We preach Christ, says the Apostle unto the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness; and yet the Apostle preaches,
and lays these blocks and this rock of offense in the way too.

Sermon page 24.

That it is to be desired, not hoped for, a Plato's Commonwealth, and Moors
Vtopia, these phansies are pleasing but unfeizable.

Examination.
He that looks abroad, shall soon have his sight terminated but the more he
goes on, the more he sees, and that which closed his prospect, opens then into
new discoveries; if you see no perfect Reformation as you stand, do not
therefore say there is none, they that stand higher, and on a holier Mountain
perhaps see further, you that stand in the Horizon of Prelacy cannot see much
beyond it; corruption is deceit full, and makes us like Adam, see all
generations in our selves; because we will not be perfectly reformed, let us
not argue our Judgments into a belief that we cannot, let us think it as
possible to be the best, as easy to be the worst; let us not think that a
Plato's Commonwealth, or a Moors Vtopia, which for ought we know, is real
and existent; There is under the Gospel, a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation a
peculiar People; and certainly had former Ages lived to see but the discoveries
of later times, they would have admired their own ignorance and our happiness.

Sermon page. 24.

There are some now adays that talk of a great light manifested in this age
more than before, indeed we Modernes have a mighty advantage of the Ancients,
whatsoever was theirs by industry, may be ours, all contribute themselves to
us, who live in this latter age.

Examination.
If we had no more light than what you insinuate were seen from the Fathers,
why do we see more and more clearly and further? he that sees far must
either have a good sight or a clear light, and sure in this age we have both,
those errors which our Fathers saw for dim truths, we see for heresies; so
surely both our eyes and our light are better; for the light which our Fathers
have in their lamps can discover but so much to us, as it did to them; and we
know our discoveries are such, as we are able to see the shadow which followed
them, even that mystery which was working in their days, both in Prelacy and
Ceremony, who will deny but that the cloud of Antichristianisme was thick in
their times, and then the light could not be so glorious as now, when these
clouds grow thinner, and more attenuated by the Preaching of the Gospel, the
Gospel does work and wind its beams into the world according to the
Prophetical seasons for Revelation, many Prophetical truths were sealed up
and those not unsealed but successively, and as our Revel.
generations after, may have a star rising to them, which we have not, so we
may have beams and radiations and shootings Act. 3. 36.
which our Fathers had not. The Apostles had not all their truths and light
revealed at once, some early, some late, some not till the Holy Ghost was
bestowed: Revelations are graduall, and the veil is not taken off at once, nor
in one Age: we honor the Fathers as men in their Generations famous, their
light was glorious in its degree and quality but they had not all the degrees
attainable; they had a light for their own times, and we for ours; and who
cannot think we are rising into that Age, where in God shall pour his spirit
upon all flesh; and wherein the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the
Sun, and the light of the Sun as the light of seven days.

But we see the policy of commending the Fathers light to our Generation for
could you prevail with us to set our Dials by that, you then might reform our
Church by the Canterburian gnomen, and so set us back to a falsly-reputed
Primitive Reformation.

Sermon, page 13, 14, 15, 16.

The Qualification for Reformers, the decent burial of such Ceremonies as are
taken from the Fathers, the honorable Reservation to our first Reformers.

Examination.
That it may appear I look not only at the worst of the Sermon, there are
excellent truths in it, and it is pity they are not better situated, I could
always wish to see a Diamond set in Gold.

These are good Positions, and in their Pages not without their enamill of wit,
yet there is a Policy to write fair in one leaf, though you make a blot in
another, but I cannot let these pass without some observation;

First for the Qualification, I dare say never age afforded more eminent in
this Kingdom, their Calling lawful, their Piety exemplary, their knowledge
radiant, their courage experienced through a legion of difficulties; their
prudence in the conduct of a business, though opposed with the Policy and
Malignity of a grand and potent Enemy;

And for the decent burial of Ceremonies, and superstitions of the fathers,
they shall have a Parliament of Senators, and an Assembly of Divines to lay
them in their Grave, and I dare say, a godly Congregation in the Kingdom to
sing a Psalm at their Funerals; and will not this be a very decent burial?

And for the honorable reservation to the Reformers and their memories, our
Divines and Reformers now have ever made resorts and appeals to the truths they
delivered; and in those times when Beza, and Calvin, and P. Martyr were set
lowest; till the Master of the feast came lately and bid them sit up higher; a
Caietan and Bellarmine, and a Council of Trent, I am sure, had more honor
from the Divinity of the other year, or your times, so far we admire the
Reformers, as to love their Truths, and to pity their errors.

But I will not say much, Nimis remedies irritantur delicta tacit. (...).
errors may be more provoked than remedied with overhandling; let us be wise in
the Colors of good and evil, Plu es amicos quam sunt arbtratur, Plin lib. 2.
Epist,
though it be an honest, yet it is a dangerous mistake to think too many our
Friends, and too few our Enemies.

Conclusion.
If I be now examined what Reformation I aim at, I answer, my endeavor here
was only to take out of the way such rubbish as others would bring in; if we
can but clear the passage we go far in the work, and in the meantime let us
like Ioshuas spies, bring no evil report upon the land we are going to.

But suppose this perfect Reformation or Church were among the Arist.
(...) the Arist. 5 pol. 6. 8. Reip^bla dmenta Live lib. 2.
(...), the Ragione di sacro dominio, he were no wise nor faithful Divine, who
would not preserve that secret for holy advantages; it is Gods own design and
his Apostles to hold out a perfection to us, be perfect as your heavenly
father, -- and some Pastors -- for the perfecting of the Saints; I commend
Bodin and Tacitus for their political faithfulness, they writ far, yet would
not Non vulgar Tacit. Ann. nec proserre dicet in publicum Arnol Clapm. 1. 6.
c. 19.
sun the Imperial (...), nor make them popular.

Apology.
I have now done (I will not say) refuting, but committing errors, I am afraid
my haste at this time has made me mend one fault only with another.

FINIS.
New Quaeres OF CONSCIENCE, Touching the late OATH; Desiring Resolution.
Q. How it consists with 1. The threefold conditions of an Oath in general of
Truth, Judgment, Righteousness
Jer. 4. 2. 2. The threefold Oath taken in particular viz. of 1. Allegiance. 2.
Supremacy. 3. Protestation.
3. Theirown introduction, Limitation in special, in order to the security and
preservation of the True, Reformed, Protestant Religion.


I. Quaere. How it consists with the three Conditions of an OATH.
1. OF Truth, which excludes falsehood, doublings, fictions, mental evasions,
aequivocations, and reservations, and requires simplicity and sincerity,
according to the sense and purpose of the imposer. 1 Liquide jurare,

2. Of judgment, not unadvisedly, lightly or wantonly, to satisfy the times,
to comply with great persons, for advantage, or carnal security, not upon a
Popish implicit faith, but to let every man be persuaded in his own mind,
that it be grounded upon a necessary Cause, and taken soberly, advisedly,
discreetly, reverently, and in the rear of God.

3. Of Righteousness, That it be not to the prejudice of my Neighbor.

He that takes it with his private Reservation inconsistent with the Sense and
purpose of the Oath, offends against the first. He that takes it for favor of
men, offends against the second. He that takes it out of emulation and rage, to
the damage of his Brother, offends against the third.

For these Causes, D. Augustine concludes; Falsa juratio exitiosa est, vera
juratio periculosa, nulla juratio secura. False swearing is pernicious; True
swearing is dangerous; no swearing is secure. Ser. 28. de verb. Apost.

By an ancient Law of the Church, No man was to be sworn but fasting.

Quaere II. How can it consist with the Oath?
1 OF Supremacy. For if he be once supreme over all persons, in all causes
Ecclesiastical and Temporal, how can I swear to subject him, or bring him
under any person, in any Cause whatsoever? and though the chief occasion of
that Oath was upon the Popes pretending jurisdiction, yet the intention and
extention was to shut all his Subjects under the same condition of Obedience.

2 Of Allegiance, For I am bound First, To defend the King and his Successors
to the uttermost of my power against all Treasons, and Conspiracies against his
Person, Crown and dignity. Secondly, To do my best endeavor to reveal all
Conspiracies I know or hear against him or any of them, and Third, That no
person whatsoever has power to absolve me of the Oath, and All which seem to
be endangered by taking up Arms against him, or his lifeguard, or the forces
raised by him.

3. Of the late Protestation, in regard of a double seeming Contradiction. For
I promise, vow and protest, to maintain the Protestant Religion, expressed in
the Doctrine of the Church of England. But this assertion (That in my
Conscience I do believe that the Forces raised by the two Houses of Parliament,
are raised and continued for their just defense, and for the defense of the
true Protestant Religion) seems to contradict the Protestant Religion and
Doctrine of our Church. For though there be many strange Fancies, and doctrines
in the Church of England, yet there is but One express Doctrine of the Church
of England, and that is contained in the 39 Articles, and Book of Common Prayer
(to which all the regular Clergy must subscribe) and are confirmed by an Act of
Parliament. Now one Protestant point of our Religion, expressed in the Doctrine
of this Church, is in the 37 Article, Viz.

1. The Kings Majesty has the Chief power (id est, supremacy) in this Realm
of England, unto whom the Chief government of All Estates of this Realm,
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all Causes does appertain, To Rule All
estates and degrees committed to his charge, and to restrain with the sword the
Stubborn and evil doers, which he cannot do if the Sword or Militia be
taken from him.

2. That a man may take up Arms when the Magistrate (id est Supreme power)
commands.

3. That a man may swear when the Magistrate requires in a cause of Faith and
Charity. Implying that no man ought to swear, take solemn Oaths, or Bear
Arms without the injunction of the supreme Magistrate.

4. That the two Books of Homilies contains a godly and wholesome Doctrine and
are to be read in Churches by the Ministers (not only reading Ministers)
diligently and distinctly, that they may be understood of the people.

5. Homil. 21. Against Rebellion, That it is not lawful for Subjects to raise
up Arms against their Sovereign, under color of Religion.

Eccles. 4. 12. A threefold cord is not easily broken, except by such as
furiously rage together, and lightly imagine a vain thing. By Rulers that take
Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying. Let us
break their bonds asunder, and cast away their Cords from us. But he that sits
in Heaven, laughs them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision.
And yet will I set my King upon his holy hill of Sion: He will bruise them
with a rod of iron, and, Be wise therefore, and kiss the Son, lest he be
angry. Psalm. 2. 1, 2 3.
Quaere III.
How can it consist with the Protestation in the second particular, Against all
Popish Innovations within the Realm, etc. For to tak up Arms in Case of
Religion, against the supreme Power, is a plain Popish Jesuiticall Innovation,
taught and maintained by them in this last age.

And in the third particular.

For I vow and protest to maintain with my life, power and estate, according to
the duty of my Allegiance, his Majesty's. 1. Power. 2. Honor. 3. Estate.


Now the Quaere is, How can I maintain?

1 HIs Person, with my life, power and estate, if I swear, To assist an army of
men, which he declares (as is thought by many pious and judicious men) to be
utter enemies to his life, honor and estate.

Or how can I maintain?

2. His Honor, when by the Oath I profess not only in my heart and thought
to curse him, contrary to the word of God. Eccles. 10. 20. Exodus 22. 28. but
openly wirh my mouth to blaspheme him, and in effect say, (which is Nefandum)
He is an utter enemy of Gods true Religion, a violator of all sacred Vows,
Oaths, Bonds and Covenants. And shall I yet say, I maintain his honor? Am I
thus presumptuous to judge him, and not afraid to speak evil of Dignities, and
yet maintain his Honor, or the Protestant Religion? Did Cham honor his
father, when he discovered his nakedness? And do they honor their father that
cover and extinguish his virtues and glory, and cast aspertions of disgrace and
calumny upon him? Would such Honor be taken of the Father from his children?
of the servant from his master? Go and offer that honor to thy Father, thy
Master, thy Governor, and see if he will take it at thy hands. Mal. 1. 6. 8.

Or how can I maintain?

3. His Estate, when I take part with them that withhold, and withdraw it from
him. 2. That put him to such an exhausting and consuming charge by maintaining
an Army to guard and protect his Person and his Subjects.

Nor will the after Limitation serve to heal the breach of the Oath, by saying,
It was not to be extended to the maintenance of any Form or Worship, Discipline
or Government of the Church of England) for first all the ordained Ministers
have subscribed and sworn to all the Doctrine of the Church, etc. and cannot be
absolved from any lawful Oath by any power whatsoever.

4. Though it should not be extended to Church government, yet it will reach to
the Civil Supremacy and power of the sword, which it avoucheth to be only in
the King, and not in any Subjects whatsoever.

Quaere IIII. How can it consist with its own
Introduction, id est. That there has been, and now is a Popish and Traterous
Plot for the subversion of the true Religion. First, How can I believe it, and
believe the Kings Protestation to the contrary. Secondly, And how can I honor
the King, and not believe him? Thirdly, How can I call it a Popish Army, when
the better and greater part by far are Protestants, and against all Popish
Plots.

And Expression,

1 IN declaring my sorrow for my sins past, and purpose to amend, if in the
very Oath I commitgreater sins of Disobedience, perjury, and blasphemy then I
repented of; if the Repentance it self be a mockery, a sin, and a
Transgression, its a Repentance to be repented of; and if the light which is in
^^ be darkness, how great is that darkness? if the Repentance it self include
a Transgression, how great is that Trausgression?

2. How is it in order to the securing of our Protestant Religion? When as it
is clear by that which is above said, it is directly contrary to the Doctrine
of our Church? which clearly assents the Kings Supremacy over all persons, in
all Causes, and plainly denies any power of Arms to be used by Subjects
against the King under color of Religion. Besides, what our Lord answered for
himself, Luke 12. we his servants may follow him to the like offers. Quis
constituit me divisorem super vos? when one desired him to speak to his Brother
to divide the inheritance, he answered, Man, who has made me a divider or
judge over you? if any speak to us to take up Arms. Quaere, Who has made me a
Judge over my Sovereign? When he has protested by all that is sacred, That he
will defend the true Protestant Religion, and Liberty of the Subject, etc. Who
has made me a judge over his heart? to sit in Gods Tribunal? or who has made
me a divider betwixt the King and his two Houses of Parliament? or who has
made me a Defender of the faith? by any power coercive, or force of Sword? Am I
not rather excluded from it by our Savior? He that takes the sword, shall
perish by the sword.

How can it consist with former Oaths, Viz.

To maintain the Kings Person, honor and estate, and all and every person (in
order to the Protestation) in whatsoever they shall do in pursuance of the
same. And yet assist to the utmost of my power, First, Those that hazard his
Person, honor and Estates. 2. those that go contrary to the Doctrine of the
Church of England (in taking up Arms against the King, under color of
Religion) in all that they shall do in pursuance of the same. What if I should
be required to kill my own father natural, civil, or spiritual, my
Sovereign, my Parents, my Pastors, if they shall oppose their force by word or
deed, and maintain the Kings Cause against them; and all this may be encluded
(in pursuance of the same) and we have cause to fear it is so intended, or may
be on occasion extended, when it is taken by some (I fear) for good doctrine,
That every man may consecrate his hand, and fall upon his brother, if he judge
him an Idolater. And that the tribe of Levi by that severe execution, did
expiare their slain of the Fathers Transgression, in their bloody excision of
the Sechemites circumcision. Perhaps the comparison holds in part in their
furious zeal, of Simeon and Levi, who under an hypocritical pretext of
Religion, and Circumcision, wrought the utter destruction and excision of the
Shechemites. Which made Jacob complain, You have troubled me, and made me to
stink among, etc. Genesis 49. 5. Simon and Levi, Brethren in evil. O my Soul,
come not thou into their (Counsel) id est Secret and into their Assembly, my
honor, be not united. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their
wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in
Israel.

Woe to them that draw iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin, as it were with
Cart-ropes. Isai. 5. 18, 28.

Chrysostom, As children pulling a rotten Rope at both ends, contrary-wayes,
at last it breaks, and both fall and break their heads and legs. So in a
doubtful Twisted Oath, rotten and unsound, when contrary parts pull several
ways, or when Conscience holds one way, and worldly affection pulls another
way; The Cord or Oath breaks, and both sides fall into a Gulf of perdition. The
one by provoking the Oath, the other by breaking the Oath.

Conscience falls one way, and breaks his peace. World pulls and falls another
way, and breaks his credit.

The Spirit of a man would sustein his infirmities, but a wounded Spirit who
can bear. Prove. 18. 14.

Hear Saint Chrysostomes suit and request to his flock. This I now ask, and
well never leave asking, That whenever any is about to swear, Let Us take John
Baptists head, and with loud cries show it, and cry out against Oaths, and
imagine you heard that tongue yet speaking as the voice of a Crier, Hate and
abhor an Oath my Murderer; For what my reproof could not effect, an Oath did,
And what a Tyrants fury could not do, th^^ a necessity of Perjury effected.
He that once heard him gladly, and did many things, and reverenced his
Sanctity, now murdered him cruelly, and that by virtue of an Oath, for two
causes, First For his Oaths sake. Secondly, For Companies sakeed est, in
pursuance of his Oath, he cuts off the head of a Saints worth the whole world.

NOw let those who are already entangled with this unhappy* Covenant, judge
rightly of Herod's Case, Whether it h^^^ not been much better to have violated
his rash Oath, and confessed his folly in making it, before all that were
present, then so bloodily to have kept it. Let them remember the School
Doctrine, No man can be to immured or enclosed betwixt two sins, but he may
find the way out without a third. If it be a deadly crime to keep such an Ooth
it can be no sin to break it. We so the Israelites found a way to evade their
severe vow against the Benjamites, not to give them their daughters. Judge. 21.
21. and it is not laid to their charge. We read of the peoples delivering
Jonathan out of Saul's hand, not with standing his fathers unto put him to
death. 1. Sam. 14. 45. And neither the people are blamed for so doing, nor Saul
taxed for yielding to the peoples What need more be said, when we find David
himself repenting of his rash Oath, to destroy the household of Nabal the
Carmelite 1. Sam. 25. 34. How many Christians in the Primitive time may we read
of, that having once abjured their Savior, repented, and turned again and were
crowned with Martyrdom 1 How many of later days, that not with standing they
have once subscribed and sworn against the Protestant Doctrine, yet have
lamented their inconstancy, and suffered death valiantly in defense of it! It
is a most certain Rule, that in rash Oaths, poenitend^ promissio, non
persicienda praesumptio: The promise ought to be repented of presumption ought
not to be executed. And in unjust and wicked ones, such as this Covenant,
Injusta vincul^ rumpat iustitia. Unjust and unrighteous fetters, let
Righteousness burst asunder.

FINIS.
Oxford Printed for William Web. 1643.


