A CRY AGAINST Oppression and Cruelty: BEING A short account of the Trial, and
of the Sentence that was passed on several innocent people called Quakers, who
are Inhabitants of the City of Worcester.

At the Assizes holden there the 16, 17, and 18 th days of the 5 th Month
called July, who were imprisoned because they refused to swear in obedience to
the commandment of Christ Jesus, etc.

And for assembling themselves together peaceably in the Name and fear of the
Lord, to worship him in Spirit and Truth, according to his Will.

And when they bring you unto the Synagogues, and unto Magistrates and Powers,
take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall answer, on what ye shall say; for
the Holy Ghost shall teach you in the same hour what you ought to say,

Luke 12, 11, 12. The wicked delights in mischief, but the followers of Truth
abhors their ways, etc.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by William Warwick, 1663.

A Cry against Oppression and Cruelty, etc.
IF we should altogethet hold our peace, and not publish to the World what hard
measure we have received from some who are in Authority, wholly, and without
any just occasion given unto them, as on our parts; yet doubtless the righteous
God who sees and beholds all the actions of men, and will justly recompense for
the same, will in his own time clear our innocence, and plead our cause; for
whose sake we suffer, our Consciences bearing us perfect witness thereunto: Yet
in regard of some who have been informed otherwise concerning the cause of our
sufferings, then indeed it is, as though we suffered in our own wills, and in
contempt of Authority, and as though we were against all good Government, when
the truth is much otherwise. Therefore to wipe off such aspersions, that such
as have been misinformed concerning us, may understand the truth; this we
declare in our own defense.

First, We are brought to deny our selves from following our own wills, that we
might do the Will of God in every thing, who has called us to follow peace and
holiness with all men: And this we are taught to do by that Principle which God
has placed in us, and not only in us, but in all men, which is the Light which
Christ has enlightened every man withal, which lets them see their sin, and
wherein they are short in what they ought to be. This is that which we say will
lead even all people to do as they would be done unto, and to seek others
welfare as their own, which every Christian ought to do; and whosoever they be
that are short in these things, though they be called by the Name of
Christians, yet not doing that which the Spirit of Christ leads unto, which is
to seek others welfare as their own, and to do as they would be done by; though
they may call themselves Christians, yet indeed and really they cannot be said
so to be. Many Reasons might we give for what we have affirmed, but this is
sufficient; It is said in the Scripture, That so many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they are the sons of God. And we say, Such as are Christians indeed,
do, and are made partakers of Christ's nature. But it may be questioned, What
is the Nature of Christ? Answer, Meekness and humility, and lowliness of
spirit, agreeable to his own words, who said, Learn of me, for I am meek and
lowly in heart, etc.

O that those who are the cause of our oppression for the exercise of our
Consciences toward the Lord, even the righteous God of Heaven and Earth,
because we fear him, and do labor to keep our Consciences void of offense
toward him: We wish that they and all others whose day of Visitation is not
quite past, would take diligent heed to the pure Light of Christ which shines
in their hearts, and so come to learn of Christ to be as he was, that their
souls may enter into rest, that the Kingdom of God they may know in them, which
consists in peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, etc. and this we do from our
hearts desire on their behalf.

Another thing charged against us by some is, That we do what we do in
contempt of Authority, etc.

Ans. God who knovveth our hearts, can bear us witness to the contrary, unto
whom we do appeal, and to his faithful Witness in every man's Conscience,
which will let them see that what we do, we do it not in contempt of
Authority, but for Conscience sake toward God; and if men require that from
us which God does forbid to be done, whether it be not better in such a case
to obey God rather than man? Let his faithful Witness in every man's Conscience
give an answer.

Another thing charged against us by some is, That we are against all good
Government, etc.

Ans. Unto which Charge we say, Nay, for we are for a good Government, and
all just Laws and just Magistrates we own, and do honor such as do rule for
God, who are a terror to the evil doer, and a praise to them that do well; such
bears not the Sword in vain, such answers the Witness of God in every man's
Conscience, which is just. But such as do govern contrary to God's Witness in
every man's conscience, doing that which is unjust and unequal in the sight of
the Lord, who is just, and whose way is equal, it is such as the Light does
reprove and condemn in their own Consciences; and such as these we cannot own,
but must testify against. And if by such our sufferings be continued, we shall
not rise up with carnal Weapons to work our own deliverance, but patiently
endure what may be further laid upon us for the Truth's sake, committing our
Cause unto the Lord, in whom we trust, and do believe that he will in his own
time deliver us by his holy Arm of Power; unto whom be praises, and dominion,
and thanksgiving for his mercy and loving kindness, who keeps Covenant and
mercy with all who trust in him from generation to generation for ever.

Concerning the manner of our Trial, and of the sentence that was past on us
afterward.
Several of us being brought into the Court by the Judges Order the 16th day of
the 5th Month called July, some of us were brought to the Bar; first, Thomas
Ball was brought, unto whom the Judge spoke as follovveth.

Judge. Have you taken the Oath of Allegiance?


Tho. Ball. Ans. Nay.


Judge. Will you take the Oath?


T. B. Nay, Christ has commanded to the contrary, who said, Swear not at all.


Then William Pit was brought to the Bar; the Judge spoke to him, etc.

Judge. Upon what account were you at Robert Smith's House the 8th day of June?


VV. P. Where are my Accusers?


Judge. Will you take the Oath?


W. P. An. Let me be cleared of what I stand here charged for; then I shall
answer to this.


Next Gervase Pierson was brought to the Bar; the Judge speaks to him, etc.

Judge. Will you take the Oath?


G. P. Ans. I never read nor heard of that Law, that by virtue thereof men
might be kept five Weeks in prison till a crime is found against them.


Judge. Were not you at the Meeting?


G. P. I do not say I was there.


Judge. I do not go about to ensnare you by your own words.


G. P. Then let it be proved I was there.


Judge said, Call Robert Smith to the Bar. Robert Smith standing up, the Judge
speaks to him as follows:

Judge. Are you a Prisoner?


Robert Smith answered; About five or six Weeks ago, I with many others were by
force of Military men taken Prisoners, and since so continued.


Judge. What is the reason you appear thus contemptuously before the Court with
your Hat on?


R. S. My Hat is my own, and I came truly by him, and it is not in contempt I
wear him.


Judge. By it you contemn the Authority and Laws of this Kingdom.


R. S. Where is that Law that forbids a man to wear his own Hat? Instance it.


Judge. It is a custom in England to show their subjection to Authority by
putting off their Hats.


R. S. It is a custom in England for men to wear, or to come before Courts with
Coats or Cloaks, and I am here without either; and is not the one as much a
contempt as the other?


Judge. Fine him five pounds, and record it, and now take off his Hat. Which
the Jailer did accordingly:


Judge. Did you ever take the Oath of Allegiance?


R. S. I have been Prisoner five or six Weeks, and I would know the cause of my
imprisonment.


Judge. I meddle not with your Imprisonment; but here you are before me, and
here I find you, and do tender to you the Oath of Allegiance: Will you take it,
or no? For I tell you the danger which will follow; you will incur Praemunire,
and forfeit your Estate to the King.


R. S. Who was that Law made for? the Papists or us?


Judge. For both.


R. S. Why then is it not tendered to them, as well as to us?


Judge. They have already taken it.


R. S. Suppose I find some Papists, or Popishly affected, sitting on the Bench,
shsll it be tendered unto them?


Judge. They have done it already.


R. S. Let us and the people see it, that we may be satisfied.


Judge. Will you take the Oath, or no? Otherwise we will record your refusal,
and call you again to morrow, and upon your second refusal record it also, and
shall pass the sentence of Praemunire upon you.


R. S. Shall the Example of Christ determine the controversy between us?


Judge. I came not to dispute with you about the Doctrine of Christ, but to
teach you the Doctrine of the Law.


R. S. Must the Doctrine of the Law make void the Doctrine of Christ?


Jud. Will you answer speedily whether you will take the Oath, or no?


R. S. Love obliges to Allegiance more than Oaths can do.


Judge. Then signify your Allegiance by an Oath.


R. S. That which obliges me not to swear, obliges me to injure no man.


Judge. Take him away.


R. S. Friends, The things that are required at our hands, is, to deny that
which to us are the Lords Truths; the one is, Not to swear at all; the other
is, The assembling our selves together. Rather than so to do, I am not here
only ready to suffer, but also to seal those Truths with my blood, if
thereunto required.


Judge said, God forbid I should seek your blood.

Then we were returned back again to prison, till the next day; in the mean
time several Bills of Indictment were drawn up against us; for we understand,
that before some of us were called for to be brought into the Court, the Judge
asked the Grand Jury whether they had any Bills against the Quakers? Answer
being made by them of the Grand Jury, They had nothing to give in against us.
Then the Judge ordered some of us to be sent for, that they hearing our Answers
to such Questions as he put forth to ensnare us, might from thence have an
occasion to draw up some Bills against us. So the Judge put them in the way how
to draw up Bills against us, whose directions they were ready to observe,
though it tended to the ensnaring of the innocent. Several Bills being drawn up
against us, one against Robert Smith in particular, and six more against the
rest of us; whereof some were drawn up according to the common Law, which is in
French, which the Jury did not understand. This being done, we were all sent
for to come into the Court.

We have not written these things out of hatred to those who are the cause of
our present sufferings, but that the truth might appear, and that such who have
not done justly toward us in these things, may for the time to come be
careful, and repent of what they have done unjustly against us, and resolve
never to do the like in time to come, lest they feel the Lords heavy
displeasure, who is just, and whose Ways are Truth and Equity, and will render
unto all men a reward according to their Works.

The 17th day of the Month we were all brought into the Court, being in number
twenty four persons, being put together with the Felons; Robert Smith being
called to the Bar, the Bill that was found against him was read, which was for
refusing to swear: The Clark of the Range spoke to him as follows.

Clark. Are you guilty or not guilty?


R. S. I have been detained a Prisoner, and not yet the Fact signified unto me,
or my crime laid to my charge: Therefore clear me, or charge me for what I was
first imprisoned, and then I may answer unto this charge.


Judge. You will not be permitted to speak except you plead to your indictment,
and then you shall be heard.


Rob. Smith. What the Scripture forbids, the Law ought not to compel unto.


Judge. I will have no discourse with you about Scripture, or other matters;
will you answer to your indictment or not?


Rob. Smith. Yesterday Christ's example would not be permitted of, and to day no
Scripture: it is time to be silent if truth and Scripture may not determine a
matter.


Judge. Be speedy in your answer, you will not be permitted to weary the Court.


Rob. Smith. That Law by which I am tried was provided for such as did labor
to murder and betray the Government of England, and in that it was just, and
how can it then reach me or them unto whom such a thing cannot be charged; and
therefore that Law is to try such as are before mentioned.


Judge. If you will not answer, I must and shall proceed


Rob. Smith. That Law which compells to that which Christ forbids, is an
unsound Law; but that Law which compels to swear, compels to that which Christ
forbids, therefore an unsound Law.


Judge. Take him away.


Then John Price, John Townsend, James Moor, Edward Lewis, Susanna Pierson,
were brought to the Bar; two Bills of indictment being read, by which they were
indicted, the one for holding all oaths to be unlawful, the other for meeting
together in the house of Robert Smith, by force of Arms and contempt of the
Laws of the Land, etc. which indictments were filled up with many untruths.

John Price being called, the Clerk spoke to him, etc.

Cler. Are you guilty or not guilty?


John Price. There be many errors and falsities in the indictment, of which I
am not guilty.


Then the Clerk spoke to John Townsend with others of us, who answered after
the same manner, which we forbear to mention, according to the questions and
their answers for brevity sake.

Susanna Pierson was called.

Clerk. Are you guilty or not guilty.


Sus. Pierson. Whose Ox or whose Ass have I taken, or who have I defrauded? if
I have taken ought from any man, I will restore him fourfold


Judge. Answer, guilty, or not guilty?


Sus. Pierson. The Indictment is false.


Judge. Answer, guilty, or not guilty? answer to the indictment, and then you
shall be suffered to plead, saying, I will do you no wrong.


Sus. Pierson. I desire you to look upon the Kings Proclamation, but the Judge
denied, and caused me to be pulled down.

Now the Proclamation forbids any Soldiers or others to come into the houses
of the Kings Subjects without sufficient warrant, or else to be looked upon as
contemners of the Government, etc. which might have been of use to us if we
could have had Justice therefrom, for those that came to pull and bale us forth
from our meetings would show us no warrant or order they had so to do.


Then Edward Bourn, George Knight, Tho. Jukes, Robert Tompkins, John Clarke
were brought to the Bar, two Bills of indictment being preferred against them;
The one for maintaining that all oaths are unlawful, etc. The other for meeting
together at the house of Robert Smith, June 11. which Bills being drawn up
according to the form before expressed, by which the other friends were
indicted.

Whereupon the Clerk of the Arraigners spoke to Edw. Bourn and the rest, as
follows.

Clerk. Are you guilty, or not not guilty?


Edw. Bourn. I desire I may have liberty to speak.


Judge. You shall have liberty to morrow to speak as much as you will when you
come to your trial, but now you must answer whether you are guilty or not
guilty?

When I would have spoke. I was interrupted, and not permitted. --


Then the Clerk proceeded.

Clerk. E. B. what say you, are you guilty or not guilty?


Edw. Bourn. I am clear from many things which are charged in the indictments
against me.


Clerk. Then you are not guilty.


Then the next was called, the indictment being read to him.

Clerk. Guilty, or not guilty?


George Knight. That I was at Rob. Smiths was true, but that I was there at a
tumultuous meeting, or to the ill example of the Kings Subjects, that I deny.

So the rest of us being questioned, after the reading of the indictments unto
them: whether they were guilty or not, returned their answer to the same effect
as we had done before them.

We desired copies of our indictments, that we might the better give in our
answers upon our further trial, which the Judge promised we should; but when
they were to be had, we could not have two copies of them, except we would give
fourteen shillings for them, therefore we chose rather to make our defense
without them, then to pay so dear for that which might have been writ upon one
side of half a sheet of paper.


Then Richard Fido, William Pit, Tho. Ball, Abraham Roberts, Gervase Pierson,
Abra. Arms, Geoffery Rasmos, and others were brought to the Bar; two Bills of
indictments being read, which were preferred against them to the same effect as
the other before mentioned, one of them bearing date June 8. being the day they
were taken prisoners, etc.

Richard Fido was called.

Clerk. Are you guilty, or not guilty?


Rich. Fido. Not guilty of many things therein mentioned.

Then William Pit was called.


Clerk. Are you guilty, or not guilty?


Will. Pit. The question is very difficult, there being some things therein
true, and many things false.


Clerk. Then that which is false you are not guilty of.

Then Geoffery Rasmos was called.


Clerk. Are you guilty or not guilty?


Geoffery Rasmos. I am an innocent man, where are mine accusers?

The rest of us being asked the same questions, returned answer to the same
effect as the other had done before.

Then we were all returned to prison again till our further trial, which was
the next day, when sentence was passed on us, as afterward is mentioned.

The 18. day of the 5. month called July, we were all brought into the Court
again, being placed among the Fellons, after a while Robert Smith was brought
to the Bar.


Judge. Robert Smith, Will you answer to your indictment or not, if not, you
shall not be permitted to speak, but I shall pass sentence upon you


R. Smith was going to speak, but interrupted --

Judge. This is the sentence and judgment of the Court concerning you: You are
to be out of the Kings protection, and to forfeit your personal estate for ever
to the King, and your real estate* during term of Life, etc.


Rob. Smith. The Lord gives, and if he permits to be taken away, the will of
the Lord be done.

On the 21 day of the same month the Sheriff seized on the goods of Rob.
Smith, and did take an account or Inventory thereof, as much as to the Ladle,
Flesh-fork, and Links, and a basket which cost but three farthings.

And now for the trial of the rest, etc.

John Price, John Townsend, James Moor, Edw. Lewis, Susan Pierson, being
brought to the Bar the second time, two Witnesses swore to the indictments,
whose evidence was proved to be false, for when the Judge said to us, we were
taken such a day or time, Susanna Pierson replied, saying, that was false, for
we have been in prison a month, which was near a fortnight before that time.
Then the Judge said we were brought before the Mayor; unto which Susanna
Pierson answered, it is utterly false; and said further, he was not a competent
Witness, who has sworn as before said, and also because he had enmity in his
heart against us. Susan* Pierson said, the Witness was utterly forsworn, and a
perjured man; upon which the Judge said to Susan. Take heed what you do, for he
may bring his action against you; and so instead of reproving the evil-doer,
his hands were strengthened in bearing false Witness. And also herein it does
further appear, that the Witnesses were forsworn, because they swore that two
of our friends who were with us at the place where we were taken prisoners,
were not there at that time, who were, and also committed to prison with us.


Su. Pierson* May I have liberty to speak.


Judge. Yes, if you will speak to the indictment.


Su. Pierson. Whereas it is said we went to our meetings by force of arms, that
is false, for we go innocently, and have had dirt thrown in our faces going to,
and coming from our meetings, without lifting up our hands against any.


Judge. That is a form of Law, and it is used as a form, as thus, If that two
or three men should assemble at one place, contrary to the Laws of this Realm,
and although they have no visible weapons with them, yet their so meeting
together is by force of Arms, because it is contrary to the Laws; and if they
do but disturb the peace, it is by force of arms, expressed in all indictments.

Now let it be considered how that form of Law can be good and just, wherein
things are expressed otherwise then it is, as to say the People are met
together by force of Arms, when the least appearance of such a thing cannot be
found amongst them.

We being taken away, Edw. Bourn, Geo. Knight, Tho. Jukes, Rob. Tompkins, and
John Clark was brought to the Bar the second time; our indictments being read
to us, and the Witnesses produced, which swore against us; Edw. Bourn spoke as
follows.


Edw. Bourn. When we were taken prisoners, they came with Swords and Guns
without any warrant or order, contrary to the Kings Proclamation, etc. but that
was little regarded.


Then the Witnesses were called to swear to the indictments. Edw. Bourn spoke
to the Judge.

Edw. Bourn. I desire liberty to ask a question?


Judge. No: But you may put what question you will to the Witnesses.


Edw. Bourn. I not being permitted to speak what I desired to the Judge, and
perceiving one of the Witnesses had sworn falsely, as to the time of our being
taken prisoners; I enquired of him when it was that we were met together?

Witness. It is in less time then a month.


Edw. Bourn. That is not so, for we had been five Weeks prisoners then, --
Afterward the prisoner took another Witness in a lie, and spoke to him
concerning what he did inform the Judge, that it was false also; whereupon the
Judge spoke as follows:


Judge. If it be false you need not say so, that is unmannerly, but you may say
it is an untruth then.


Ed. Bourn. That which is a Lie, is a Lie, I hope in meekness one may speak the
thing as it is, I do not speak it in malice; for indeed I was there in (...)
meekness, and in the fear of the Lord; and as for malice I dare not keep it in
man heart against any, for I am a Christian, and have learned of Christ to love
my enemies, and to do good to them that hate me.

And further it was observed, that the Witnesses durst not swear that we were
met together as in pretense to Worship God; because they heard nothing read or
spoke amongst us, which the Judge and Jury was often minded of, but we were
many times interrupted, and not permitted to speak.

One of us asked the Judge, whether it was not a point in Law to make vold the
indictment, when the Witnesses had sworn contrary to the time?


Judge. No, so long as it was one time or other.


George Knight spoke.

Geo. Knight. The witnesses have sworn that we were at Rob. Smiths between the
hours of 11 and 12 of the clock, and I can prove by diverse witnesses that I was
in my Fathers business at that time, and many hours after.


Judge. Were you not there that day?


Geo. Knight. That is not to the purpose whether I was there that day or not,
etc.

Here the Jury may take notice that the Witnesses swore more out of enmity
against us then otherwise, they swore so carelessly.

Many questions were asked of us that we by answering might ensnare our selves,
which we understand by the Laws of the Land the Judge ought not to have done,
but rather to have advised and counseled us how to make our defense with
safety to our selves. It was a saying of Judge Heath, that the Laws of England
were merciful Laws, and that it was the Judges duty to be helpful and assistant
to the prisoner, rather then to ensnare them.


R. Tompkins said, I was at my Fathers house that time when the Witness swore I
was at Robert Smiths, as several can witness.

Judge. Were you there that day?


R. T. I am not to accuse my self.


Judge. What did you meet together for?


Answ. Many times when we are met together, we take care for such as may be in
want amongst us.


Judge. That is an unlawful way to meet privately upon that account, you ought
to do it publicly by the Overseers of the Parish, and Churchwardens, according
to the Law of the Land.


Answ. That we do also.


Geo. Knight. I desire to know whether we may not except against the Jury, for
there be some of them which we look upon to be our open enemies.


Judge. It is too late, the Jury are sworn already.


Geo. Knight. We did not know that.


Judge That was your own fault.


Let it be considered how that could be our fault, when we were kept close
prisoners while the Jury was svvorn? E. B. seeing there could be no exception
against the Jury, who were all strangers to him, said, Let them alone, if
they are not right, I desire they may live to be better.

As to the Jury, they had been svvorn before we were brought into the Court,
and further we have been informed, that there was another Jury impannelled
before these, which was afterward discharged, because it was thought they
would not serve our adversaries ends; and those men impannelled in their rooms
that they might have their purpose of us, who are no enemies unto them, but
their friends and lovers of their souls, and desire the good of all men, that
they may know the truth, and be saved from everlasting misery and destruction.

Edw. Bourn spoke to the Judge.

E. B. Is not there one Bill drawn up against us, for holding the taking of
all Oaths to be unlawful?


Judge. Yes.


E. B. Have any svvorn to that Bill against us?


Judge. No: Did not the Mayor tender the Oath to you when you were committed?


E. B. Nay.

Then the Judge spoke to the Mayor concerning it, and spoke again to E. Bourn.


Judge. Will you say so, when the Mayor offers to take his Oath of it?


E. B. I believe the Mayor may remember very well that the Oath was not
tendered to us when we were committed.


Alderman Solley offered to take his Oath that the Oath was tendered to us.

E. B. Alderman Solley was not there when we were committed to prison. -- Let
the Reader understand that that before mentioned has relation to the prisoners
then at the Bar. --


E. B. spoke further to the Judge and those who sat with him on the Bench in
judgment upon the innocent.


E. B. I desire you to be careful, and do no otherwise with us then you may
give a comfortable account to the Lord, and as you own your selves to be
Christian Magistrates, deal with us as becomes Christians, for we are
Christians our selves.


Judge. God forbid I should do otherwise with you, and lifted up his hands,
saying, If I do otherwise, it will be between me and the Lord.


E. B. I desire to ask one question in the fear of the Lord?


Judge. That you may in the fear of the Lord.


E. B. Suppose that if Christ and his Apostles were here at this time, and if
they should meet together, would not this Law take hold of them?


Judge. Yes, that it would, -- but said afterward, I will not answer your
questions, -- And said, you are not Apostles.


E. B. We are Christians, followers of Christ as they were; then interrupted.


Judge. Take them away.

And as to what I then said, it is truth, for we know that the same Spirit
which led them, leads us, even the Spirit of truth which leads unto all truth;
and if it were not for the truths sake that we suffered, we were in a sad
condition; and people may well believe, that if it were not to keep our peace
with the Lord: we would not expose our selves to such hardships and cruelty as
we do meet withal from the world, because we refuse to swear, in obedience to
Christ's command, who says, swear not at all; and because we dare not neglect
to assemble our selves together in the name and fear of the Lord; it being that
way by which we have found him, and have and do enjoy his holy presence amongst
us, etc.

Then Richard Fido, Will. Pit, Edw. Stanton, Abr. Roberts, Gervase Pierson,
Abraham Arms, and others were brought to the Bar; the Indictments being read,
the Witnesses sworn and (...)


Judge spoke, Will you take the Oath of Allegiance?

R. Fidoe. I did never deny Allegiance to the King by way of swearing, until I
knew that Principle which did more oblige me to the King than swearing can do.


Judge. What is that Principle you speak of?


R. F. It is the pure Principle of God, which leads me to do to all men as I
would they should do unto me.


Judge. That is a good Principle, it is the Word of God.


Judge. Will you take the Oath now?


R. F. Is there amongst you any one that can accuse me of any thing done by me
against the King, that by it I should be suspected? Or what is the ground of
tendering it to me?


Judge. It is in order to one of your Indictments.


VVil. Pyt. It is very well known we have been a suffering people for these
many years under the former Powers in this very matter; so that if this had
been the first Oath we had refused to take, you might have had more ground to
have suspected our Allegiance to the King and his Government.


R. F. I desire to hear the Witness that svvear to the Indictment.


VV. P. Before the Witness be sworn, I desire to be informed by the Court, lest
through our ignorance of the Law we should deprive our selves of our own
proper right: The matter is this, Whether we may have liberty to except
against such men of the Jury that are greatly prejudiced against us, and so not
competent Judges in this matter.


Judge. Before the Jury was sworn, you might, but now you cannot.


VV. P. We were not present when the Jury was svvorn; Wherefore it seems we
are deprived of our just right in this matter.


Judge What have you to say against them? I hope they are none of them of your
Faction?


W. P. If what we have to say will not dismiss them, it is to no purpose to
declare it.


One of the Witnesses swore, that we were at a Meeting about the number of 46.
and that we refused to take the Oath of Allegiance at our commitment.

The Judge asked another of the Witnesses what he could say -- Witness, I was
there too; and I say as he said, Sir.

R. F. This Witness makes nothing against us: What visible testimony have you
against us tending to the Worship of God.


Witness. None at all.


Judge. What were they doing?


Witness. Some sitting, and some standing.


R. F. Did you hear any one pray, or speak, or see any Book opened amongst them?


Witness answered, No.


Judge. What have you to say for your selves? For what end were you at that
unlawful Meeting?


W. P. There are three or four fatherless Children amongst us, which we are to
take care for, that they may not be chargeable to Parishes for maintenance;
such things are taken care for amongst us when we meet together sometimes; and
whether we were not met together at that time, for that end, you are to prove.


Judge. If you were met together for that end, it is unlawful; for you are to
go from House to House.


W. P. That which is charitable, is not unlawful.


Judge. I leave that to the Jury, whether they will take this new invented
Plea, for a sufficient ground to excuse your being at that unlawful Assembly or
not: Although the witness may prove little, yet if the Jury believes you were
met together under pretense of Religious worship, as they well may, it being
your constant practice, they may find the Bill.


R. F. You of the Jury, take notice that all this makes nothing against us.


Judge. That is true, I may speak to the Jury for you.


R. F. But give me leave to inform them with the truth. The Judge spoke to this
purpose following, and would not allow Rich. Fidoe to speak.

Gentlemen of the Jury, it is true, this witness makes nothing against these
men; yet I shall leave it to you, that if you as believe they did meet together
under pretense of religious worship, you may find the Bill.

Many things more were mentioned between other Friends and the Judge tending to
the purpose before expressed, which are left out; so we were taken away, and
not permitted to speak what we would, although the Judge spoke otherwise the
day before, saying, we should have liberty to speak as much as we would when
we came to our trial; and said he would do us us all the right he could; but
let the Witness of God in every ones Conscience answer whether it were so or
not.

The Jury being returned to give in their verdict, found the Bills against us,
notwithstanding the evidence was made void in effect, as upon the examination
of the Witnesses does appear beforementioned, upon our trial.

Then John Price, John Townsend were called to the Bar, with Su. Pierson, to
receive the sentence; also Edw. Bourne, Geo Knight and Robert Tompkins, Tho.
Jukes and John Clark were called to the Bar the third time; and the Oath was
tendered unto them before sentence was passed. Robert Tompkins desired to hear
the Oath read, which was accordingly done.


Judge. Will you take the Oath?


Tompkins answered, No -- it is not my principle to swear.


E. Bourn spoke, What is truth in the Oath we can promise; and if we do not
swear, it is in obedience to Christ's command; but if you can convince us by
the Scriptures, that we may swear, and not offend the Lord, see what we will
not do.


Judge. I will not talk with you according to the Scriptures; I know the
Scriptures you will bring is that which says, Swear not at all; but I deny
your meanings.


E. B. We mean no otherwise but what Christ and his Apostles meant. -- So the
Judge would not be persuaded by us to take in hand to convince us according to
the Scriptures, but proceeded to pass sentence upon us.


Judge. This is the sentence and judgment of the Court, You are fined 5. l. a
piece; and if you do not pay the fines, nor if there be no distress to be made
in a Weeks time, you are to be committed to the House of Correction, and to be
put to hard labor for three months.


E. B. The Lord judge between you and us.


Judge. Take them away.


Then R. Fidoe, Will. Pyt, Ed. Stanton, Gervase Pierson, Abra. Roberts, Abr.
Arms, Fran. Harvey, Fran. Fincher, Ief. Rasmos, T. Ball, and John Wait were
brought to the bar the third time.

G. P. I desire to know when, or at what time the Kings two Declarations, the
one from Breda, the other concerning Ecclesiastical Affairs, were made void.


Judge. They are; what is that to you?


G. P. We expected some benefit by them -- Which Declarations tended to the
giving liberty to tender Consciences in matters of Religion, though differing
from others in opinion therein, which do not disturb the peace of the Kingdom,
which we have not done.


G. P. Are the King Words of no value?


Judge. Come; you are a saucy Companion.

Then the Judge proceeded to sentence, passing the same sentence upon us as
upon the other Friends aforementioned; upon which William Pytt spoke as
follows.


W. P. Well, not only our Goods and our Liberties are we willing to offer up in
this matter, but also our lives if it be required


Then after our Trial, and sentence was passed on us as before is expressed, we
were taken away and brought to prison again, being filled with peace and joy in
the Lord, whose pure love has largely abounded toward us; blessed, praised
and magnified be his holy and glorious Name above every thing, for ever; Amen.

And thus such as are sober-minded may see what hard measure we have received
from some in Authority, only and alone for the exercise of a good Conscience
toward the Lord, and not for any injury or wrong that we have done unto any
man, the just God can bear us witness herein; and thus the Scripture is made
good, being fulfilled in us, which says, Whosoever will live godly in Christ
Jesus, must suffer persecution. And as there was a generation in time past
which sought an occasion against Daniel, but could find none except it was
about the matter of his God, for which cause they labored with the King
Darius, until they had obtained a Decree against him, Dan. 6. But remarkable is
the passage about the same; for the Lord delivered Daniel, but his Enemies fell
into the snare which they had laid for him. And though it be so come to pass
concerning us, that a Decree is sealed against us about the matter of our God,
whom we fear, and dare not but hear his voice, and obey him in what he commands
us, by which we do and may suffer for this only cause; yet notwithstanding
these things, let persecutors and haters of that which is good, bear this in
mind, tha the Lord God is the same to save, help and deliver them who fear and
put their trust in him, as he was in times past, and repent before it be too
late, remembering what Christ has said, who said it would be better for such
that offend the least of those who believe in him, that a Millstone were hanged
about their necks, and they cast into the sea.

E. Bourn.

Here follows a Copy of a Letter directed to Judge Hide, and Judge Terril,
which was delivered before our Trial.
FRiends, It cannot be unknown to you, but that we have been a suffering people
for many years past, and are so at this time, and that it has not been for any
evil, neither is it for any evil by us done toward any people, the righteous
God can bear us witness herein; but only for the exercise of a good Conscience
toward him, in doing that which he requires from our hands, who has called us
unto peace and holiness; and woe unto us if we do it not; for consider in
meekness, and in the fear of the Lord, how can we neglect that which we believe
the Lord does require at our hands, but we must be offenders against him in a
high nature? And if we must come before you in o^der to our trial, deal
righteously with us in the sight of the Lord, in whose hands your life is, your
breath is, and all you do enjoy, he can soon deprive you of, if it be his Will.
Therefore in his holy fear deal justly and righteously with us in his sight,
lest you provoke him against your selves, and kindle his Wrath and displeasure
against your own souls. Therefore in much love to you do we desire you to do
that which is right in the sight of the Lord toward us, and toward all in
matters by you to be determined of, that so it may go well with you here and
hereafter for ever. It is well known to the generality of the Inhabitants of
the Nation, that we are peaceable; and we desire the good and welfare of all
people, that they may know the truth, and be saved from everlasting
destruction. And therefore why should we be hindered from the exercise of our
consciences toward the Lord, seeing we are peaceable, and no ways injurious
unto any? And we believe your selves have experience of the same, which was the
ground of our oppression in the days of Oliver Cromwell, and of his Son Richard
Cromwell, under whose Governments we were greatly oppressed, because we could
not conform to them in matters about Religion; for whose cruelty and in
justice the Lord has overturned them and such as took part with them therein,
and you do now possess their places, not that you should do as they did, but
that you should answer the end of the Lord therein, in doing justly, loving
mercy, and walking humbly before him, who is to be feared, and will justly
recompense all according to their doings; and now has given you a day to try
and prove you herein, whether you will do what he does from you require, or
not. Therefore mind what the Lord does require at your hands, and answer him
therein, that ye may be a blessing to the Nation wheresoever you come; for in
this your welfare depends eternally.

From the Prison in Worcester the 15. of the 5. mon. 1662. From lovers of your
souls, who desires the peace and welfare of all mankind, who suffer bonds with
many more for righteousness sake, called Quakers. E.B. R.F. E.S. W.P. R.S. S.P.
etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
What is before mentioned, is, as near as we could remember, the substance of
the passages at our Trial. Many things more might have been mentioned of what
then passed, but we were willing to be as short as we could in publishing a
Relation thereof, commending our selves with the Controversy between us and
our Opposers, to be decided by God's Witness in every ones Conscience which
shall read or hear the same.

Worcester Prison the 10th day of the 6, Month 1662.


A brief account of the imprisonment and trial of some more of our friends, who
are Inhabitants of Worcestershire.
UPon the 20. day of the 5. Month 1662. came a party of Soldiers to the Town
of Pershore, where some of them were peaceably assembled in the fear of the
Lord, and lay violent hands on them, drawing them forth from the meeting, and
some out of their houses, and off from their own ground with their swords
drawn, and forcing them along the streets, and forced them into an house, not
showing them any order for what they did, until they had been kept several
hours in the house, where they were close detained prisoners, and their friends
not permitted to come to them; and afterward took them to Worcester, striking
them, and giving some of them fore blows: Some moderate people seeing it,
desired them to forbear striking them; then they fell a striking and cutting
the people with their swords, and so brought them to the prison in Worcester
without any Mittimus.

Upon the 5. and 6. days of the 6. Month, Ed. Hall, George Fort, Henry Gibbs,
with the rest of our friends who were taken prisoners with them at Pershore,
were brought before the Justices at the Sessions in Worcester to be tried
with several other of our friends who were taken from their peaceable meeting
being assembled in the fear of the Lord at Dudly in Worcestershire, at the same
time as friends in Pershore were taken, whose names are, Richard Payton, John
Newcomb, Thomas Denton, and Sutton Bagley. All these before mentioned, were
tried at the Sessions then holden, being made offenders about the oath of
Allegiance, because they did not svvear, the Jury finding them guilty, though
in the sight of the Lord they are innocent from the breach of any just Law;
sentence was passed upon them, as follovveth.

Richard Payton being brought into a Praemunire, his personal estate was
forfeited to the King for ever, and his real estate during term of Life, and
himself to be out of the Kings protection, and to remain in prison during the
Kings pleasure, etc.

The rest of them, viz. Ed. Hall, George Fort, Henry Gibbs, John Newcomb,
Thomas Denton, Sutton Bagley, John Johnson, William Collins, and Ed. Gibbs,
were fined five pounds a piece, and for want of distress, or not payment of
the same in a Weeks time after sentence was past, to be committed to the house
of Correction, and there to be put to hard labor for three Months etc.

And thus for no evil, but for keeping a good Conscience with the Lord do we
suffer, the Scripture being fulfilled in us, which says, he that departs
from evil makes himself a prey, etc. Se^ Isa. 59. 14, 15, 16, 17, etc.

Queries to the Compellers in Religious matters.
Whether you your selves would be compelled from your Religion; or not: if
not, then do ye as ye would be done unto, to compel others unto that, when as
you you would not be compelled your selves?

Whether that which you compel unto, be truth, or not: if truth, who did ye
deny it, in not practifing it, or suffering for it, about 8 or 9 years ago; if
not truth, do you well to force unto it?

Whether to allow liberty in honest and religious matters, be not a more
sweeter, and also an acceptabler sacrifice to God, then to oppress or prison
about it, and to make men Aliens to their own families and strangers to their
households concerning it?

Whether it be heavenly or heathenish, to force in things pertaining to
conscience, and whether Christian like or otherwise to neglect the better, and
to take the worser to be an example herein?

Whether to limit that which is conscientious in others, does not truly be
speak the permitters thereof, men rather lovers of vanity then virtue?

Whether to ruin a man and his family, and yet no injury by them done, be
truly religious and prevailing virtues to make Proselitos, or otherwise?

What is the ground of oppression, and whence had it its descent; was God the
Author thereof, or did good, men practice it in any generation?

Robert Smith

THE END.

