A more Exact and Perfect RELATION OF THE Treachery, Apprehension, Conviction,
Condemnation, Confession, and Execution, OF Francis Pit, Aged 65. Who was
Executed in Smithfield on Saturday, October the 12. 1644. For endeavoring to
betray the Garrison of RVSHALL-HALL in the County of Stafford, to the Enemy.

Published by Ithiel Smart and Edward Archer, two Ministers. Who were
acquainted with him in his life, and present with him at his death.

By special Command.

1 Corinthians. 10. 11. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and
they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

Matthew. 26. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.

Prove. 1. 10. My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.

Romans 6. 21. What fruit have ye in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed:
for the end of those things is death.

The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus
Christ our Lord.

London, Printed for John Field. October. 18. 1644.

A short and true Relation of the life and death of Francis Pit.
FRancis Pit, of Wedgefield in the Parish of Wolverhampton, in the County of
Stafford Yeoman, being wrought upon (as he said) by the Ministry of Master
Lee, (heretofore Preacher there) made open profession of the Gospel, and
attended upon the means of grace with much diligence, for many years together,
whereby he obtained a good repute amongst the godly (Ministers and People) in
those parts; but of late (wanting the powerful means which formerly those
parts did enjoy) was seduced by the Popish party, contrary to his profession,
and against his own conscience, (as he confessed) to endeavor the betraying of
a Garrison in the command of the Parliament, into the hands of the enemy: For
the which Fact he was apprehended, and brought up to London in the month of
September last; and being brought to trial before the Honorable Council of
War, sitting in Guildhall upon Tuesday the eighth day of this present October,
was then and there arraigned, convicted, and condemned for the said Offense:
From which place he was carried to Newgate, where he was visited the next day
by two Ministers of his acquaintance, who found him very sad and stupid, and
(as they conceived) insensible of his condition: The day following, four
Ministers (who were his Countrymen and known to him) went together, who dealt
plainly with him; and after every ones endeavors for his good, and prayers to
God for a blessing, left him for that night (as yet finding little comfort in
him,) at their departure he desired one of us to come to him the next morning,
which was done, and coming to him, found him by himself at prayer, and rising
up confessed, the words spoken the night before, had so wrought upon him, that
he could take no rest all night long; wherefore he desired some further
direction, promising to lay open himself freely (as indeed he did) according to
the advice of the godly Ministers who were with him the night before: After
which time, he was much more comfortable to himself Psalm. 32. 3. When I kept
silence my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day long.
and others.

The next morning (being Saturday, the day of Execution) we came to him, and
found him very ready and willing to undergo the sentence of death, as having
hopes of a better life, though as yet his light was not so clear as afterward
it appeared to be; yet said, he was never more cheerful in his days.

Having spent some time in prayer and preparation, he was hastened to the place
of Execution, to the which, we did accompany him, and (putting all the money he
had left into the prisoners Box) he went along very cheerfully, telling the
people by the way, I am going to Heaven, good people help me forward with your
prayers, I hope this day to be in Heaven; and as he went, entreated us to help
his memory, in any thing we would have him speak unto, that might tend to Gods
glory, and the benefit of the people: Being come to the Tree, the Executioner
put the Rope about his Neck; whereupon he said, I bless God I am not afraid of
death: after which passage (the other prisoner being to die first) the Martial
took him to a private Chamber, not far off, to retire himself for a time;
immediately he went to prayer, wherein God did mightily assist him, so that he
expressed much fervency and zeal, remembering not only himself, but all others,
both public persons, and his own private friends, with such enlargement and
variety of expression, as caused much affection and admiration in all that were
present; so that abundance A man at other times of no great parts.
of tears were shed. Prayer ended, the Martial came for him, with whom he went
willingly, and when he saw some whispering, who were in hopes of a Reprieve, he
hastened them, saying, Sirs, what do we stay for? Being come again to the place,
and the Rope put about his Neck, the Executioner going up before him, he turned
to us, and smiling said; Here Is one leads me up like a dog in a Halter, but
anon I shall have better Leaders to bring me to Heaven: As he stepped up the
Ladder, he said, now the Lord direct me, and assist me, to speak something that
may be for his glory: Being upon the Ladder, he beheld one about to write, in
the first place therefore he desired him to take special notice of what he
spoke, and to Print it, and then lifting up his heart and voice to God, addressed
himself to speak, as foll weth.

GOod people, I desire the Lord to bless you all, and I desire all your
prayers to Heaven for me: Good Lord what a multitude of people are here! I
desire to speak to you all in general; I wish that all could hear me. I am
here justly brought to this place for mine offense; I presume it is well known
to you all what it is, it is this, An attempt to betray a Garrison under the
Parliaments Command. In that Act I was made an Instrument between a Popish
Garrison, and a Garrison under the Parliament; of which Treachery I was not
ignorant; and for that Fact I confess, that I deserve this death, and desire
all Spectators to take notice of it: For mine own part, I have been bred up
under a powerful Ministry; I have had good education, and have been a great
professor, but the Lod knows my heart, I have been a dissembling Hypocrite; and
now I do here heartily confess it, and bewail it: And the Lord bless you all,
and give every one of you grace to take notice thereof, that you may be warned
by me* And the Lord bless this great City; and the Lord bless the Country
likewise, especially that where I was born; and the Lord make every man
faithful. I have been a great Professor, but I have not done my Masters will:
I have been a great sinner: I now call to mind a Text in There is more
mentioned there.
the first to the Romans, from the 29. verse to the end, there is a Catalogue
of 17 or 18 sins (as I take it) I am guilty of them all; therefore I suffer
justly: I do freely confess it; The seed of all was in him.
yet one thing I have to say, I desire all men to take notice of it, If any
Magistrates or Parliament men were here, I would speak it to them; but I desire
you Master Martial, and you two (speaking to us) who are acquainted with my
Lord Mayor, and other great Magistrates, to tell it them from a dying man, I
beseech you remember it, it is this, That they use not their power as a Net to
catch the small The same phrase he had in his prayer in the Chamber where he
prayed, also that God would root out that den of thieves at Dudley Castle, and
added this, Not that I seek it by way of revenge, but as they are thine
enemies, O Lord.
Fishes, and let the great ones escape: I desire that great Offenders may be
brought to condign punishment as well as lesser: For my part, I desire to
justify that good Council of War, and the Lord bless them, they have dealt
but justly with me, and the Lord show them mercy for doing me justice. The Lord
bless the Parliament, and keep them from Treachery; for there are many Achans
still in the Camp.

Being asked whether he knew any Treacherous ones, and desired to reveal them;
He answered no, if he did, far be it from him to conceal them; I mean (said he)
those profane ones that are employed in the Parliaments Service, I never heard
more swearing, nor saw more drunkenness, and profaneness, then I saw in the
Garrison at Rushall, I Will mention one: The Martial (I have forgotten his name)
he did swear and blaspheme, as if he would cause the stones to fly out of the
Walls; and after I fell into his hands, he stripped me and abused me, and used me
more like a Jew, then a Christian: Now the Lord amend that and other places
under the Parliaments Command, or else they can never prosper, they can never
prosper. And the Lord bless the King, and I desire every honest man to honor
Him, so far as He does Honor God, and to obey Him, in what they may, not
disobeying God. I desire the Lord to bring Him home to His Parliament, and to
remove far from Him, all evil Counselors; and the Lord bless His Friends
and Welwillers: I am persuaded the King of Himself is an honest Man, only He
is misled; and I hope He will return to his Parliament: (The King is the Head,
the Parliament is the Body; if they be divided, what good can be expected) But
I hope He will return, that (though I am now a dying man, yet) you that hear me
this day, may enjoy a happy peace, and see that which I am not like to see.

And now for you that hear me, and are to celebrate a Here was much more spoken
to clear Religion, and to exhort to Piety.
Sabbath to morrow, I beseech you all to prepare your selves for it, and labor
to rise early to fit your selves for the Lords work. If any of you be to go to
a Market, (though in the depth of Winter,) yet you will be up before day to go to
it; I beseech you therefore to make use of the time of the Market for your
souls: Men in the Country Many Country people were there, as well as Citizens,
it being Market day.
will ride a great way to buy their Seed Corn, think not much to take pains,
and to travel for the Word of God, that Immortal Seed, when you have it not
at home, though (blessed be God) you of this City need not go far. Labor to
hearken to the Word of God, and labor to carry it home with you, and to
practice it. Leave sitting in your doors (an evil custom I have observed since
I came up to the City) and meditate of what you have heard: God requires the
whole day to be kept Holy. I lived in a Country where few powerful Ministers
are left: And all you that have slighted the Word of God formerly, take heed of
it now: I have been a great Offender in this particular, and I have played the
Hypocrite exceedingly; I have been very zealous outwardly, and I have kept many
Fast days very strictly, both public and private; I have enjoyed the company
of the best Ministers, and have associated my self with most Religious people,
and yet I have played the Hypocrite exceedingly. The Lord forgive me, and good
people pray for me: And now I beseech you, lift up all your hearts to God for
me; I have known much and done little: I pray God give you all grace to labor
to know much, and to practice it.

Then being desired by Master Smart to give more full satisfaction to the
people touching his Offense, That he being a Professor would hearken to a
Papist in so foul an Act, was a thing very scandalous.

He gave him Hearty thanks for minding him of it, and spoke to the people:

Good people pray for me, and help me, in remembering me to utter what I should
speak: The Gentleman that employed me about this Treachery, was the Governor
of Dudley Castle, his name is Luson, he is my Landlord, I hold a Farm of him (a
good one) but it is only for my life; this day I must surrender it. Now the
manner of it was thus, He sent for me to come to him, and asked me, what I did
so often at Rushall-Hall; I told him I had been there but twice of late; once I
went to pay money, contribution money; the other time, to redeem my Neighbors
Cattle that were taken away: He told me, seeing you have such acquaintance
there, I will see whether you will do as much for me; I would fain purchase
that Garrison, I will give two thousand pound for it: I went with this Message
to the Governor, which was Captain Tuthill, who sent me with Letters back; and
so I carried Messages from one to the other; but it was not delivered up.
Captain Tuthill promised me, if I could make that bargain, I should have one
hundred pounds of the money: yet I never asked him for any; neither had any,
save one forty shillings, which he gave me without demand. Colonel Luson did
give me no money, but he promised to be as good to me as seven years Rent.

I desire you that write, to take notice thereof, that it may be published,
that all the world may take warning of such false-heartednesse.

It being urged then, that coveteousnesse misled him, he said, no, but mine
eyes were blinded, that I did not He told us in private, that two Garrisons of
the King being near to it, (Leichfield, and Dudley,) the Country was forced to
pay to both sides, which was a sore burden to them; better to pay to one only
as he supposed.
see the evil consequence of the delivering up of that Garrison, 'twas hid
from mine eyes; but now I see it, and I confess mine Offense was great, and
far greater then others, because I have been a great Professor.

Being asked by Master Smart, what he thought of the Cause, defended by the
Parliament. He answered, I have always held it to be just, and right, and
therefore my sin is so much the greater; I have stood for this Cause, yea, all
my Friends, and Children have stood for it; and we do verily believe it to be
the Cause of God: But it is for my sins, and the sins of other Hypocrites, That
Gods Cause has been so much dishonored, and beaten down:

I desire you all, That Religion may not be stained by my suffering; nor good
men slighted; nor Gods Cause fair the worse for my Hypocrisy. I have read
there was ever some wicked amongst the most godly: There is some Chaff amongst
the finest Wheat; there was one Judas amongst the twelve Apostles, and one
Achan in the He said indeed a eleven, but that was a mistake. The sum of his
Speech being to vindicate Religion, and the Professors thereof; and to quick^n
Magistrates to the Execution of justice: (that whilst a Professors suffers,
profane ones go not unpunished) Both which are twice repeated.
Camp: And therefore I beseech you all, judge not ill of the Cause of Christ
for mine Offense.

This one thing I desire to speak again, (that it may not be forgotten) to you
that are Magistrates, or to you that are intimate with them; I desire you to
speak these last words of mine to them, I mean to the Lord Major, and to the
Honorable Council of War, and tell them, that I beseech them, That great
Ossenders may be brought to trial, as well as lesser.

Now for you that are employed in Gods Cause, and are called forth to fight his
Battles; go on courageously and know, That you have God for your Captain, and
then you cannot but prevail.

I remember how the Ethiopiaus came against Asa, with a thousand thousand men,
(what a world of men were here) He sought unto the Lord, and went out against
them, and the Lord going with him, he smote them, and overcame that mighty
Host: I do not read, that any of them escaped. You may read the story, 2 Chronicles. 14. 8, 9, 10.

And take heed of disobeying Gods call; remember that curse of God against
Meroz, Curse ye Meroz, and the Inhabitants thereof, because they came not forth
to help the Lord against the mighty. You may see it, Judges 5. 23.

The Earl of Denb^gh I hear is going out for Staffordshire, the Lord bless and
prosper him: I hear and hope he is an honest man, I pray God increase it, and
bless him. I could wish he were now with his Forces there, for that Country
is in great want of them; and I could wish that he would take with him, some
good and faithful Ministers, to plant in that barren Country, without which,
I fear no good will be done there. I pray God they may do good there: Oh do you
labor to do good there (speaking to us.) Master Smart, I beseech you do you
labor to do good in Staffordshire.

Then he was wished to compose his thoughts, and to call upon God in prayer,
which he did with a great deal of life and devotion, near half an hour, and
proceeded a great way very methodically, after a sweet and pertinent Preface;
he began with confession, and run over all the Commandments distinctly, and
ordely, drawing a large indictment against himself, bewailing the breach of
every Precept in several particulars; and in the close of each, he added this
Petition, Now the Lord forgive me this It Is pity no one penned it.
in; The good Lord forgive me this sin, etc.

These particulars were very remarkable; when he came to the fourth
Commandment, he did exceedingly complain of the want of preparation to the
duties of the Sabbath; that he had not remembered it the day before; nor risen
so early that day as he should have done.

And when he came to the sixth Commandment, he said, True it is, I have not had
my hands imbrewed in any man's blood; yet I have been taught, that malice is
murder, and I have been a malicious man, etc.

And when he came to the eight Commandment, he said, I have been no open thief,
but I have been taught; He that is an unjust man, is a thief. I have dealt
unjustly, the Lord forgive me; and where I cannot make restitution, good Lord
do thou restore it.

Not that he did omit any one of the Commandments, or hide any of his sins (as
we conceive) but above all, he did extremely cry out of Hypocrisy, and
complain of a barren, and fruitelesse profession.

But when he came to intercession, he prayed heartily and religiously, for the
King, for the Parliament, for the City, (particularly for the Lord Mayor,
giving him these Titles; A merciful man, a charitable man; he is good to poor
and rich) the Council of War that condemned him to die; the faithful
Ministry of the Kingdom; his native Country, his natural Friends, and the
whole Church of God.

And having concluded, he spoke to the people, as follows.

NOw good people, I beseech you all pray for me; I beseech you pray for me, and
hear me once more. Hears a great many (looking round about him) I wish that all
could hear me: You that are like to enjoy a Sabbath the next day; Labor to
prepare your selves for Gods Service, and to hearken diligently to Gods Word;
Labor to renew your Covenant, that of late you have made with God. Let these
last words of a dying man prevail with you, to stick close to God and his
Cause. I confess, I heard of the Covenant, but I never took it; you that have
taken it, be careful to renew it, and keep it: And so the Lord bless you all;
and the Lord have mercy upon my soul.

Then the Executioner putting the Rope fast about his neck, he put by his hand,
and said, I pray thee forbear, I am not afraid to die; but let me speak once
more to my God. Lord have mercy upon me: Lord have mercy upon me. Dear Friends
help me; Good Christians help me, O help me, O help me; Now help me, Now help
me; Sweet Jesus help me, Sweet Jesus help me; Deny me not now, Sweet Savior
deny me not now, now, now I come; Into thy hands I commend my Spirit; Lord
receive my Soul, Lord receive my Soul: And spoke no more words.

Now being before desired by Master Archer, if he found God coming in to his
soul, by any extraordinary support and comfort in his departure, that he would
make some outward sign, to intimate it to us; accordingly soon after he was off
the Ladder, as he hung, he lift up his right hand, and clapped it upon his Breast
twice, or thrice, and then cast up both his hands toward Heaven, and so gave
us comfortable hopes that he is at rest with the Lord. His body was taken
thence to Sepulchers Church, and at night was attended with many godly
Ministers, and good Christians to the Grave, where it now lies interred: But we
hope his soul is in Heaven.

Postscript.
Courteous Reader,
WE Humble crave this favor: Pardon the Style, It is his own as near as may
be; we have not varied from the sense, if at all from his words; we have lost
much, but added nothing (to our knowledge:) Excuse the method, it is from a dying
man, and we conceive not premeditated: Accept of the whole, it is intended for
thy good, and published to these ends. 1. To satisfy the desires of our
acquaintance dead, of many friends yet living. The one desired it to be
Printed, the other have requested (indeed Commanded) us to do it, the rather
because of the former imperfect Copy. 2. To comfort his friends, now in
sadness, for his death, that they sorrow not as others which have no hope. 3.
To vindicate Religion, it was not his profession, but hypocrisy 1 These. 4. 13.
Romans 3. 4
(as himself confesses) that brought him to this: Let God be true, and every
man a lier. 4. To reclaim the wicked, If this be done to the green Tree, what
shall be done to the dry. If it first begin at us, Luke 23. 31. 1 Pet. 4. 17. 1
Cor. 10. 12.
what shall the end be of them that obey not the Gospel of God. 5. To admonish
the godly, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed left he fall: Let no
man presume of his own strength. 6. To stop the mouths of gainsayers, who
complain, that one who had formerly been a professor, and one who offended so
lately; yea, one who gave manifest signs of his repentance, should suffer
death, and as it were lead the way, when many wicked Achans, who have long
troubled this our Israel; yea, many Achitophels, who have both plotted and
acted all this mischief, remain alive.

Silence, Let Justice take place, and the mouth of all wickedness he stopped.

For the first, (that a Professor should suffer) Know that (though the Law be
quick sighted) yet Justice is blind, and must know neither Father nor Mother,
Friend nor Foe. Now Justice and Judgment must go hand in hand, it is Gods own
Ordinance, Levit. 19. 15. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in Judgment; thou
shall not respect the person of the poor; nor honor the person of the mighty;
but in righteousness thou shall judge thy Neighbor: As also Deuteronomy. 16. 18, 19.
Judges and Officers shall thou make thee in all thy Gates, which the Lord thy
God gives thee throughout thy Tribes, and they shall judge the people with
just judgment.

Thou shall not wrest judgment, Thou shall not respect persons, etc.

Justice would prevent Judgment, but Judgment must preserve Judgments shall
return to Justice, Psalm. 94. 15.
justice. Wherefore to pervert Judgment (though through favor and affection)
is the great often injustice; as coining base Coin, double Treason. To give a man
poison is evil, but to remove counter-poysons, this is worse, here is no remedy:
This is to take away the balm of Gilead. Religion and Justice bound all; He
that cuts these bonds dissolves all. Now Justice looks not upon the man but the
Cause, respects not the person, Exo. 23. 3. Dent. 1. 16, 17. Prove. ^^. 5. and
24. 23. and 28. 21.
but the offense: And we are persuaded, that Honorable Council looked not
upon him as a Professor, but as a Malefactor They did not know the man, nor yet
that he was a professor.
Now our Saviors counsel is, Judge not according to the appearance, but judge
righteous judgment, John 7. 24.

No man's goodness (much less profession) must bear him out in a bad cause
Justus est qui justefacit


Again, It Is not the Judge but the Law, or rather not the Law, but the crime
that condemns. Wherefore, there is a woe denounced against those Judges that
speak falsely in judgment, Woe unto them that speak good of evil, and evil of
good, Isai. 5. 20. He that justifies the wicked, and he that condemns the
just, even they both are abomination to the Lord, Prove. 17. 15. He that says
to the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people curse, Nations shall
abhor him; But to them that rebuke him, shall be delight, and a good blessing
shall come upon them, Prove. 24. 24, 25.

For the second, That he came so soon to trial, we can say no more to it, but
this; God in his wise providence so ordered it: His witnesses were ready, and
his Fact apparent, whereas others are not prosecuted with that diligence, and
prudence, as is desired. The Council being forced to send diverse ways, both
by Sea, and Land, to call up witnesses; so that (excuse this boldness) the
delay is not in them who are to judge them, but in those who do complain
against them. And what though he lead the way? Who art thou that repinest
against God? What if God would thus be glorified? We are persuaded, the Lord
wrought a great work in him, and we hope much good by him, even by his death.

Object. But is may be said, Why should he call for Justice? More need to call
to God for Mercy? In his speech he desired justice might be executed upon
Delinquents


Answ. So he did, and we doubt not but that he found Mercy with the Lord: But
to give thee satisfaction, Solomon holds forth an answer, Because that sentence
against an evil work is not excented speedily, therefore the heart of the sons
of men is fully set to do evil, Eccles. 8. 11.

We humbly conceive no man can justly complain of this: The Lord charge it as
a heinous sin upon his people the Jews. None calls for Justice, none pleads
for Truth, Isai. 59. 4. And for this, the Lord See the complaint also in the
14. and 15. Verse. Prove. 4. 23.
hid his face and would not hear.

To conclude, the words of a dying man are wont to take a deep impression,
these wrought kindly when they were uttered, we wish no better entertainment
now they are Printed: Beware of a barren and fruitless profession; take heed
of hypocrisy; keep thy heart with all diligence. Hear, read, and learn, thou
know thy beginning, but no man knows his end; and whatsoever thy condition
be, it is mutable, Prove. 27. 1. Nemo foelix ante mortem Solon to Craesus.
thou know not what a day may bring forth: Many in the course of their lives
may be accounted happy, yet no man can write himself happy indeed, till his
end: Remember the four last things, and thou shall never do amiss. Live well,
and die well; Take this for a warning. If thou reap benefit, we shall bless
God for it, and wait to serve thee in a greater employment. Farewell.

Imprimatur,

Nath. Brent.

FINIS.

