Gods Work of Mercy, IN Sions Misery; Laid out in a SERMON Preached before the
Honorable House of COMMONS at Margarets Westminster, December. 27. 1643.

By JOHN STRICKLAND, B. D. Pastor of the Church, at S. Edmunds, in the City of
New Sarum.

Published by Order of the said House.

Whereunto is added, A Catalogue of the Names of all the Divines that preached
before the Parliament till this present, in order as they preached.

In freto viximus moriamur in portu.

Senec. in Epist. 19. Judge. 14.14. Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of
the strong came sweetness.

Psalm. 81.13, 14. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and that Israel had
walked in my way! I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand
against their adversaries.

London, Printed by J. Raworth, for L. Fawn, and are to be sold at his shop,
at the sign of the Parrot in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

HONORABILI ET MULTUM CELEBRANDO SENATUI DOMUI COMMVN: IN SALVTEM ECCLESIAE
REIQUE PUBLICAE ANGLICANAE, FOELICITER IN PARLIAMENTO CONGREGATAE.

Hanc Qualem Qualem concionem publica jejunii solennitate nuper habitam in
obedientiae suae and observantiae Testimonium. D.C.Q.

JOHAN. STRICKLAND.

Anno salutis Christianae, qVIs Vt tV DeVs Ita MIrIfICVs In operIbVs tVIs.
Psalm. 86.8. 1643.

Die Mercurii. 27. December. 164^.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master
Recorder do return thanks from this House, to Master Strickland, for the great
pains he took in the Sermon he preached this day (at the Entreaty of the House
of Commons) in Saint Margarets, Westminster (being the day of public
Humiliation) and that he be desired to Print his Sermon; And it is Ordered,
That none presume to Print his Sermon, but who shall (...) authorized under his
hand writing.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

I Do Authorize, and appoint Luke Fawn^, to Print my Sermon above mentioned.

John Strickland.

ISAI. 10.20. Wherefore it shall come to pass, That when the Lord has
performed his whole work upon Mount Sion and Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit
of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.
THis Prophet was cast upon variety of times, under the Reigns of several
Kings, wherein the Church was severally conditioned; sometimes happy, being
blessed with pious and virtuous Princes, sometimes miserable, afflicted with
vicious and tyrannical ones, which occasioned so much variety of Doctrine as
we find in this excellent Prophecy. At present, the Churches both of Israel
and Judah, were under a Cloud, and God, The Series and Sum of the Chapter.
by the hand of our Prophet, writes bitter things against them both: Israel and
Samaria were to go into Captivity under the power of the Assyrian, in the 8 and
9 Chapters; and Judah, a little after, to be severely punished by the same
hand, in this. In the delivering of which heavy tidings unto Judah in this
Chapter, he mingles as much of the Gospel as he may, to sweeten them: and while
by the one hand he leads that Church to repentance, in threatening Gods just
Judgments against her for her sins; by the other hand (in promises of her
enemies overthrow, and her deliverance) he bears her up in her afflictions by
faith to wait upon the Almighty. This prophetical mixture is carried along
through the whole body of this Chapter, and is beautifully laid out in the four
parts thereof.

In the 1. He lays out the justness of Gods judgments upon the Jewish Church,
in discovering her sins whereby she had provoked the Lord so to anger. Ver. 1.
-- 5.
Verse. 1-5. 2. He declares the severity of their punishment, in setting forth
their enemies (the Assyrians) whose pride and cruelty they should see upon
their brethren the children of Israel before their eyes, Ver. 5. -- 12.
Verse. 5. -- 12. 3. He discovers Gods purpose against the Assyrians at length,
for their cruelty against the Church, Ver. 12. -- 20.
Verse. 10. -- 23. 4. He proposes two special promises from God to comfort
that Church; Ver. 20. -- 24.
viz. 1. Of turning all her heavy afflictions to her good and benefit, in
reforming and drawing her nearer unto God, Verse. 20. -- 24. 2. Of full
deliverance from her enemies, in due time, that should so heavily afflict her,
Verse. 24. Ver. 24. -- ^




Before I come to the particulars which the Text presents, let us more
generally look a little upon the Scope and Design of the holy Ghost therein.
The Scope of the Text.
The Text we find in the third branch of the Chapter, wherein the Lord begins
to discover a purpose of destroying the proud enemies of his Church (which were
then the Assyrians) that prevailed and insulted extremely, so that weak
consciences in Judah began to scruple, Why God should suffer his own people to
be so hardly dealt withal, and let the proud and wicked King of Assyria (not
only go unpunished hitherto, but also) prevail and prosper in his bloody
designs against the Church, non quam si ulsisci non posset: Or as another
Prophet expostulates, Hab. 1.13, 14.
Hab. 1.13. Wherefore look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and
hold thy tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous
then he? And make men as the fishes of the Sea, as the creeping things that
have no Ruler over them.

Musculus on the place.
Huic offendiculo pulcherrime occurrit. To take away this foul aspersion from
God, and scruple from the weak, the Prophet excellently answers in my Text,
intimating, That it was not without a providence that the enemy was let alone,
and prevailed so long, the Lord had a farther work to be performed by their
hands upon his own people, he was resolved in due time to punish the Assyrians,
but in the mean time to make use them (though enemies) for the due correction
of his children and Church, and that their sins might be taken away; and when
that should once be accomplished, he would quickly turn his hand upon their
enemies: When the Lord has performed his whole work upon Mount Sion, and
Jerusalem, I will, etc. Giving us to note;

It is not without some reference to the good of his people, that God suffers
so long, and visits not presently their wicked enemies.

Cautions 4. premised.
That Gods bearing with his Churches enemies may not be mistaken, it will be
necessary to lay down, by the way, these four Cautions, viz.

1. He bears not with them through any want of information, Sennacheribs
proceedings even in this story, were not unknown to him, 2 King. 19.27. I know
thy abode, 2 Kin. 19.27.
and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy rage against me. And elsewhere,
not so much as a proud word uttered by the men of Mount Seir, against the
Mountains of Israel, but the Lord took special notice thereof, and so tells
them, Ezekiel. 35.12, 13. Thou shall know that I have heard all thy blasphemies
which thou have spoken against the Mountains of Israel, Ezekiel. 15.12.13.
saying they are laid desolate, they are given us to consume: Thus have you
multiplied your words against me, I have heard them. Neither need he to be
awaked, as if the enemies could do the more mischief while he sleeps, and
regards not; such expostulations of the Saints (up, Lord, why sleep thou?
Why forgettest thou our affliction and oppression?) that seem to imply any such
imperfection in the Almighty, be rather the Balbuties sanctorum in precihus.
imperfections of the Saints, or at best, Calvin on Psalm.
but humane expressions, uttered in the bitterness of their souls, and in the
zeal of their desires: And when the wicked, through infidelity and atheistical
presumption, do flatter and encourage themselves, That the Lord shall not see,
Psalm. 94 7.
nor the God of Jacob regard their wicked cruelties against his people, Psalm.
94.7. The Prophet lets them know it is but brutish folly, and proves that God
cannot be but watchful, from certain Demonstrations in the Verses following;
he knows their doings then, and yet he does not visit them presently.

2. He suffers not their wicked enemies as delighting in the afflictions of his
people; he rather delights in the prosperity of his servants: his afflicting
them (especially by such cruel enemies as were the Assyrians) is one of his
strange works, Isai. 28 21. opened.
Isai. 28.21. which he will not take in hand, so long as it may stand with his
justice, his truth, his wisdom, his holiness, his faithfulness, to forbear,
he afflicts not willingly, nor grieves the children of men, to crush under his
feet, all the prisoners of the earth, Lam. 3.33, 34. Aliena est ab ipso omnis
saevitia and crudelitas. Lam. 3 33, 34.
Though God in his Sovereignty (according to the opinion of some Divines) did
appoint the Vessels of wrath, to be tormented in Hell for ever; I find not any
that make his afflicting of his Church, an act of mere sovereignty.

Psalm. 50.21. Psalm. 50.21.
Thou thoughtest that I was such a one as thy self, but I will reprove thee,
says the Lord unto the wicked man: God makes use of this wicked King
Sennacherib to afflict his people, not for any love to him, but for another
reason, as Musculus observes, Musculus in Isaiam.
Non quod reliquis regibus justior erat, sed quod pro tyrannica superbia erat
accommodatior. The more wickedly, cruel, and proud, and so the more hateful
he was to God, the fitter to be Flagellum irae, the rod of his anger, and the
staff of his indignation. He that is comforted in punishing his own people,
when they offend (as God is in punishing Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 5.13. Thus shall mine
anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury to rest upon them, Ezekiel. 5.13.
and I will be comforted;) he I say, that is thus comforted in the punishment
of his own, cannot sure delight in sparing his enemies out of any love, either
to their persons, or proceedings.

want of power, as being unable to punish them; If the Lord be slow to anger
(as he is) yet is he great in power, Nahum. 1.3. His people may be secure of
his ability, to save and deliver them in the midst of all the storms that can
be raised, by the rage and insolency of their enemies; As the story sets forth
Neptune in a statue, holding Scylla and Charibdis in chains, with this
Inscription,

Pergite securae per freta nostra rates:

So God holds the Churches enemies in chains, having his Hook in their Nose,
and his Bridle in their Lips, even, when they seem to be beyond, and above all
bounds and limits, whatsoever; When the Heathen rage, and the Kingdoms are
moved, Psalm. 46.6.
Psalm. 46.6. And are become as unruly, as the raging Sea, which makes the very
Mountains to shake, Verse. 3.
to which they are compared, Verse the third. If the Lord do but utter his
voice, in token of his commanding power, it is enough, to dissolve them, and
all the earth with them; so that we must conclude, It is neither want of
knowledge, or care in God; nor want of love to his peoples welfare; nor out of
any love he bears to them, nor want of power that he suffers, and visites not
his peoples enemies; but in a special dispensation for the good and benefit of
Gods own Church, as the Householder in the Parable, Matthew. 13.29. Sim:
Gathered not the Tares unto the fire, with reference unto the Wheat: Nay, the
truth is, God makes use of enemies, to the special good of his people: As we
say of fire and water, and as the Romans of Caligula, Nemo melior servus nemo
pejor dominus, we may say of the Churches enemies, they are very bad masters,
executing their own Lust and cruelty against Gods people; yet very good
servants, if the divine hand make use of them for the Churches service, and
such as could ill be wanted: David foresaw, that the sparing of Saul, and his
instruments for a time (though cruel enemies to both him, and the Church)
would be the preventing of a mischief, if not a benefit; and therefore entreats
the Lord, Slay them not, least my people forget it, Psalm. 59 11.
Psalm. 59.11. God did not cut off the Canaanites utterly, and at once, though
they were his peoples enemies; and it was out of the care he had of his own,
least the Beasts of the field increase upon them. Deuteronomy. 7.22.
Deuteronomy. 7.22. He makes use of them, as the good Husbandman does of Briars, and
Thorns; which though they be fruits of the Curse, and cumber the ground, yet
will he suffer them to grow in Hedges, that he may make them a Fence unto his
Fruitful Grounds. 3. Special benefits intended the Church by suffering her
enemies to live.
More especially, there be three benefits of his Church and People, with
reference, whereunto God suffers their enemies to remain, so long unvisited;
viz.

Philomela's Breast, and the Brass Ball in the Phisophers hand, a means to
keep them waking: An alarm from enemies, now, and then, will put the Church
into a posture of defense, and keep her in breath, when the Beast had power
given him to make war with the Saints; Here is the faith and patience. (i.e.)
Vt tolerantia little ma^eat invict^ and f^des quovis our (...) fi^t prob^ior,
Paraeus in Apocalypsin.
The exercise and trial of the faith and patience in the Saints, Revel. 13.10.
The graces of Gods people are like the honey in the comb, Opus est aliqua
pressura, They had need to be wrung out by the heavy hand of an enemy,
sometimes: Ease and Idleness Prosperit^es effae minat virtutem fidei. Tertul.
Emasculate the vigor of grace, whereas the sight of an enemy provokes and
stirs up the strength thereof: Carnal security, the daughter of unsanctified
peace, is more Pan cum bello de crudelitate cetavit and dicit. Aug.
destructive and cruel, then an enemy to the Church; as is observed of the
Roman State, It could not be overthrown by enemies, but was by Peace and
Luxury; and what a Viper has our long and wantonly abused Peace, bread in the
Bowels of this Kingdom? By being at ease in Sion, we have begotten a woe unto
us, and verified that old Poetical Rhyme.

Anglica gens est optima flens and pessima rideus.

Assyrian is called, the Rod of Gods anger, by which, he purposed to take down
a peccant humor in his people, Isa 10.5, 6.
and correct them for their Hypocrisy, Verse. 5, 6. For this purpose likewise,
he brought the Chaldeans upon his people. Thou have ordained them for
judgment, and thou, O God, have established them for correction; That which
God looks after, in punishing his people, by wicked hands, is the correction of
their iniquities. By this, shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged Mediote qui
de^ flagellis peccaia, ^^^iantur non immediate adducant enim ^os ^d
poenitentiam quae ad oblin^ud^^ pec catorum, re^^s sionem suo ord ne nos
^dducit. Calvin. Isai. 27.9.
; and this is all the fruit; the taking away of his sin, Isai. 27.9. Not that
suffering, immediately, and of it self, does take away sin; but by suffering,
the soul may be humbled, and brought to hunger after righteousness, even that
righteousness of Christ, whereby the iniquity of Jacob is really taken away;
yea, by affliction also, the Lord intends to take away the iniquity of Jacob,
in a way of Reformation, and to beget the quiet fruit of righteousness in them
that are exercised thereby, and to make them partakers of Gods holiness, Heb.
12.10, 11. Heb 12.10, 11.
He deals herein with his Church, as the Husbandman with his Vine, which he
desires should bear fruit, with a pruning Knife he lops off Suckers, and such
Branches, as are burdensome, or superfluous, Viti enim non est Luxuriandum.

3. To wean his people from the world, lest they should be too much taken with
the pleasures thereof, and think of settling in a Land of their Captivity:
Israel was inclineable enough, to have dwelt in Egypt (as appears in their
wishing themselves in Egypt again, upon the least discontent in the
Wilderness) and therefore, the Lord permitted the hard hand of Taskmasters to
oppress them into a willingness, to depart; by threatening, that the
Canaanites shall be Goads in the sides, and Thorns in the eyes of Israel, The
Lord strives to keep his people from joining with them, Josh. 23.12, 13.
Josh. 23.12, 13. David had but little mind to dwell in Mesech, among them
that were enemies unto Peace, Psalm. 120.5, 6. This good he got, even by his
enemies, and this good also God intends, in those persecutions that befall his
people in their earthly Country; to make them (as the Primitive Martyrs, Hab.
11.15.) less mindful of that Country, from whence they are come out, and
more earnestly to seek another Country, even a heavenly, Et placeant etiam
dolores per quos nihil in mundo placet; and so should their very sorrows, and
griefs, do them a pleasure, and become profitable unto them.

Judah, that were troubled at the prosperity and insolency of the wicked
Assyrians, against the Church of God. Let it serve for the same purpose in the
Church of England, wherein there be likewise many fainting, and troubled
spirits, to see the sons of violence, even a cursed generation of Popish
enemies, to carry on the ruin of this Nation, with so high a hand against the
Church and people of God, who sadly complain, as David, Psalm. 38.19.
Psalm. 38.19. Mine enemies live, and are mighty, and they that hate me, are
increased; yet the same Prophet, when the enemies of the Church prospered,
Usque ad invidiam, concludes, Psalm 73.1.
Psalm. 73.1. God is good to Israel; yet God is good to England too, though her
Physic work very strongly, and bring her very weak and low, and though the
unsatiable Horse-leech be still sucking her blood, the wise Physician knows all
this is but needful for her recovery: God suffers not her wicked enemies to
remain so long unvisited, but with reference to her good. That they shall be
but medicinal, and at length taken off in her deliverance. Three Arguments of
good intended, to England, in the remaining of her enemies.
There are three probable, and encouraging arguments to be considered of; viz.

1. In that he has broken already, that power which our enemies lately abused,
to poison and wound the spirits and conscience of men; it is not long (we
know)* since they did hunt, and devour the souls of men, by stifling,
preaching, or else by poisoning it; Not long since, our Sacraments were put
into a Romish dress, and adulterated both in point of Doctrine and Ceremony;
Not long since, the Sabbath (wherein the heavenly Manna should fall among our
Tents) was beaten down from the Press and Pulpit; Not long since, many other
ways were used, to oppress men's consciences with intolerable burdens, in all
which, the Lord has already broken the horns of the ungodly. And is it not an
argument of Gods love unto us? That since he must yet punish us, by the hands
of enemies, that our punishment is less spiritual, though it be more penal,
then before; that we go with free consciences, though it be under such heavy
burdens, as are upon our bodies and estates, at this day; And since God has
begun to take them down in their, boundless, and lawless power; Why may we
not expect the utter downfull of our enemies? This was an argument that held in
Hamans case, as his Wife and Wisemen told him, Esth. 6.1^.
Est. 6.13. If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun
to fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him:
So well may it hold in our case, for ought I know, If the Church of England, be
the Church of God, and spiritually of the Seed of the Jews, before whom the
enemies are begun to fall, they shall not prevail against her, but shall surely
fall before her.

Saul against David) they have travailed with mischief, they have brought forth
a lie, Psalm. 7.14. Yea, Psalm. 7.14.
their own counsels have wonderfully recoyled and turned, to the furtherance
of their own ruin; as they have followed the example of Sennacheribs, and they
Assyrians cruelty, against the Church, God is going the way to judge them, in
like manner, as he judged the Assyrians for their cruelty (for that judgment,
is conceived by the best Expositors, to be denounced against the Assyrians)
Isai. 33.11, 12. Isai. 33 11, 12.
Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth stubble, your breath as Ignis
vestro flatu accensu^.
fire shall devour you, and the people shall be as the burning of Lyme: As
Lyme is melted, and mouldereth away by his own heat; so the enemies of the
Church at this day, Propria audacia seipsos fraugunt: And it is not the least
footstep of Gods care over this Church, that he daily unvails, and lays open
the face of their unnatural and divellish designs, before all the world,
which they have endeavored, by all Jesuited policy, to mask under specious
pretenses, that they might delude the world thereby.

By this, also we may know, that he favors us, that the enemy does not
triumph against us. Thus David argues, Psalm. 41.11
Psalm. 41.11. Whether the place be meant of a present experience of Gods
favor, which David enjoyed, or of a future, which he desired to enjoy, it
matters not in this point, though Expositors differ; If God have now and then,
let down a link or two, that our enemies might give the Church a reaching
blow, and strike home, yet still our God has them in chains.

Use. O let this quicken and stir us up, to give God his end in suffering his
Churches enemies; and this shall we do, if we spend not our time in bemoaning
our selves, and crying out of the miseries that are upon us; but in being
awaked out of carnal security, in being humbled for our sins, in being
reformed, and in drawing nigh unto God, which is some of that work, which God
expects should be done upon Mount Sion, and Jerusalem, before he will visit
the stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks; And
thus at length we are brought unto the words of the Text:

Wherein we have to observe 2 particulars, viz. 1. An Intimation of the true
cause why God did not yet visit the Assyrian that had so much provoked him;
Division.
the Lords Work upon Mount Sion and Jerusalem was not yet wholly performed, in
these words, When the Lord has performed, etc. 2. A Declaration of Gods
purpose to be revenged on the Assyrians, when that Work is once ended; I will
punish the fruit of the stout heart of the stout heart of the King of Assyria,
and the glory of his high looks.


Work of the Lord, what. Twofold.
To find out what this Work to be performed is, we must know, That the Lord
has a twofold Work to be performed on Mount Sion: 1. One is external and
preparative only, even outward affliction and calamity to be brought upon his
people, which God intended to perform here by the hand of the Assyrians: This
Work was not the overthrow (as some conceive) but the besieging of Jerusalem by
the Assyrian Army, as Saint Jerome thinks, and as appears by the sequel of the
History, in 36 and 37 Chapters of this Prophecy, where we find Sennacheribs
Army before Jerusalem, emptying the Treasures thereof by a heavy Imposition of
300 Talents of silver, and 30 Talents of gold, yielded unto by Hezekiah, upon
condition that the Assyrians should depart, and leave the strong Cities of
Judah, 2 King. 18.14.
2 Kin. 18.14. whereby they were afflicted with that and other outward
calamities also, which are the ordinary attendants of War.

Sion more immediately by the hands of God himself, even the Work of
Repentance, with all the real genuine fruits thereof, in the hearts and lives
of his people, as humbling their souls under the hand of God, lifting up their
hearts unto God with strong cries in their afflictions, renewing their
Covenants, and turning from the evil of their doings; this is the Work which
the Lord will have wholly performed upon Mount Sion and Jerusalem. Sion and
Jerusalem.
] Sion and Jerusalem are usually known to be put by a Synechdoche, for the
Church and State of the Jews, because this was the chief City, and there the
Temple. Some difference there is among Expositors about the placing of these
words, and pointing of the Text, whether they are to be read with the
antecedent words, as usually; or with the following words, thus, Upon Mount
Sion and Jerusalem I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the King of
Assyria. Thus the Rabbis. But Saint Jerome, and our modern Writers, for the
most part, follow the former reading, saving Musculus, who leaves it
indifferent, as conceiving both senses agreeable to the Histories of those
times. Et Jerusalem aliquo-usque per Assyrium erat castinganda and ipse
Assyrius in monte Sion manu Domini percutiendus. So he. The difference is
really this: In the former reading Sion and Jerusalem do signify the Church
and People of God, whom he will correct by his rod the Assyrian. In the later,
they signify the place where God will visit that proud enemy of his Church;
he will punish him upon Mount Sion and Jerusalem. But upon due observation of
the Series wherein the Text runs, and the Scope at which the holy Ghost ayms
therein, before mentioned, we shall find the former reading more apposite,
Quae de urbe and arce hoc loco dicuntur transfe^enda sunt ad Ecclesiam omnium
aetatum. Mollyeri Hypom^emita E^^ egetita ia Isaiam.
wherein Sion and Jerusalem signify the Church and People of the Jews, and, in
them, the Church and People of God successively, whom the Lord intends duly
to correct, as need shall require, by the hands of enemies, in bringing upon
them outward afflictions, as he did here upon the Jewish Church by the
Assyrians; which is the first part of the Lords Work, from whence we may note;

Whosoever be the instruments, God himself is the principal efficient of those
outward afflictions and miseries that befall his Church and People.

Men and devils had a hand in afflicting Job, yet the good man over-looks them
all, and takes the affliction as from the Lord alone, Job. 1.24.
Job. 1.21. And though they were shot in Satan's bow, yet he calls them, The
Arrows of the Almighty that stuck in him, Job 6.4.
Job 6.4. When that great evil was to be brought upon Judah, in the time of
Manassch his wicked Reign, so great, as that it would make both a man's ears to
tingle that should hear it, yet the Lord takes to it, and tells the world it
shall be his doing, 2 Kin. 21.13, 14.12. Behold, 2 Kin. 21.12, 13, 14.
I am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whosoever hears of
it, both his cars shall tingle. And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of
Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab; and I will wipe Jerusalem, as a
man wipeth a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down. And I will forsake the
remnant of mine Inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies,
and they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies.

God in the author of evils of punishment.
Yea, the Lord challenges the efficiency of all evil of punishments, whether
temporal or eternal, as his own prerogative: For temporal, he has said, I
make peace, and create evil, I the Lord do all these things, Isa 45.7.
Isai. 45.7. And by a strongly denying question he not only strikes it out of
doubt, but would take it evil if any beside himself should lay claim to the
doing of them, Am. 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, Am 3.6.
and the Lord has not done it? And for the vindication of his Royal
Prerogative therein, whereas the Heathen Idols pretend unto the Godhead, the
mighty God is pleased to condescend, That if they can do but either good or
evil, they shall be (as they desire to be) accounted so, Isa. 41 22.
Isa. 41.23. Show us the things that are to come, that we may know that ye are
gods; yea, do good or evil, that we may be dismayed.

For eternal punishments, they are from God more clearly, Eternal punishments
are from God immediately.
by how much they proceed from him more immediately then temporal punishments,
which are sometimes laid on by isntrumental hands: but in hell (though there
be created miseries, yet) the main of the damneds punishment is from God
immediately, as the Apostle seems to carry it, 2 These 19. opened.
2 These. 1.9. Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. I am not ignorant that
the place is usually understood of the wickeds banishment from the presence and
glory of Christ, as setting forth their pain of loss. But with submission I
conceive, upon a more deliberate apprehension of the Text, we shall find, That
the presence and power of the Lord are to be taken as the efficient causes and
means of inflicting the pain of sense upon the wicked in hell. Beza.
Beza, in rendering the words, favors this meaning, Damnati a present Domino
and potente ipsius gloria; the very torrour of his face, and the dreadful
Majesty of his presence shall slay the wicked, who shall beg and wish, the
Mountains, and the Rocks, to hide them from the face of the Lamb, Revel. 6.16.
Revel. 6.16. Where note, that since it were a favor to the wicked, to be
freed from the presence of the Lord, their destruction from his presence,
cannot congruously be understood of their punishment of loss. Learned Zanchius
in his Explication of that Epistle, recites this opinion, and approves it so
far, as to contribute a notable illustration of it, from the Prophet, Psalm.
68.2. Psalm. 68.2.
As Wax melts before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the presence of
God; As then, the fires heat is the efficient cause of the Waxes melting, so is
Gods presence of the wickeds perishing, or destruction; whence, that expression
of Gods resolution, to destroy a people, is usually in Scripture, this, I will
set my face against them: In like manner, we are to understand [from the Glory
of his Power] as another efficient, (...).
or means of the wickeds destruction, wherein God will put forth the glory of
his Power, to make it advanced in their confusion, For the Lord will show his
wrath, and make his power known in the Vessels, fitted for destruction, Romans
9.22. Romans 9.22. (...) quod erat ei possibile si adjective sumatur.
If the Lord should punish those Vessels by a Creature, or any other hand, then
his own immediately, it would be disproportionable, not sufficient to show his
wrath, nor enough to make his power known, but as unsuitable, as if a strong
man should put forth all his might to strike his enemy with a Feather, who
would but little feel the power of the strong man therein: The devils
therefore, that shall be tormented themselves, together with them, after the
great day, cannot probably be conceived to be the tormentors of the Vessels of
wrath, but God himself shall be all in all, as in rewards, so in punishments, 1
Cor. 15.28. But since I have digressed, I will return from the general, That
God is the Author of all afflictions, to show the ground and reason, Why he is
the Author, more especially, of those afflictions that befall the Church.

God is the first, Ashur, That he was no more but the Almighties rod, to
chastise his people, Isai. 10.5, 6.
Verse. 5, 6. If it be demanded then;

Q. How stands it with divine justice, to punish the King of Assyria for this,
wherein he was but Gods instrument?

Answ. Assyrian, Isai. 10.7.
Isai. 10.7. God intended by his hand, to punish the hypocrisy of his people,
But the King of Assyria means not so, neither does his heart think so, it is
in his heart to destroy, and cut off nations, not a few; Verse. 13.14, 15.
and more to this purpose, Verse 13.14, 15.

the instruments of our public miseries, which are but subservient unto a
higher hand, that is correcting us: The Prophet finds comfort in this course,
when reckoning up the heavy calamities that were upon Gods Church, by the
Caldeans; Thou O Lord haste ordained them for correction, and thou haste
established them for judgment, we shall not therefore dye, Hab. 1.12. Hab.
1.12.
This also was David's course, when his enemies were grown to a great height
against him, he looks upon them as Gods instruments, whom the Lord can rule;
and take off at his pleasure; and therefore betakes himself unto God, by
Prayer, Psalm. 17.13, 14. Deliver my soul from the wicked, Psalm. 17.13, 14.
which is thy sword, from men which are thy hand, O Lord; He can as easily rule
and govern his Churches enemies, as a man can rule his own hand, and his own
sword, to strike, and to forbear at pleasure: While we look upon second causes,
and fix our eyes upon instruments only, we profit not by Gods judgments and
afflictions that are upon us, but rather are provoked to passion and revenge,
Injuriam injuria pellere, our Hearts are never kindly wrought upon in our
troubles, whether public or private, till we conceive, That God has to do
with us, in them; but this quiets the spirit from all impatience, and passion,
and is the way to beget a dutiful submission in whatsoever we suffer. This was
it, that stopped the mouth of David's murmuring, when Gods hand was heavy, and
ready to consume him; yet was I dumb, because thou did it, says he, Psalm.
9.10. If we could take this course now, in the sad times of our public
miseries, to take them as from God, not as the fruits of man's malice against
us; but as in Gods wisdom, righteousness, faithfulness, and goodness, laid
on us, and overruled by our Heavenly Father, Three special ben^fits, by
receiving ^ur afflictions as from God. viz.
we should find really a threefold advantage therein.

1. It would make our present troubles, a spur to quicken us to (the duty of
this day) humiliation for our sins, Hos. 6 1.
Hos. 6.1. Nor is there any way of returning safely to the Lord, so as he may
return to us in mercy, but by humbling our souls under his mighty hand, and
turning from our evil ways; upon which condition, only does he promise to
heal his peoples Land, 2 Chronicles. 7.14. If my people, 2 Chro 7.14.
that are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my
face, and turn from their wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, and will
forgive their sin, and will heal their Land.

Psalm 76.10.
Psalm. 76.10. The consideration of which overruling power in God, may quiet
our hearts, and sustain them in the time of trouble; Be still, and know, that I
am God, Psalm. 46.10.
Psalm. 46.10. Our lives are not at the mercy, nor in the power of merciless
enemies, but in his hand, without whose will, not a Sparrow, not a hair of our
Head falls to the ground, which was a comfort into David, in the time of his
persecution, Psalm 31.15.
Psalm. 31.15. My times are in thy hand, deliver me from the hand of mine
enemies, and from them that persecute me.

3. The consideration that God is chief, in bringing upon us, these public
miseries and distractions, would be a special check to carnal policy, whereby
the worldly wise, endeavor to make a Linsie-Woolsie end of our afflictions,
looking more after peace with men, then peace with God; yea, after peace (it
may be) with such men, as are not at peace with God, saying, a confederacy to
them, to whom the Lord would not have us to say a confederacy to; yea, the Lord
spoke against it with a strong hand, although the people then were (as our vain
people now are) mightily for it, such as had not the fear of God before them,
Isai. 8.12, 12, 13.
Isai. 8.11, 12, 13. But if God be the supreme worker in our afflictions, it is
in vain to daub up a peace with men, till Gods anger be appeased, and his wrath
turned away; For we may say in this case, as Jehu to Joram, 2 King 9.22.
2 King. 9.22. What peace, so long as the Whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel, and
her Witchcrafts are so many? If God remain displeased, it is all one, we see by
daily experience of those that submit, and condescend unto the enemies for
peace, they turn, and return, from side to side, and shall surely find no set
ing of peace, till God be reconciled: To go, to make peace with our enemies,
before that be done, were, as if a man should entreat his enemies sword to
forbear devouring, and not at all to entreat the man that smites with it; the
folly whereof, is elegantly set forth in the Prophets Ironicall Expostulation,
and the answer thereunto, Jere. 47.6, 7. Ac si gladium dei vellet mulcere
blanditiis and mitig re ejus surorem. Calr.
Jerem. 47.6, 7. O thou sword of the Lord, how long will it be, ere thou be
quiet? Put up thy self into thy scabbard, rest, and be still; How can it be
quiet, seeing, the Lord has given it a charge against Ashkelon? Stulte facio
qui vol^ compescere gladium dei. Since it is only in his power to put it up,
who ^^^^h given it a commission.

Isai. 1.5. It he set us on the fire of affliction, like a boiling Pot (it is the
Prophets Comparison) and when the scum boiles up in us, it be not taken away,
but that our great scum shall still remain in us; and if God having offered to
purge us, we will not be purged, we shall not be purged, till the Lord have
caused his fury to rest upon us, Ezekiel. 24.13.
Ezekiel. 24.13. If the founder have been melting all this while in vain, and we
remain Brass and Iron corrupt still, the Bellows shall be burnt, the Mettle
consumed in the fire, and reprobate silver shall men call us, Jere. 6.28, 29,
30.
and the Lord will reject us, Jere. 26.28, 29, 30.

What fearful dooms are these, that the Prophet sets forth, and how dreadful
at a distance, and far off? How much more, when we consider, how nearly they
concern us? That have been little amended, by all the hammering of Gods
judgments upon us, hitherto: How profanely opposite, do we yet remain in
general, to the work of Reformation? How does a spirit of division, still
prevail, and continue us a divided Church, and a divided Kingdom? The good Lord
prevent such woeful conclusions as will otherwise follow, and fall upon us,
from these wretched premises! And unite our hearts in carricing on this work of
the Lord, to wit, of Reformation in the Land, that he may turn his hand upon
his enemies; Which leads me to the true cause? Why God did not yet fall upon
the Assyrian, intimated in these words. When the Lord has performed his whole
work upon Mount Sion, and Jerusalem; And the point is this.

That Gods work is not yet performed in the Church, is the grand obstruction,
and main cause, Why she is not yet delivered?

For the settling of this Truth, I shall brifly show these three things.

First, What this Work is, The non performance whereof, is an obstruction.
Secondly, That the Churches deliverance, hangs mainly upon the performance of
this Work. Thirdly, The causes why the Churches deliverance hangs upon the
performance of that Work.
A threefold work upon the Church in her trouble.
For the first, we find, That when God brings the hand of an enemy upon his
Church, to trouble her, he has a threefold work to be performed upon her.

Luke 8.13. Yea, Luke 8 13.
Yea, he will make the Nations as a Sieve, wherein the Lord will sift his
people, Israel, Ames 9.9. Which is, Amos 9.9.
we know to sever between the Wheat and the Chaff; and as a Refiners fire,
melts the Gold, and severs between the dross, and purer Mettle; so will God
deal with the Church in time of trouble; he will be unto it, as a Refiners
fire, and like Fullers Soap, Mal. 3.2, 3.
Mal. 3.2, 3. No good husband will lay up Chaff with Wheat, no Goldsmith,
dross with pure Gold; and therefore, they will use the fan and the fire
first, to sever them: The Eagle (they say) will try her brood, before she will
acknowledge them; so the Lord will discover, what is in the heart of Israel,
while they are in the troublesome Wilderness, ere they come into Canaan, a
Land of rest. When the Romans immortalized any of their Emperors, they did it
with this Ceremony, they brought one to swear, That they see him go to Heaven,
out of the fire, intimating, That the fire of trial had passed upon them. I am
sure, the fiery trial is now passing upon the Church, which will sever between
the precious, and the vile; as men's works, so men's conditions shall be tried by
fire, and men that are saved and delivered, shall be saved yet, so as by fire.

Israel with fiery Serpents and Scorpions, and the like; It was, That he might
humble them, and prove them; that so he might do them good, Deuteronomy 8.15, 16.
at their latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. So that by such afflictions, when he
brings them upon his Church, The Lord is said to call his people to this duty,
to weeping, meurning, baldness, and girding with Sackcloth, Isa. 22.12. Isai,
22.12.
God is not set up, till the creature be abased, and his people, ashamed of all
their vain confidences, in themselves, or any other creature; but when in the
work of humiliation, this is done, God is most ready to be reconciled to them,
and to save, Hosea 14.3, 4. No sooner can his people say, Hos 14.3, 4.
Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any
more to the work of our hands, ye are our gods; But God presently answers, I
will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine anger is turned
away from him; This then is another work God looks for.

Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 24.13.
when he brought the King of Babylon against her, whereby he would have purged
and refined her. If my people will turn from their evil ways, then will I
forgive their sin, and will heal their Land, says God unto Solomon, 2 Chro. 7
14.
2 Chr. 7.14. As it was observed in Romes overthrow, there was not left
standing any of the Temples or Statues of Idols, but were all broken down,
only the Basilicae Christianorum, were left standing. So God will, doubtless,
make it observable in the troubles of his Church; there shall be nothing of
Idols or Idolatry, nor any thing contrary unto God left standing; he will pluck
up all the Plants, that his hand has not planted, and what was not from the
beginning, as he promises, Isai. 1.25, 26.
Isai. 1.25, 26. I will take away thy dross, and purely purge away thy Tyn,
and I will restore thy Judges, as at the first, and thy Counselors, as at the
beginning; afterward thou shall be called the City of Righteousness, the
Faithful City.

And for the second Branch, that the Churches deliverance, depends mainly upon
the performance of these works, appears both in Gods promises, and
dispensations of deliverance: He looks, but whether the Church has performed,
or not performed it, and accordingly promises, or denies to give deliverance:
If they humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
evil ways, are the terms, upon which the promise of deliverance is made: I
will hear their prayers, and heal their Land, 2 Chro. 7.14. as before was
noted: And if this be not done, he will not promise deliverance, but threaten
rather, that the Syrians before, and the Philistims behind, and they shall
devour Israel with open mouth, for the people turns not unto him that smites
them, neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts, Isai. 9.12, 13.
Isai. 9.12, 13. In like manner, he orders his dispensations to the Church, in
this particular. For though Joshua prayed, that Israel might have success, and
not be delivered into the hand of their enemies, when they fled before the men
of Ai, yet were they not delivered, because Achan was not punished, neither
will God be with them any more, till their sin be reformed, Josh 7.11, 12.
Josh. 7.11, 12. The reasons are manifest; viz.

Amos 3.2. Ex hoc intelligi mus nos deo curae esse. Lact.
whosoever go free, Amos. 3.2. Agatho in Aelian, told that King (who wondered,
why he was so rough to his friends) my roughness, says he, is but like that
of the File, or Whet-stone, to make my friends affections more bright and
sharp: If his people be never so miserably afflicted, God can love them. I have
chosen thee in the furnace of affliction, Isai. 48.10. But he cannot love them
in their sins; Isai. 48.10.
Like the Lacedemonian Woman, when she gave her son his fathers Buckler, (...)
gave him this charge with it, Either bring this back with victory, or be
brought back upon this with honor: She desired rather never to see him alive,
then to see him in disgrace: So God will rather not deliver his people, then
that their sin should not be reformed, which dishonours them.

such a deliverance would be the hardening of peoples hearts in their sins, as
appears in the Jews, who would have concluded, they were allowed to sin,
because they were delivered unreformed, Jere. 7.10. So God expostulates; Jere
7.10.
and therefore God resolves to deliver them up into the hands of a far severer
judgment, Verse. 14.15, 16.
Ver. 14, 15, 16. As the taking away of a Plaster, before the Wound be
perfectly cured, is the way to make it rankle and dangerous: An unjust peace,
is as much worse, then a just war; as it is better for the Church to be at
peace with God rather, then to be at peace with men.

Jacob, Isai. 27.9. Which to lose, and leave his cure imperfect, Isa. 27.2.
can neither stand with the wisdom, justice, faithfulness, nor goodness, of
her heavenly Physician.

Sion and Jerusalem; that we may justly lament it, as an obstruction in the
hopes of our deliverance: Quanta de spe decidimus? We well hoped, to have seen
the Lord by this time visiting, upon the Churches enemies, the fruit of their
stout hearts, The blasphemies they have uttered, and the Seas of innocent blood
that they have spilt, wherein they have been as (or more) predigious then the
Assyrians were against the people of the Jews; so that we thought the sins of
the Amorites had been well nigh full, (Et qui nil sperare potest desperet
nihil.) But what of all that? The Lord will suffer them for all that, till his
work be done upon the Church (as we hear) and that (oh that) is not yet wholly
performed, Et hinc ille lachrymae, that should wound and break our hearts unto
weeping, before the Lord this day. When the Lord, upon the disobedience of
Israel, sent them word, that he would not, drive out the Canaanites from before
them, but that they should remain to be Goades in their sides, and Thorns in
their eyes; they lifted up their voices, and wept so sore, that the place took
its name from thence, and was called Bochim, Judge. 2.4, 5. And surely, Judge.
2.4, 5.
And surely, the sad message from the Lord, tells us little less, for our
disobedience, and unreformednesse this day, Then that the Canaanites amongst us
(that idolatrous, and unnatural generation, risen up in the bowels of this
Nation) shall not yet be driven out before us; but be as Goads in our sides,
and Thorns in our eyes; Why therefore, should not we also lift up our voices,
and weep this day, and with our tears, baptize this place, that it may be
called Bochim, a place of weeping; and that our hearts may be melted, to
contribute a few tears, toward a general mourning, over a distressed Church
and Kingdom. Let us sadly consider three things; Three Motives to mourn over
England this day.
viz,

1. Its a sign of heavy wrath come out from the Lord, against us; That he does
chastise us with Scorpions: Jerusalem (his own dwelling place) the very worst
of the heathen; it betokened great provocation, and some sad issue, Ezekiel. 7.23.
as is worthy your observation, Ezekiel. 7.23. unto the end: So surely, God is
very angry with England, when he puts a Sword into the hands of Popish enemies
against us, and brings upon us also, even the worst of all the Heathen, those
inhumane, and barbarous Rebels, that have already dyed their hands in the blood
of so many thousand souls in Ireland.

England is very sick, and the disease is mortal, very dangerous, and much to
be lamented; for the Symptoms are sad, Physic works not, obstructions remain:
In such a case, Jere. 8.20, 21.22.
the Prophet was astonished ( Jere. 8.20, 21, 22. and so may we) that there
should be Balm in Gilead, and Physicians too, and yet the health of the
daughter of my people, not recovered: How much more should it amaze us to see,
That we are a people generally refusing to be healed, hating to be reformed;
and like mad men flying in the faces of those that spend themselves, to do us
good: That we are still torn in pieces, yea, daily more and more, infatuated
by a spirit of division, and that while Gebal, and Ammon, and Amaleck, with the
Edomites and Philistims, are joined together with one consent, and are
confederate against us.

England in these woeful broiles, is active in her own destruction; and how
horrible, and unnatural is the self-murder of a Kingdom? wherein her own blood
must be upon her own head: O Israel, thy destruction is from thy self, in me is
thy help, Hos 13 9.
says God. Hos. 13.9. O England, thy destruction is from thy self, in me is
thy help, may God as justly, say to us: For he has not been wanting to show
himself most ready to save us, in discovering Plots, preventing intended
mischiefs; notwithstanding the assiduous attempts of our enemies, even to this
day, infatuating their Counsels, appearing with our Armies, and prospering
them, so that there is no want of help on Gods part, only, we pull down our
own ruin upon us, by our impenitency, and not performing the work of the Lord.
Poor England, thou have a good God, a good Cause, good Means, and good Friends,
only thou art miserable in thy self; it is not a Popish Army, nor Jesuited
Counsel, nor Irish Rebels, can ruin thee; and must thou perish in the sight
of mercy and deliverance? and must none but thine own hands (thine own sins)
destroy thee? thy condition is to be lamented with tears of blood.

2. You then (honorable and beloved) that are called to be State-Phisitians,
cannot chose but find a very sick State, and Church, yet there may be hope in
England, concerning this thing, in that the Lord has laid before you in the
Text, a discovery of the Cause. It primus est ad sanitatem gradus no visse
morbum: A Physicians princiall (if not the greatest) work in the curing of his
patient, is the finding out what it is that causes his distemper; when that is
discovered, the cure is not difficult. You will please to take notice, that the
main stoppage, and obstruction in our recovery is, That the work of the Lord is
not wholly performed on Mount Sion and Jerusalem. You are the Lords work men,
to carry on this work, which you have had the honor to begin! God waits but
until that work be ended, and he will quickly turn his hand upon your enemies:
Be exhorted (I beseech you) in the Apostles words, Be steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know, that your
labor shall not be in vain in the Lord: Master Fym lately buried before.
If you should be taken away in the midst of the work (as some Worthies have
lately been) your faithful endeavor (as theirs) shall crown your memories to
Posterity, and it shall be said of you, (as it was said of Radolphus the
Emperors, after his death) Ecclesiae ceciderunt.

1. Help on the work of humiliation through the whole Kingdom,

Dagon is begun to fall before the Arc, his head is off, but let not so much
as the stump of Dagon remain; be mindful of your solemn Covenant, and (as
good King Josiah did, 2 Chro. 34 32.
) cause all the people to stand to it, by whose honored example, together with
that of the Princes in Ezraes time, Ezra 10.3, 7, 8.
Ezra 10.3, 7, 8. Who by forfeitures and excommunications, effectually caused
the people, both to make, and keep their Covenant of Reformation, you may be
stirred up, to see your so pious a general Covenant for the work of
Reformation reinforced, which many audaciously refuse, and are unpunished, and
very few observe: Go on, I say, thus with the work of Reformation, and look
forward rather to the Word, then backward to any former Presidents for your
Rule, though they should be Presidents of the purest times, since the
Reformation began to look out: We honor (as much as any) the memories of those
Primitive reformers, Edward the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth; yet we dare not
exempt them from imperfection, even in that Work, for which we so much honor
them: Nor can we rationally presume, but that some things (among so many, nay
among all things to be reformed) must needs slide by, uncorrected, in that
darksome dawning of the Gospel; but we had rather admire Gods goodness to the
Church in them, that he in abled them to reform so much, then ungratefully
expostulate, Why they did reform no more: As Master Greenham sometimes
answered a Bishop, that pressed him to subscription by Luthers example, saying,
That Luther held our Ceremonies lawful: I had rather (says Master Greenham)
admire Gods goodness, that revealed so much truth unto Luther in
Fundamentalls, then to inquire into his secret Counsels, Why, He revealed no
more unto him in matter of Ceremony: However, we know the Scriptures examples
are beyond all exception, and of all, the perfectest; and therefore, your
wisedoms will carry you in point of imitation, Ad perfectum in quolibet genere.

Jere. 48.10.
Jere. 48.10. The mighty God strengththen you thereunto, make all Mountains
plain before you, and make the work of the Lord to prosper in your hands. Thus
have I done with the former particular in the Text, the intimation of the true
cause, Why God visited not yet the Churches enemies: We should now have
proceeded to the second, Gods Declaration of a resolution to punish his
enemies, when that work is once wholly performed: I will visit the fruit of the
stout heart of the King of Assyria, etc. The point.

God himself will take in hand his peoples enemies, when they have done as much
as he intended against his Church.

The Lord begins with these Assyrians, at the sixteenth Verse, and see what
dreadful slaughter he brought upon that host, 185000 slain by the hand of an
Angel in one night, 2 King. 19.35.
2 King. 19.35. And Sennacherib himself being escaped for his life at Niniveh,
was murdered by his own sons in the very act of Idolatry, Verse. 37.
Verse. 37. Which dreadful judgment from the hand of God upon him, occasioned
that Epitaph upon him, (...). Qui me aspicit colat pietatem. As if he should
say, Let men by my example, take heed of falling into the hands of the living
God.

This may be an excellent encouragement to wait upon the Lord, Be still then,
and know, that I am God, I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will be exalted
in the Earth, Psalm. 46.10. It is not their stout heart, Psalm. 46.10.
nor their high looks, can carry them out against him, that is above them, even
in those things wherein they deal most proudly; I will visit the fruit of the
stout heart of the King of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks: Let us
then conclude with the Church, Psa* 68.20, 21.
Psalm. 68.20, 21. He that is our God, is the God of salvation; and unto God the
Lord, belong the issues from death, but God shall wound the head of his
enemies, and the hairy scalp of such as go on still in their trespasses.

DOctor Burgess, Jere. 50.5. November. 17. 1640. Master Marshall, 2 Chro. 15.2.
November. 17. 1640.
Before the receiving of the Sacrament.
Mr. Gauden, Zach. 8.19. November. 29.
At the thanksgiving of the Union, betwixt England, and Scotland.
Mr. Marshall, Psalm. 124.6, 7, 8. September 7. 1641 Mr. Buroughs, Isai. 66.10.
September 7. 1641 Dr. Bargesse, Psalm. 76.10. November 5. Mr. Marshall, 2 Kings
23.25, 26. December 22. Mr. Calamy, Jerem. 18.7, 8. December 23. Mr. Marshall,
Judge. 5.23. February 23. Mr. Calamy, Ezekiel. 36.32. February 23. Dr. Burgess,
not Printed. Jerem. 4.14. March 30. 1642 Mr. Ash, Psalm 9.9, March 30. 1642 Mr.
Tho. Goodwyn, Zach. 4.6, 7, 8, 9. April 27. Mr. Carryll, Revel. 2.2, 3. April
27. Mr. Harris, Luke 18. 6, 7, 8. May 25. Mr. Ob. Sedgwick, Jerem. 4, 3. May
25. Dr. Gouge, Nehem. 5.19. June 29. Mr. Will. Sedgwich, Isaiah 62.7. June 29.
Mr. Reynolds, Hosea 14.8. July 27. Mr. Hill, Proverbs 22.23. July 27. Dr.
Downing, not Printed, 2 These. 3.2. August 31. Mr. Carter, Judges 20.26, 27, 28.
August 31. Mr. Wilson, Hebrews 11.30. September. 28. Mr. Hodges, Psalm 113.5, 6.
September. 28. Dr. Temple, Psalm 2.6. October 26. Mr. Case, not Printed, Psalm
12.5. October 26. Mr Newcoman, Nehemiah 4.11 -- November 5 Mr Herle, Zachary
8.19. November 28 Mr Vines, Number 14.24. November 28 Mr Vallentine, Zephaniah
3.8. December 28 Mr Corbet, 1 Corinthians 1.27. December 28 Mr Whittaker,
Haggai 2.7. January 25 Mr Arrowsmith, Leviticus 26.25. January 25 Mr Bridges, 2
Samuel 19.5, 6, 7, 8. February 22 Mr Ellis, Micah 5.5. February 22 Mr Gibons,
not Printed, March 29 1643 Mr Lightfoot, Luke 1.14. March 29 1643 Mr Ley,
Jeremy 4.21, 22. April 26 Mr Greenhill, Matthew 3, 10. April 26 Mr Perne, Micah
4* 5. May 31 Mr Cheynell, Zachary 2.7. May 31
Thanksgiving Sermons, for the discovery of a dangerous, and bloody Design,
tending, to the utter subversion of the Parliament, and the Famous City of
London.

Before the Lords.
Mr Calamy, Joshua 24.15. June 15 Mr Herle, Psalm 95.1. June 15
Before the Commons.
Mr Marshall, Revelation 15.2, 3, 4. June 15 Mr Obadiah Sedgwick, Esther 9.1.
June 15 Mr Carter, Exodus 32.9, 10. June 28 Mr Palmer, Esther 4.13, 14. June 28
At a Fast before both Houses, and the Assembly of Divines.
Mr Bowls, John 2.17. July 7 Mr Newcomen, Isaiah 62.67. July 7
At an Extraordinary Fast.
Mr Hill, Revelation 12.11. July 2^ Mr Spurst^w, 1 Samuel 7.6. July 2^ Mr
Vines, not Printed, July 2^ Mr Conant, Jeremy 30.7. July 2^ Mr Sympson, Isaiah
4.5. July 2^ Mr Tuckney, Jeremy 8.22. August ^^ Mr Coleman, Jeremy 8.20. August
^^ Mr Chambers, Zachary 7.5, 6. September ^^ Mr Anthony Burges, Mark 1.2, 3.
September ^^
At the taking of the Covenant of the three Kingdoms.
Mr Coleman, Jeremy 30.21 -- September 2^ Mr Carrell, Nehemiah 9.38 -- October
6 Mr Wilkinson, Zachary 1.18, 19, 20, 21. October 25 Mr Sallwey, 1 Kings 18.21.
October 25 Mr Mew, Isaiah 42.24, 25. November 2^ Mr Bridge, Zachary 2.1, 18,
19, 20, 21. November 2^
At the Funeral of Master Pym
Mr Marshall, Micah 7.1, 2. -- December 1^ Mr Henderson, Ezra 7.23. December 2^
Mr Strickland, Isaiah 10.12. December 2^
FINIS.

