The Kings Majesty's RESOLVTION CONCERNING YORKSHIRE.

Together with many other Occurrences concerning His Royal Majesty and the
High Sheriff of that County.

Likewise Fearful and Terrible News from Yorkshire, Cheshire, and all the
Northern parts of England, concerning the great disturbances which were
occasioned by many that rose up in a warlike manner in Yorkshire, May 19. 1642.

Also how they were resisted by the High Sheriff of Yorkshire, having Order
and Command from both Houses of Parliament, to suppress all those that shall
appear in a Warlike manner in that County.

With an Information from York, concerning the Lord Seymer, the Lord Savill,
and the Lord Rich, etc. And their Answer to the Parliaments Message.

LONDON, Printed for J. Horton. 1642. May 26

The Kings Majesty's Resolution concerning Yorkshire.
Loving friend,
AFter my hearty Commendations remembered unto you, and to your wife, I thought
it necessary to send you these Occurrences, writing them with a sad and heavy
heart, by reason that there is such a great dissension here in this our County,
there is no talk now in these parts but Wars, as we are very fearful that
they will ensue very suddenly, for there is great preparations in this City,
and we dare not say to the contrary; His Royal Majesty is Resolved to stay
there as yet, and does assure us that there shall be nothing done contrary to
the will of this Kingdom.

The great and manifold dangers which are like to ensue (Courteous and
judicious Reader) are many for these two or three years, but I pass them,
they have been a Hatching and are now almost come to a full ripeness, as may
appear by this ensuing Relation.

Upon this present month of May, there has been many Fears and Jealousies
entering into the hearts of true hearted Protestants in the Northern parts of
England, and especially in the County of Yorkshire, and they are now fully
entered, more is the pity, we may all say, for they had some hopes that His
Majesty and the Honorable High Court of Parliament, would by degrees have
assented one with the other, and have all joined with one constancy of mind,
for the future and public good, of this Kingdom, but now in the Conclusion
they are far further off then they were at the beginning, and their
intentions are more apparently known to the World; For it is absolutely
thought that a Civil War will suddenly ensue, unless God of his great mercy
stir the intentions of many.

There were many assembled together in a warlike manner in the County of
Yorkshire; but to what intent is not yet known, but at last each man departed
to his own home, yet this is for certain, that there is great preparations for
war made in this County and diverse other adjoining Counties, but to what
intent is not yet known, it strikes terror to the hearts of all true
Protestants, and makes a great provision in this County, some of the Malignant
party saying, that the world will never be good till there be some blood of the
Puritan shed, but the Lord of his mercy send us a sudden prevention, that the
blood thirsty Papists may loose, and miss of their intended purposes.

There is in this County a great number of Papists, and likewise in many other
Countries adjoining to this, and it is thought that they are well provided and
furnished with great store of Ammunition for War whose design is to bring a
civil War upon the face of this whole Kingdom, that while we are in
dissentions among our selves, a Foreign Enemy may have the more advantage to
work their damnable and mischievous designs.

There was upon the two and twenty day of this Month, many that went to his
Majesty, saying they would lay down their Eves for the safety of his Majesty,
it is generally thought there will be suddenly Wars in this County of York,
and all other places thereabouts, so J rest.

Your Loving Friend Edward Sanders.
From York, May, the 22. 1641.
Another passage of Note that happened in the County of York between the high
Sheriff of the said County, and certain men assembled in Arms
THe High Sheriff of Yorkshire, having Order and Command from both houses of
Parliament, to suppress all those that appeared in a warlike manner in those
parts, and having intelligence that there were some that had put themselves
into a posture of War, He commanded some certain persons to make toward
them with all speed, to certify the Command he had from both Houses of
Parliament, to suppress all those that appeared in a Warlike manner, they
having heard what the Messengers had said, immediately departed from them, and
every man withdrew himself to his own home.

An Information Rec^^ved from York (...) five of May 1642
Upon the nineteen day of this present month, 1642. the Honorable Houses
received Information from York, that those Noble men sent for to attend the
House, that went thither, without the H^^ses consent, my Lord Savell, my Lord
S^^mer. and my Lord Rich, etc. had denied to come; saying, that they were bound
by the Oath of Allegiance to serve His Majesty.

Die Martis, 20. Maii 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, That
the Magazines of the several Counties (...) England and Wales, shall be
forthwith put into the power of the Lord Lievtenants of the said Counties,
respectively, (being such as the Parliament does conside in for the Service and
safety of His Majesty and the Kingdom.

Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this Order shall be Printed and
Published.

Ioh. Brown, Cleric. Parl.


