XXIII. PUNCTILIO'S OR CAPRICHIO'S OF STATE Among the present GRANDE^S.

Sed magis ingenue Peribonius, hunc ego fatis Imputo -- By Count GUNDOMAR.

Printed at Madrid in the Year, 1659.

XXIII. PVNCTILIO'S OR CAPRICHIO'S OF STATE.
I.
WHether the Court of Honor was not timely and prudentially suppressed in the
beginning of this brouillery, since the Authors of our confusion had none
themselves nor intended to leave any in; or to the Nation.

II.
Whether we or the Kingdom of Portugal, shall have the Honor of Precedence in
returning to our ancient and Pristine allegiance; if not, whether the same
Arms that are like to reduce the latter, may not reduce us.

III.
Whether the English Plenipotentiaries in the Sound, to accord the two Northern
Kings, were not more useful at home to compose the difference betwixt the
Parliament and Army, having been so well exercised and experienced in
uneffectual and unfeasible Treaties.

IV.
Whether Mounsieur Downham may not be any ones Broker or Factor in Holland,
since his Principals here are bankroupt; whether he have not leisure enough to
enquire aftet the Crown Jewels, as his Master Oliver instructed him.

V.
Whether the Welsh, or No Bodies Ambassador, were Sir William, or my Lord
Lockhart, or my Lord Cardinals Fool at the late enterview of the Favovrites,
whether he did Bezos los manos or la cueva of Don Lewis de Haro; and whether
his Credentials were not writ in Scotch.

VI.
Whether to be master of the Sword and Militia, be not more advantageous then
to be master of the Wards and Liveries, and yet if he be not Lamberts Pupil:
and whether Charles Fleetwood, be any kin to miles Fleetwood.

VII.
Whether it were not a main error in Oliver in satisfying himself with the
bare diminution and eclipse of my Lord Lambert; whether like Ixion he may not
be begot of a cloud; whether like him he may not turn the wheel and change this
abyss of confusion into an Elysium.

VIII.
Whether John Desborow's high Shoon, or his Lordships Collosha's are best to
wade through thick and thin; whether he knows any difference betwixt a Barn and
the Parliament House, since there is threshing and winnowing in both; whether
Lambert plow not with him.

IX.
Whether Lieutenant Col. Duckenfield ought not to be Master of the Ceremonies,
since he could parler so Court-like with the Speaker, and brought him so A la
mode to his Audience at Wallingford House.

X.
Whether my Lord Whitlocks extraordinary Embassy to Sweden, his Intrigues
there, his puny Treasurer-ship, his Juniority to Lisle for the custody of the
Seal, his new League with the Army will be any Riddle to knotty SQUIRE Dun.

XI.
Whether Alderman Tichburn's impertinent Headpiece, make him not as troublesome
a Senator to the Soldiery as he is a President to the new Artillery men.

XII.
Whether Crispin was not a type of my Lord H^wson; whether he has not married a
Queen: if he ought not at last to be President of the new thing that has so
much cobling work to do.

XIII.
Whether Mr. Brandriffe be better at the Drawing or Council board; whether he
or his goose will best forward the Settlement; whether he be not fitter to be
Porter at White Hall gate being measured out for such a Fellow.

XIV.
Whether Ireton in a Ruff would not look like Queen Besse, and wonderfully
grace the new Senate and strike ^n awful reverence and dread into the boys and
girls of the Town.

XV.
Whether the Army found it not easier to cajole Lieutenant General Ludlow into
their junto, then they will find it to cokes Overton out of Hull, it being
Rebellions and the Parliaments Metropolis:

XVI.
Whether Sir Orlando Hes^lrigge might not be one of this pack, if he would
allow this 23 to be half so villainous as his 5.

XVII.
Whether the Armies light touch of the Murder of the KING in their late Plea,
be not a point mainly and chiefly to be insisted on.

XVIII.
Whether the solemn League and Covenant, the Parliaments engagement against
KING, etc. Olivers instrument, the new subscription of the army were licensed
by Matchiavil, and which of them is most especially and eminently obligatory in
point of conscience.

XIX.
Whether the Army thought not to Monkifie General Monk by prescribing him such
a toye as their Address for his imitation; whether they be not mistaken, and
the Devil a Monk is he; and if he must be one, whether he had not better by his
loyalty enter himself in the order of Benedict.

XX
Whether Lawrence and Sydenham were not taken in for Tutors to the new F^y,
that the affairs of this new nothing might be managed orderly and to little
purpose.

XXI.
Whether Sir Henry Vanes wisdom should not have been the first Pageant in my
Lord Majors Show, whether Mischief, Money, or Vainglory is most pleasing to
him, whether he suits with Balzae's Character, that there are a sort of men
born to trouble and disquiet the world, whether his Devilship be not convinced
of his detestable contrivements; and if the Committee of safety may not aptly
be surnamed Vane, and if London Bridge lack not a Vane.

XXII.
Whether the rest of the pack, can be marshalled by any Herauldry but Ralph
Briscoes Books; whether their Politic Education has not been an insuportable
charge to the Commonwealth whilst it eased particular parishes; whether they
can give any other account of themselves then Tom Pride; if they can, that they
inform the Printer who will give them their due honor.

XXIII.
Whether this Punctilio-maker would scruple I think it below him to be
Halter-maker of the Senate if he could not show them a better Turn of State
then any yet; if such a course would not be the only way to safety: and
finally if the 23 Commissioners, shall not have in due time 24 Godfathers.

FINIS.

