Sabbati 4to Die Decembriis, 1680.
I Do Appoint Samuel Heyrick, Thomas Dring, and John Wickins, to Print this
Collection of Letters and other Writings, Perused by me according to the Order
of the Honorable HOUSE of COMMONS; and that no other Person presume to Print
the same.

GEO. TREBY.

A COLLECTION OF LETTERS AND OTHER WRITINGS, RELATING TO The Horrid Popish
Plott: Printed from the ORIGINALS in the Hands OF George Treby Esquire Chairman of
the COMMITTEE of Secrecy Of the HONORABLE House of Commons.

Published by Order of that House.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Heyrick at Gray's Inn Gate in Holborn, Thomas Dring
at the Harrow, and John Wickins at the White Heart in Fleetstreet. MDCLXXXI.

TO THE READER.
THE Letters and Writings here published are indubitably authentic. They were
all (except those of which account is given at the end) found and seized in Mr.
Coleman's House at the time of his Commitment, and owned by himself; and
particularly at his Trial; when several of the Letters written by and to him
were produced and read, and then marked by the Clerk of the Crown with Lect.
pro Rege, as is here printed in the Margins. And they were by his Majesty's
Order delivered to the Houses of Parliament, and thence delivered to the
Committee of Secrecy.

Also the handwriting of Mr. Coleman, the Cardinal of Norfolk, Mr. Leyburne,
Sir William Throgmorton, and the late Earl of Barkshire, by the name of
William Rice, have been proved by Testimony of such Witnesses as well knew the
same.

The Letters writ by Mr. Coleman are printed from the Original draughts,
written by him in French, and translated by Order of the Privy Council; and
such of the Letters sent to Mr. Coleman which were written in French, were
translated either by the same Order, or by Order of one of the Houses of
Parliament.

The Letters writ by Mr. Coleman were read in the House of Commons in this and
the two last Parliaments, and the rest either read, or in substance reported in
this and the last Parliament, by their Orders.

In most of these Letters the principal and material words and names of Persons
and Places were writ in Cipher, but have been exactly decypher'd by the Keys or
Tables which were found together with them.

In several of them there were used Figurative words, or words of Cabal; the
meaning of which, is conjectured from the Tenor and Sense of the
Correspondence, as (in the Allegories used between Mr. Coleman and the Nuntio)
the word Creditors appears to signify Adversaries; Debtors, Friends,
East India Company, the Paliament; and Trade and Traffic, the administration
of public Affairs. So Suit, appears to signify contesting (especially in
Parliament) concerning the Popish Interest; definitive Sentence, gaining the
point in that Contest. And in the like Metaphorical Sense, are used Process,
Lawyers, Advocates, etc.

The Correspondents in these Letters, do seldom use the First Person, when they
mention themselves; or the Second Person, when they mean him to whom it is
written, but they use the Cipher of their Names for the Persons. And
accordingly they are decypher'd and rendered in the Third Person. As in the
Cardinals Letters to Mr. Coleman, it is written that the Cardinal of Norfolk
did so, and Mr. Coleman should do thus, etc.

The House of Commons intended and directed Exactness of Truth in this
Publication. In observance of which not only Mr. Coleman's but the Letters of
the Cardinal and others, which contain several passages not directly relating
to the main Design, are published at large, so as they stand represented to the
World without any other disadvantage than what is inherent in themselves. But
several Letters of Mr. Leyburn, and some of the Letters of others of the lesser
Correspondents, being stuffed with common and ordinary News, that News, and that
only is omitted in this Print.

Some of the Letters seized at Mr. Coleman's are not decypherable by all or any
of the Keys found, of which, however one is thought fit to be published, which
is inserted toward the end.

Geo. Treby.

A LETTER FROM Mr. Coleman to the French King's Confessor, June the 29th 1674.
I AM commanded to tell you, That his Royal Highness, Lect. pro Rege.
my Master, is very sensible of the Friendship of his most Christian Majesty,
which he will endeavor to cultivate very carefully, and to give him all
possible Assurances of it, to take away all Jealousies that his Enemies would
raise to the contrary.

That his Royal Highness has done nothing in any manner whatsoever, nor in any
place, against the Interest of his most Christian Majesty, but has rendered him
all the good Offices he has been capable of.

That as for recalling the Parliament, and touching my Lord A -- his Highness
is altogether of the opinion of his Majesty, that neither one nor other is
useful, but quite contrary, very dangerous as well for England as France, and
that his most Christian Majesty is in great danger of losing the Neutrality of
England, at the next Session, (if the Parliament meet) as he lost its Alliance
by the Peace of Holland at the last; because the Lower House and their Friends
(as the furious Protestants, and the Malcontents in the House of Lords) have a
Design to lessen his Royal Highness, and root out the Catholic Religion, and
they think they cannot make use of any other fitter means to attain their End,
than to raise the Dutch, and to perplex his most Christian Majesty, as much as
lies in their Power.

That his Highness doubts not, but it is absolutely necessary for the Interest
of his most Christian Majesty, and his Royal Highness, to use all endeavors to
hinder the meeting of the Parliament, by persuading his Britannick Majesty,
that his Greatness, his Honor, and his Quiet, are no less concerned therein,
than theirs; So that if his most Christian Majesty would write freely his
thoughts thereupon to his Br. Majesty to forewarn him of the Danger he
apprehends from thence, and would withal think fit to make him the same
generous offers of his Purse, to persuade him to dissolve the present
Parliament, as he has done to his Highness for the Election of another,
perhaps he would succeed therein by the Assistance we would give him here.

As for another Parliament, it would be easy enough to get such an one as we
wish for, the Constitutions of our Parliaments being of such a nature, that as
there is nothing to be hoped for by the King, from an old one, so there is
nothing to be feared from a new one, because such an one at their first meeting
must needs assist his Majesty, so far as to enable him to acknowledge his
Obligations both to his most Christian Majesty and to all the World.

Now, although there is nothing in the World more true, or plainer than this,
some, nevertheless carried on, either by their particular Interest, or by their
mere Malice, and the hatred they have conceived against those they have so far
offended, as to despair of their Pardon, are resolved rather to sacrifice the
Honor of their King, and his Kingdom, than to show him the danger he is
running into, and the means to avoid it, lest they themselves should fall into
the hands of those that have long taken notice of their Baseness.

However, his Royal Highness will endeavor by his Care and good Offices to
entertain a very good understanding with the King, his Brother, as he has
always done, and lately, with so much success, that methinks, he endears
himself more and more every day.

For Monsieur Rouvigny, his Highness has nothing to say against him: As he
seems to understand the Interest of his Master, and to follow it with great
Observancy, he cannot by consequence thwart Ours: when we shall have any thing
material to ask or to propose to you, you shall know it, and we will trust to
the Promises of your help. I desire you from my Master, to deal with us with
the same freedom and confidence, and be assured, that notwithstanding all the
Rogueries and Follies of some People here and there, you will find us always
just, and Religiously faithful.

From Mr. Coleman, to the French King's Confessor, without Date, but noted by
him to have been written in Answer to a Letter of 25 September. 1674.
HIS Royal Highness has received the Letter that you sent him by Sir William
Throckmorton, Lect. pro Rege.
which he has answered to you himself; and besides, he has commanded me to
testify to you, the great esteem he has for the Friendship of his most
Christian Majesty, and for yours, and to assure you, that he will not fail to
cultivate it with all his power; and that preferring the sincere Faith of a
Christian, and the word of a Man of Honor, before all Subtilties, and even all
the advantages of the World, he gives you them both, as a Pledge of the ardent
desire he has to continue always a strict Alliance with his most Christian
Majesty, and to entertain also an intimate Correspondence with you.

For the first point of your Letter, his Royal Highness has commanded me to
tell you, that he will govern him self according to your Advice, and treat of
nothing concerning the Catholic Religion with Monsieur Rouvigny, nor with any
other Person than your self, but that he will communicate to you all things he
shall find necessary for the good of the Catholics, and shall be very well
pleased to receive Advices from you thereupon.

For the rest, his Royal Highness does a little wonder, that he hears nothing
from Monsieur Rouvigny touching the second point of your Letter, since you have
written so positively, that he had order to confirm, and procure execution of
what his most Christian Majesty proposed to him the second of June last, by
your Mediation, and you by that of Sir William Throckmorton's. He (His R. H.)
has omitted, till this time, to acquaint you with the small success that he has
had, as expecting daily that M. Rouvigny would impart to him the Commission of
which you made mention to him in your Letter; but having heard nothing yet of
that matter, and being obliged to go out of Town for 15 days or three Weeks,
he thinks fit to send you back Sir William Throckmorton, to acquaint you with
the progress of this Business, and to pray you to inform your self of what has
been able to hinder it.

His most Christian Majesty, made a very generous offer to his Royal Highness
of the assistance of his Purse, to enable him to defend them both from the
Evils that threatened them, and by good luck, his Royal Highness has labored
with so much diligence and success, that the Dangers which they apprehended are
a little put off; but one thing more is necessary for the perfect securing
their Affairs; and without making one step more, all that he has already done
will signify nothing. For that the Assistance of his most Christian Majesty,
is no less necessary at present, than heretofore, to subdue entirely those, who
being exasperated against his most Christian Majesty, as much as against his
Royal Highness, and are angry with his Royal Highness, only because he is so
unalterably addicted to the Interest of his most Christian Majesty, will
exercise their Malice and their Rage with more brutality than ever, if they
find occasion for it hereafter.

If you can therefore, by your Credit, obtain from his most Christian Majesty
the accomplishment of the offer of his Purse, for raising the Reputation of his
Royal Highness, in the opinion of his Britannick Majesty and for putting him in
condition to resist the sharpest Batteries of the Adversaries of his most
Christian Majesty and Royal Highness, to wit, the possibility they pretend to
get Money from the Parliament, and the impossibility of having any elsewhere,
by which they often keep the mind of his Britannick Majesty in suspense, and
wherein they place the hope they have to conquer him at last.

There will nothing more remain to be feared by his Most Christian Majesty, or
his Royal Highness, but his Royal Highness will be able to dissolve the
Parliament with ease and afterward, in recompense of the said Assistance, will
perform on his part all that his most Christian Majesty shall ask of him, and
will proceed with Sincerity upon the Word of a Prince (that no man can reproach
him with the violation of) for the Interest of his most Christian Majesty.

A Letter from Mr. Coleman to the Internuncio, July 24. 1674.
THE Affairs of the Duke are at this time as formerly, in a very uncertain
condition. He has many Enemies, and also some Friends, amongst whom, he
particularly esteems you, having a great Confidence in your Amity, of which
he hops to find the good Effects when he shall have occasion to demand your
Assistance, but truly, in the present Conjuncture, there is nothing more than
to make you understand the Estate in which he is at present, and the state of
the Catholics, and to let you consider what your Friends can do for the
Comfort of the one and the other; the first is now very well, because of the
putting off the Parliament, and of the uncertainty whether that Party should
take occasion to persecute him upon this Affair, or not; if he can deliver
himself from this difficulty, he will re-establish himself better than ever,
and shall be capable, not only to manage his proper Affairs, as before, but
also to testify his Acknowledgments to those who have been favorable to him
in his misfortune; but if this Affair is brought again upon the stage, he will
be so enabled, that he will have all his Adversaries upon his Back, which at
present are Civil enough to him, and do run a great Risque to be ruined with
his; all this depends on the King, who pretends to be effectually the
Duke's Friend, but does nevertheless hold an intimate correspondence with his
Enemies, and too openly declares himself sometimes, which makes us mistrust,
that he is persuaded that his Interest is altogether opposite to ours, but we
must not despair. God is mighty, and the innocence of this poor, miserable --
too evident, to permit him to be abandoned of all the World. If, by your means,
you can gain the Emperor and the Pope to the Duke, for his Assistance, or to
contribute something for the accomodating of the differences between his
Friends of Spain and France, (which cannot give him any Succor, because of the
unfortunate War, in which they are engaged) you will merit much of God, and of
all the Friends of the poor Catholics, who are reduced almost to despair, and
are tormented every day by their Enemies, and will be constrained to fall every
day under the burden of their miseries, if they are not upheld by some means:
Their condition and that of the Duke are alike in many things, but do differ in
this, that they have many Enemies, which may, every of them in particular, be
against the Catholic Cause for the Parliament, whereas the Duke, being only
engaged for the others, shall not be obliged to do any thing, at least, that he
shall not be condemned by the Parliament, all the others being of the same
nature, so that none shall attacque him in the last, before this first is
determined, because, that if the Process comes to be determined in his favor,
our Laws give him a great advantage against them which shall have the boldness
to trouble him thereupon. This is all that I can say at present of the Affair
of the Duke, and of the Catholics, which I recommend to you with all my heart,
assuring you, that since Christianism, there has not been any Affair neither
more to be pitied, or more worthy of all the Cares and Zeal of good People,
than this of which I now speak to you. If you have the same Sentiment, you will
take a great part in the Affairs of our Friends, and you will endeavor to
apply all the most proper Remedies to make them succeed.

From the French King's Confessor to Mr. Coleman.
Paris, September 15. 1674. SIR,
I AM very much obliged to you for the Letter you were pleased to write me
concerning my Sickness. Lec' pro Rege.
It was long and troublesome, and that which troubled me most during the long
continuance of it, was, to find my self unable to take care of that Affair you
gave me a memorial of, with as much diligence as I could wish. But, being after
all arrived here, I resolved to send an Extract of the Memorial, because I was
not able to carry it my self, which has been very lucky, thanks be to God, as
you will see by the Letter I write to his Royal Highness. Sir William
Throgmorton goes express with it. I pray acquaint his Highness, that this
Knight has managed this Affair with all the Zeal, Fidelity, and Prudence
possible, that his Highness may remember him upon occasion, as a Person much
addicted to him. For Mr. Bernard, that stays here, and whom you have
recommended, I pray be not further concerned for him: The first occasion that
offers, he shall find the Esteem I have for his Zeal and Wisdom, and for the
recommendation of his good Friends. I am in the mean while

Sir, Your most humble and most obedient Servant J. Ferrier.

From Mr. Coleman to the Pope's Internuncio.
Aug. 21. 74.
YOU expect that the Duke should let you know what your Friends can do for his
Service; Lec'. pro Rege.
I told you the last Week my Opinion concerning the Estate of the Pope, in case
the Process of the Parliament be judged to his disadvantage. And I have
likewise told you what Opinion all the World has as to that matter, that is to
say, that it was absolutely lost.

But, for my part, not being of so timorous a nature as others, I do not
believe so, but am of opinion, that it is not impossible to overcome our
Adversaries, in spite of all the confidence they have of Success. But the
Victory which I hope for is, to be able to prevent the Business coming before
the Parliament, that it be not begun at all, rather than to gain the point, if
it shall be brought upon the stage. For the Fury of the Persecutors is such,
that they will make use of all means imaginable, as well Evil as Just, to gain
their point. And I have too much reason to suspect the Integrity of our Judges
in that Affair, for I plainly perceive, they naturally incline to the side of
our Adversaries. And I dare put no confidence in the Assistance of the King,
after so many Demonstrations as he has given us of his weakness, as to that
matter. And it is from these three Causes; that is to say, the Fierceness of
our Adversaries, the Injustice of our Judges, and the Weakness of the King,
that we are to expect surtable Effects. So that we shall have very little hopes
of success, having so many Difficulties to contend with, in case the Parliament
should meet. Wherefore it will be necessary to provide some Support among his
Friends of your Acquaintance, if his Affairs should be too far pusht to suffer
him to be in quiet here. All those who have had any Correspondency with him are
at present in great suspense, and in pain to know what Success the Business
abovementioned is like to have. If the Duke succeeds in what he pretends to,
they will be more fixed to him than ever; if he fails, all his Creditors fall
upon him in a moment, and he and his Catholic Associates will be absolutely
ruined, for it is he alone upon whom all the rest do entirely depend: So that
it is for him and his Affairs, that all our Friends ought to employ their Care
to keep him up, that he may subsist. We have none with us that regard the
Merit, but the Success of things. So that if the Duke can happily disingage
himself of those Difficulties wherewith he is now encumbered, all the World will
esteem him an able man, and all People will entrust him in their Affairs more
willingly than they have done formerly. And the King himself, who has more
influence on the East India Company, than all the rest, will not only
re-establish him in the Employment he had before, but will put the Management
of all his Trade into his hands. By which means, he will have opportunity to
enrich himself, and all his Catholic Associates, with all their
Correspondents. So that it is of great consequence, (that those who owe him the
Sums of) the Emperor and the Pope assist the Duke with a little Sum of Money,
to put him in a condition to re-establish himself in the Management of the
King's Affairs, and to endeavor to Compose the Differences between his two
Friends of Spain and France; So that they may be in a condition to support him
in his just and worthy Design, to begin and establish a new Traffic very
advantageous to the whole World, and particularly the Kingdom of England,
which, at present, is unhappily divided, for want of being employed as it ought
to be, and as it will be in little time after it shall have tasted the
sweetness of that Profit which it shall find by the Managery of the Duke and
his Associates, being assisted by his Friends and yours, and principally by the
Church. We have in agitation great Designs, worthy the consideration of your
Friends, and to be supported with all their Power, wherein we have no doubt but
to succeed, and, it may be, to the utter ruin of the Protestant Party, if you
join with us in good Earnest, and cordially second our Enterprises. The Affair
is too long to give you all the Particulars of, but, without doubt, you will
understand much of it by the little which you find here.

September. 4. 1674. Jo. Nicholas,
AT present (Sir) We are returned again to London, where we shall be, as I
hope, less embarrassed than at Windsor, and by consequence, shall have more
leisure to entertain our Correspondents for the future, than we have had
before. Since our return I have received your Letters of the one and twentieth
of August, and fourth of September, and three others from our Friend, through
whose hands you sent me yours. I wonder whence it comes that they have lost
their way thus, but I conceive that he directed them to his Correspondent here,
instead of addressing them immediately to me, or to Mr. Jerome Boteman; I will
advertise him of it this day, the better to settle our Correspondence for the
future; it is true, that I did not write till this present as I intended,
fearing lest you should have forgotten what I said thereupon, when I was at
your House, but being delivered from that fear, I will not fail hereafter to
treat you with that Liberty and Freedom you have permitted me to use toward
you, having no other Design, than to obey you as I ought, being

You will wonder, without doubt, at the Freedom I take in this Letter, and at
my Confidence, and, perhaps, will esteem it as a mark of my Weakness, judging
thereby, that I accustom my self to treat others in the like manner, and to
open my mind, without distinction, to all who make profession to me of their
Friendship and Sincerity. But, Sir, I desire you not to believe me guilty of so
great Lightness and Folly, if I shall let you know my most secret Thoughts. And
first, to answer the Question in your Letters, touching the Concerns of the
Catholics before the Parliament; viz. Whether they will come in Debate again
in the Month of (...) I assure you, there is none but my self, either Friend or
Enemy of the Duke's, who does not believe certainly, that that Business will be
begun again at the time aforesaid, and that it will terminate to the utmost
prejudice of the Duke, and of the Catholics. For my self, I am alone of the
opinion, that it will not then be taken up; at least, I will do my utmost to
prevent it; although I know well that the Spanish Minister, and all those who
are for the Interest of Spain, and the Confederates (whereof some
notwithstanding are very good Friends to the Catholics) will do all they can
to prevail with the King to pursue the said Business, preferring their Malice
and Enmity against France, (which will, as they believe, be overwhelmed
thereby) before their Love to the Duke and the Catholics; who will certainly
by that means be in great danger to be quite ruined. As for my self, I am
neither tied to the Interest of Spain nor France, but entirely to that of the
Pope and the Catholics; but pardon me, if I tell you freely, that I believe
that the whole Proceeding of Spain in this Contest with France, is visibly to
the great prejudice, as well of the Pope and the Catholics, as his own
Interest, and that He has been long deceived by his Ministers and Associates,
who have exposed him, during this whole Affair, to vast Expenses, and have
brought all the Burden upon him, and in the end will quit him in his extremity,
if He does not take heed betimes. All his Friends on this side have foreseen a
good while what is fallen out of late, and have been much afflicted to see two
Gentlemen, of equal Merit, of the same Parentage, and of the same Interest, so
transported one against the other, as to expose themselves to the Derision of
their Neighbors, who have always been, and who are at present inwardly (what
show soever they make in appearance) Enemies to both. In short, I believe that
it is not Prudence in Spain to suffer it self to be thus governed by the
Passion of its Ministers, to its own Damage, and the ruin of its best Friends,
rather than to agree with France, because it has been perfidious, although Spain
may have all the Assurances imaginable, that France will act honestly for the
future, like a good Neighbor, a kind Relation, and a most faithful Friend: The
Duke's principal Defign is, to terminate this Difference by the Interposition
of the Pope, and by that means to establish himself in the possession of his
Estate, through their Assistance, and to turn all their Cares, (which at
present are employed to destroy each other) for the Ease of the Pope's Friends,
and particularly for the Catholics of the Church, against their great Enemies.
If you please to consider the Affair as it is, you will find that the Pope
never had an occasion so favorable as at this Hour, to enrich those of his
Family, and to augment the number of his Friends, and if he lets it slip, he
will never find the like: so that if ever they propose to make use of the
Treasure of the Church, it is now they ought to do it, for they can demand
nothing that the Duke will not be capable to do for the Pope's Friends; and the
Emperor, being assisted, as I said: On the other side, without their Aid, He
will run great hazard of being lost, both himself and his Associates. This is
all I can say.

From Mr. Coleman to the Pope's Internuncio. September 11. 1674.
SIR,
I Have received yours of the 7th Instant, by which you do me the Honor to
desire the continuance of News from us, in which I will willingly obey you,
nothing being more agreeable to me than to serve you.

On Tuesday was sevenight our Commissioners and those of Holland (who are to
adjust the Commerce of both Nations to the East Indies) entered upon that
Affair.

Friday last the Privy Council met again (the King present) being the first
time since his Majesty adjourned them at Hampton Court, about five or six Weeks
ago) and for the future they will meet regularly, as heretofore.

The third Son of the Duchess of Cleaveland, known hitherto by the name of my
Lord George Fitz Roy, has been lately made Earl of Northumberland, Viscount of
Falmouth, and Baron of Pomfret. Don Carlos, another of the King's Natural Sons,
will be created Earl of Plymouth, but his Letters Patenes are not yet figned.

An Irish man, named Cussack, in a small Vessel of 13 men, had the boldness
(the last Week) to take a Scotch Ship in our River, near Sheerness, and got
off: But the Yacht called the Merlin, pursuing the said Cussack, and took him,
so that he and his thirteen men are to be treated as Pirates.

Saturday last, Sir Jonathan Atkins, Governor of Barbados, sailed from
Portsmouth to take possession of his Charge. His Majesty will go to New Market
about the end of this Month, to divert himself with Hunting, Horse races, and
the other divertisements of the Place and Season.

Yesterday the Earl of Arlington took possession of his Charge of Lord
Chamberlain of his Majesty's Household, his Majesty having delivered him the
Staff, and this day he has complemented their Royal Highnesses, and has
received the Visits and Congratulations of all his Relations, and Grandees of
the Court.

Sir Joseph Williamson succeeds him in the Charge of Secretary of State, for
which he has taken the ordinary Oath, and has this day taken his place in
Council.

As for the Process of your Friend, for which I was in great apprehension when
I writ to you on the one and twentieth of the last Month, it is at present (as
I hope) in a better condition than formerly; and although his Adversaries
prosecute him with as much vigor, and more confidence than ever; nevertheless,
I do not doubt but the Lawyers of Mr. -- will find out some means to avert the
danger for the present, in deferring it at least for some Months; and then it is
to be hoped, that his Enemies will begin to hear reason; and that those who had
a Design to make use of this ill Conjuncture to satisfy their Malice, under
the specious pretext of obtaining their pretended Debts, and securing their
Trade, will see, perhaps, that it is not so easy to maintain a Cheat, and
ruin (by their tricks) honest People, supported by Justice and Innocence, as
they imagined, after having got that point.

Your Friends, the Emperor and the Pope, will have a fair occasion of giving
marks of their Friendship to Mr. -- by joining their Credit and Interest to
his, to make the great Design (which he has so long meditated, succeed, to
undermine the Intrigues of that Company of Merchants, who trade for the
Parliament and the Religion, and to Establish that of the associated Catholics
in every place, which may be done (without any great trouble) if the Emperor
and the Pope will grant him their assistance, and that Spain will not too
obstinately oppose him; as he has hitherto done, to his own prejudice; of
which I freely told you my Opinion in my last, of the Third Instant. A little
time will now let us see the Trade of all Affairs of this nature more clearly
than at present; In the mean time, you see the Confidence and Liberty I use
with you, etc.

From Mr. Coleman to the Internuncio, October. 23. 1674.
YOU agree with me, Lec' pro Rege.
that Money is the only means of bringing the King into the Duke's Interest,
and of difingaging him from the Parliament, and you must also agree with me,
that nothing can more promote the Interest of the Catholiek Party, which is the
principal Object of the Duke's Care and Affection, and of the Hatred of the
Parliament, and which must hope or fear, according as the one or the other of
them increase in Power.

Now the Power would be unalterably established in the Duke, if the King were
resolved to give him his Assistance in one or two things, so that if Money can
prevail with him to act in the Duke's favor, and to abandon the Parliament,
the Catholics will find themselves at great ease about it. And if that be the
only way to gain the King, that without him the Duke will be in great danger of
being ruined, and all the Catholics with him, it imports much to the Duke's
Friends, and to the Catholics, that nothing be omitted for the securing to
them assistance of Money, as above mentioned. But how shall one get it? There Is
the difficulty. For my part, I do not doubt (notwithstanding the Discourse
which we had together, when I had the honor to speak with you upon this
Subject, and when we proceeded upon other Propositions than now we do) but that
the Pope may do it effectually, if he think fit to employ his whole Power,
because Money, which is entirely at his command, is more than sufficient to
make the Pretensions of the Duke and the Catholics succeed; besides that, the
Pope has many other means to attain the favor of Money.

But before it be endeavored to persuade the Pope to engage himself in things
of this nature, he must first be made to understand, that the assistance which
he shall give the Duke shall be hindered from becoming ineffectual to the
Catholics, either by the lightness of the King, or by any other means, and
that it shall be so ordered, as to produce infallibly (or at least, very
probably) the Effects which we wish for from it.

As for the first, nothing in the World is more certain, than that the King has
a good inclination toward the Duke and the Catholics, and would join himself
willingly, and inseparably to their Interests, if he did not apprehend some
danger from such a Union, which, however, he would not have any cause to fear,
if he found their Interest, and consequently their Power, so far advanced above
that of their Adversaries, that they should neither have the Power nor the
Boldness to contest any thing with them, or with him, upon any matter that
concerned them, which he could see in a very little time, if we could persuade
him to treat roundly with Sir Will. Throckmorton, and to do two or three things
besides, which would necessarily follow the first, and which he could not
easily avoid doing; and I am certain Money could not fail of persuading him to
it, for there is nothing it cannot make him do, though it were as much to his
prejudice, as this we endeavor to persuade him to, will be to his Advantage.

To convince you that the Duke and his Friends would have so much the Advantage
in their Trade over their Competitors, in case they might be assisted by Money,
that there would be nothing for the King to apprehend, either of immediate
loss, or Collateral Damage, in present or to come; it will be enough that you
consider the infinite augmentation of Credit which they have already gained by
the bare suspending of their Suit for a little time only; for if that has been
capable of advancing their Interest to such a degree, consider (I beseech you)
how one definitive Sentence in their savor, must needs establish both their
Reputation and real Power; It would do it to that degree, that, I dare say, not
one man of those who now balance betwixt them and their Adversaries, or that
seem to be even of their Enemies Parry, believing the Advantage of the Suit on
their side, would dare to cross or contradict them in any matter whatsoever, in
case that this point were absolutely determined in their favor, and even those
who have most obstinately opposed their Interests, would then be as earnest to
serve them, and to join with them, so that their Adversaries would be wholly
ruined, and all the Business be managed entirely by the Duke and his Friends,
without any opposition: in such sort, that it will not be in the King's Power
to establish another Company, although he should be so capricious as to desire
it, which he will never do, because he is naturally inclined to favor those,
when he may do it without hazard, and he has nothing to apprehend upon this
occasion, since he will find his Interest better established by this means, and
with more security and quiet, than ever it has been hitherto.

For my part, that which I have said seems so evident to me, that nothing less
than a Miracle can give me greater assurance, that the King will never oppose
the Designs of the Duke and his Friends, provided he has once done in their
favor what they desire of him, because he will find his Account in it very
advantagiously, as he will quickly perceive, when he has made trial of the
Success, although he does not yet see it, and therefore it is necessary we
should be assisted with Money, to open the Eyes of the King, or to carry him
blindly to his own Advantage, which Money will easily do, having such an
absolute Power over him. that he cannot resist it in any thing; and besides
that, the thing which we ask is so reasonable, so honorable, and so much for
his Interest, which he will see clearly, when he comes to consider his own
Affairs, as he ought, and so agreeable to his Inclination, that we want nothing
but the assistance of a Sum of Money, that may have influence enough upon him,
to make him reflect upon what concerns him most, particularly, to obtain all
that we can desire of him.

As for the Process, we have no great reason to apprehend the success of it, if
money may there give it is honorable Testimony; for we are not only assured of
Justice from those Judges who are to determine it, but even of as much Favor
as they can reasonably show us: for seeing they have been so kind as to defer
the Sentence for so many Months, in favor of the Duke and his Friends, that
they might have occasion to strengthen their party, when the ordinary Rule and
Method of the Law, oblidged them to proceed forthwith to a determination of the
Dispute, which the adverse Party pressed with all their power, knowing well,
that the Duke and his Friends, were not at all prepared to support their Right
as was requisite. The Judges I say, being so favorable to them as to give them
time for the clearing of some points which might change the Appearance of the
Cause, so that instead of loosing it as they would certainly have done, without
this Explanation; they cannot now fail of Success in it, according to the
strictest Rule of Justice, nor need they fear any Oppression of Injustice after
such proofs of Kindness, so that the Duke and his Friends assisted by the
Testimony of Money, which may give so much evidence to this Affair, cannot fail
of a Decision in their Favor, by the aforesaid Judges.

Moreover, I persuade my self, the Pope will never want Testimonies on the
Duke's part, either of his Will or Power, to go through what he undertakes, if
the King does not hinder him; for as to the former, he has given such proofs of
his Integrity, and Resolution to continue it unalterably in the greatest
Extremities, that no body can be so unjust as to suspect him capable of any
unworthy Action.

And as to his Power, there are so many Instances to be given in other Persons,
who have been less concerned and less able than himself, and yet have been so
successful in the same Attempts, that there is no reason in this Case to doubt
of it. Remember (I beseech you) what happened at -- in the year -- and compare
the persons Enterprises, and all other Circumstances of those times, with
these, and then tell me (if you please) why one may not expect as good an
effect now, as then; but if Money alone be able to produce Effects of this kind
in the present Conjuncture of Affairs, you will doubtless, agree with me, that
it is requisite to employ it on this Occasion, if ever we pretend to use it on
any. And indeed, there is no Appearance that so much Labor and Care have been
used for so long time to increase the Power of the Church, to render it
unuseful for ever.

As to the Journey of (Mr. Gabriel) the Internuncio, seeing he is fond of it, I
am content, because he will have better opportunity of promoting the Duke's
Interest with the Pope and Emperor at Rome, than elsewhere; for my part, I
should not correspond with his Successor, without Monsieur Gabriel's Express
Order, or some of his Friends, because I may continue the Negotiation of our
Affair immediately with him at Rome, as well as by any other way, which would
not advance, but rather retard the Business. I should think my self very happy,
if I might see him in his passage to -- but if that may not be, I shall be glad
to get leave of my Master to meet him at -- to kiss his hands, and to give him
the greatest assurances of my being entirely his, as I profess to be,

SIR,

As to what you say of the Pope's Obligations to assist other Friends, who are
under greater Pressures, I answer, That perhaps the Affairs of the King of
France may be more pressing than theirs, and also than those of the Duke, for
the Duke may possibly be able to overcome all his Difficulties without any
assistance from abroad, though not without much trouble and hazard, but I
should think the best, and honest way of assisting the King of France
effectually, would be for the Pope to join with the Duke, and to endeavor,
with their Credit with Spain, and other Catholic Princes, to unite themselves
in a Company, and to admit the King of France into it, to the end, that being
joined in the same Company, they might have but one common Interest, and they
would be able to Govern the whole Traffic at their Pleasure, and the
Protestants and all other Nations would be obliged to give them what they would
ask for all they should expect, and to sell them their Merchandises at their
own price; because there would be no other Merchants of whom they could buy, or
to whom they could sell, but to those of this Company, which would bring them
in an incredible Advantage, and there is nothing more easy than to establish
this Company, if the Pope would contribute his Assistance, as abovesaid.

From Mr. Coleman to the Internuntio.
Windsor, Aug. 30. 1675.
IT is true, Sir, that the Pope has given us a clear and evident mark of his
affection toward the Catholics of England; but the Internuntio has testified
no less in doing Justice to the Merits of Cardinal Norfolk, which he mentioned
in his Letter of the 6th of July. Since we have reason to attribute his success
to the (just or favorable) character that the Internuntio has given of him, I
do not at all apprehend that the Internuntio repents himself of the good
offices that he has done him, but that he will find them recompensed by the
satisfaction which he will receive in his Friendship.

As for (Monsieur Clement) the Duke, I believe that he has already found the
effects of your Prayers; and that he has almost surmounted all the
Difficulties which have opposed his Establishment: The face of his Affairs are
well changed; for we now passionately wish to see the coming on of the
Parliament which we so much feared before: And while it was held doubtful
whether it ought to meet or no, we employed all our Power to bring it on; which
point we have gained but within these few days. And for my part, I no ways
doubt but that we shall receive as much good by it, as we apprehended ill,
provided that the Duke fail not in the execution of the good Resolutions which
he has taken. There is but one thing to be feared (whereof I have a very great
apprehension) that can hinder the success of our Designs; which is a Division
amongst the Catholics themselves, which has already broke out at Paris
amongst some Catholics of England, touching some difference of Opinions in
their Debates.

I find that some of them have sent their Complaints to Rome, to have their
Antagonist condemned: I have an intimate Acquaintance with the Person
complained of, and I dare affirm he has made twice as many Catholics in
England, of those which were none before, as any other person of his Quality;
and that he is as well inclined toward the Pope and his whole Family, as the
best of his Accusers: And I assure you, he has many Friends here of the First
Rank of Catholics, who would not engage in his Affairs, if they did not
believe that he marched steadily toward the common end. Although he affects
sometimes to express himself somewhat different from some of his Brothers. As
for me, I believe there is too much passion on both sides; and if it shall fall
out that his Enemies prevail against him, and procure his Condemnation at Rome,
I am afraid that diverse others will take occasion from thence to fall upon many
Catholics before the Parliament, desiring its friendship about some
extravagant Propositions concerning the Authority of the Pope, to which the
other Catholics cannot submit; which will give occasion to the Parliament to
accord their conjunction to those who require it, upon the Conditions
beforementioned; that is, Conditions prejudicial to the Authority of the Pope,
by the hatred which they bear to all the Religion of the Catholics, because
they may persecute the rest of them with more appearance of Justice, and ruin
the one half of them more easily than the whole body at once. So that it
seems to me, that although the Religion should be much more severely dealt
with, by reason of their Complaint, than now it is, it would be very improper
in the present Conjuncture of our Affairs, to make any division betwixt the
Catholics of England, upon any occasion whatsoever.

But for my part, I do not perceive any prejudice that can befall the Religion
from any of those things, against which some persons seem to be so furiously
enraged; because to my apprehension, there is nothing contained in them, but
what has heretofore been maintained by Men of Worth and Honesty, with the
general approbation of the whole world; and particularly by D. Elizalde a
Spaniard, in his Book Entitled, De forma verae Religionis quaerendae and
inveniendae.

If you do not understand the Subject of this Letter, our Friend, from whose
Hand you shall receive it, will inform you, and let you know the persons, and
all the matters which have passed betwixt them; and when you shall be fully
possessed of them, and shall possibly come to be of my opinion, (that it is
necessary to prevent all differences betwixt the Catholics of England in this
present Conjuncture) I hope you will contribute your utmost endeavor to
prevent the Condemnation of Rome, in any thing that may occasion a Breach
amongst the Catholics of England. I very well know, that the Duke will hold
himself much obliged by those, who shall concern themselves in the pacification
of this disorder, from whence we dread so much mischief; And that the Emperor,
and the Internuntio, cannot perform an Office more grateful to him, than to
prevent the Pope or any of his Family to embark themselves in the Affair, which
would raise some dispute amongst us.

I beg your pardon for the trouble I have given you upon this Subject: but
knowing your goodness, and weighing the importance of the Affair, wherein I
have taken the liberty to beg your assistance, I doubt not but you will pardon,
SIR.

A Letter seized at Mr. Coleman's, directed, A Monsieur Monsieur le Point
proche de Charing Cross a Londres, pour fair tenir a Monsieur James Clark.
September 28, 1678. PARIS.
I Had yours of the 12th instant, last night; our Posts these three last came
in late: my Friend being with the Crowd, it is impossible for me to reach him
now, but last night he sent me the Friend I mentioned, to tell me that this
Peace has broke all our Measures at present here, so that to write to our
Friend at present is useless, notwithstanding he had proposed all things in
very good order, had the Courier brought Peace in his mouth, which stopped his
as to our last design; so that now they pretending here, the Peace being made,
they have no need of us; so that by consequence they will not seek us, as they
would if the Peace had been still opposed. But in a word, to put our Traffic
afoot, it is absolutely necessary that my friend come speedily over to you, and
to converse with you and our other friend, because his Measures are so well
taken in Italy, that we cannot miss to establish this Commodity better from
those parts, than from any here at present, tho hereafter we may find means
and helps from hence too. But it is most certain, now is the time, or never, to
put things in order to establish it with you, for reasons which you may very
well guess; and whatever my friend or the other friend in the crowd can write,
will signify nothing; So whatever we say by Letter will be always imperfect,
and want explanation; so that to clear all doubts, and for better Secrecy too,
it is absolutely necessary that our friend comes to you, and to that intent in
terms as obscure as you please. It Is necessary that our friend with you desires
our friend at the Crowd here to give liberty to my friend with him, to come
over to convene with him; for he says himself, it is you must put him the way to
make the measures he has taken in Italy to take effect; for he knows what power
he has here, but he knows not of what Constitution you are in: Besides, the
Propositions he makes for Portership cannot be done at this distance, but in
such terms, as the meanest face here you have will easily tell what he means,
and so our Trade quite spoilt; so if our friend with you signify the least
desire he has to have our friend come over, he will easily clear all
difficulties, and discover to you the dispositions of both Countries to our
purpose, and I no ways doubt but you ll have entire satisfaction; however,
there will be no harm to hear what he can say, and to see the plan that is made
for this kind of Traffic. I expect your answer as to this particular, and
shall ever be as you would have me to be.

This Letter is indorst with Mr. Coleman's hand thus; Answered 7ber 26. but
imperfectly, and with a promise of a clearer and fuller Answer by the next Post.


[Note, this dark suspicious Letter was received but a very few days before the
Plot was discovered to his Majesty's Privy-Conncil, and Mr. Coleman thereupon
Committed.]

Among Mr. Coleman's Papers is one of his own handwriting, tituled on the back
thus; King's Power to command his own Subjects service against all Acts of
Parliament.

That which is written within, seems to be but an imperfect beginning of an
Argument to prove this Power of commanding Subjects service against all Acts of
Parliament: the words are these; Any Subject is by his natural Legeance bound
to obey and serve his Sovereign, etc. It is Enacted by the Parliament of the 23
Hen. 6. that no man should serve the King as Sheriff of any County above one
year; and that, notwithstanding any Clause of Non obstante to the contrary,
that is to say, notwithstanding that the King should expressly dispense with
the said Statute: Howbeit it is agreed in 2 H. 7. that against the express
purview of that Act, the King may by a special non obstante dispense with that
Act; for that the Act could not bar the King of the service of his Subject,
which the Law of Nature did give unto him.

Lord Cook 7th Report, Calvin's Case, fol. 14.

The next following Letters were written to Mr. Coleman by the said
Internuntio, (or Nuncio, as he styles himself) part from Brusselles, and the
rest from Rome; whither he removed during the Correspondence. They were written
Originally in French, Translated by several Members of Parliament.

Bruxelles the 14th of August, 1674.
Translated by Tho. Thinn Esquire.
SIR,
YOur Letter of the 24th of July, which I received some days since from the
person to whom you had Addressed it, delivered me from the great uneasiness I was
in, by not having heard from you in so long a time. I was very glad you
confirmed what I received from another hand, the good condition in which the
Dukes Affairs stood in relation to the Process he had with the Parliament,
wherein I hope he will have an entire Victory. Oblige me in acquainting me as
often as possible you can, how that matter proceeds; and particularly, whether
it will come quickly to a hearing as those of his side intended, or whether it
is like to be put off to a longer time; the Emperor is in tirely his, and the
Inter-Nuntio has this week received Letters from him, wherein he commands him
to assure the Duke of the passionate zeal he has for his Service, and those of
the Catholics. I pray you acquaint the Duke with it, and assure him that the
Inter-Nuntio has also the same inclinations, as he will make appear on all
occasions that shall present themselves; but it must be the Duke himself must
direct in what we may contribute to his Service. The Pope also will give his
assistance in such things as are proper for him to appear in. I beg of you to
communicate your News to me as often as you can, by such ways as you shall
judge most convenient, and am in the mean time, without reserve,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, ALBANY.

From Brussels, September 28. 1674.
Translated by Sir Humphry Winch.
SIR,
I Have received this Week two of your Letters, dated the fourth and the
seventh of this Month, by which I understand in what condition the Dukes
Process is. I was ravished to find by the last, that the Trial will be put off
to another time, against the general opinion. Without doubt this will extremely
rejoice the Pope and the Emperor, whereof the first imployeth all his power to
accommodate the differences between Spain and France; and I doubt not, but the
consideration of contributing by this means, to the advantage of the Duke and
of the Catholics, will further incite him to solicit this affair, upon the
relation which the Nuncio will make to the Pope of the importance of its
success, for the Catholics of England.

As for the Emperor, he is so zealous for the Dukes service, that I am assured
he will omit nothing on his side to facilitate whatever he shall find tend to
the good issue of this Affair, whereof I will write to him particularly.
Continue only to impart to me all the light that may serve to direct what is to
be treated on; I hope the next winter will give opportunity for more happy
Negotiations, even to the Mediation of the Pope, who hitherto has not been
able to act at all, as you have known from other parts. I am, without reserve,
etc.

Your most Humble, etc. ALBANY.

October 19. 1674.
Translated by Sir Humphry Winch.
SIR,
I Agree with you, that the only means to win the King to the Duke's Interest,
and to take him off entirely from the Friendship of the Parliament, would be
Money, for the Reasons you allege in your last Letter of the 2d instant, which
I have just now received; but the means necessary to continue it are so
excessive, that even according to your own opinion, and the discourse we had
when you was here, what the Pope could contribute would be nothing in
comparison of what is needed: and in the obligation he has also to assist
other Friends who are in greater straits. I likewise doubt whether the Pope
would resolve upon what you propound, considering the little stress can be laid
upon the Kings will, it being to be feared, that all employed that way would
soon be lost, without any advantage to the Duke or his Associates, which we
have reason to fear from his ordinary manner of proceeding. It would therefore
be necessary in my opinion to have at least some propable assurances that we
might employ for the advantage of the Catholics, and (...) what otherwise we
are obliged frugally to manage for them in other parts, before the Proposition
be made to the Pope, which is not to be undertaken in so general and obscure
Terms as you propound it. For what remains, the Nuntio is upon the point of
going to Rome, having already leave to return. The Negotiation of the business
you propound, will belong to his Successor; but he will retain the same
passion which he had for the Dukes Service, as well at the Emperors Court, as
at the Popes, if he shall have any part in the Affairs of England. He will not
fail to inform you more particularly of his departure. I pray assure the Duke
of what I have told you, and am, without reserve,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant ALBANY.

October 30. 1674.
Translated by Sir Gilbert Talbot.
SIR,
ACcording as I sent you word by my last, I am upon the point of parting from
hence, having already received the leave that I waited for. I am sorry to part
from a place, where I might have been instrumental to the Service of the Duke;
and have made it appear to him, what a particular zeal I have for all things
that relate to him. Howsoever, I will not fail to contribute thereunto all that
lies in my power, in the place whither I am going.

I leave here behind me a Friend of mine, who will have the care of my affairs;
to whom nevertheless I have communicated nothing of the Commerce which is
betwixt us: Neither will I acquaint therewith the Friend that is to come, till
at least I understand first from you, that you judge it convenient.

If you have any thing to send to me, in order to the Duke's Service, you may
make use of the same hand which you employed in their address hither to me, and
he may send them to Rome, under the cover of his Brothers.

I pray you, deliver the Enclosed to Monsieur Belair; and I am, without reserve,

SIR, Your most obedient Servant ALBANY.
POSTSCRIPT.
I Think it better, that you send the Letter for Monsieur Belair some other way.



Rome, 12 January, 1674/5
Translated by Sir J. Knight, part of this Letter not Decypherable.
SIR,
It Is certain, that the best Expedient to become Mother of the Kings will, and
to sever his kindness from the Parliament, is that of Money. And I doubt not
but the Duke may thereby make himself absolute over his thoughts, and to draw,
by his Process, and that of the Catholics, those advantages which you take
notice of in your last Letter.

But if the Pope had the means to do as much as would be necessary in this
matter, which is much beyond his power, for the Reasons I told you when I had
the happiness to see you, and of which I have advised you in many Letters;
never can he be drawn reasonably to do it, but upon more solid grounds, and
more probable assurances touching the good of Religion and of the Catholics,
then what you intimate in the discourses of your last Letter.

What you propose touching (...) you may there consider it in the Terms wherein
at present are (...) it would be for the Interest of the Duke to produce unto
light an affair of this nature. That which I can with truth assure you, and
whereof the Duke may be persuaded, is, that (...) since the Pope and the
Emperor have an affection, and most peculiar zeal for all that regards him.

As to my self, I lay about with the one and with the other in the same shrine
of zeal which I shall always retain for the Duke, and perhaps you shall shortly
see some proofs thereof.

It has been here said that the King for some time has wanted his health, let
me know what there is in it.

And as to our Commerce, you may continue until farther order, to send me your
Letters by the same way which hitherto you have done. I am, without reserve,

SIR, Yours, etc.
The Cipher which I left with 300, and which you may have from him, will serve
to open what here you find.



February 16, 1675.
Translated by Sir Gilb. Talbot.
YOur last Letter of the 7th of January, (which I received from a Gentleman,
sent from her R. Higness the Duchess of York to the Duchess of Modena) has
afforded me very great comfort, from the favorable prognostic which you make
of the Affairs of the D. of York, wherein you know how highly I concern myself:
without all doubt you have received the answer which I sent you some time
since, to the Letter delivered to me by the hand of your friend. And you have
understood by that the incongruities, which render the execution of that Affair
impossible, which you proposed to be Treated with the Pope and the Emperor,
concerning Money, and I doubt not but the Duke and you both, will come to be of
the same opinion with me, that it would prove an irrecoverable prejudice to his
Highness, if that business should be set on foot. I was not a little surprised
to hear, that my Lord Arlington was so deeply engaged in the concerns of the
Parliament, that he should have so little consideration of preserving his
friendship for the King.

I expect with impatience the news from your Country, to know what the
negotiation of your Ministers in Holland will produce; and what the effect of
Admiral Tromps Journey to London. I am, in the mean time,

SIR, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, ALBANY.

June 3, 1675.
Translated November 1. 78, by Sir Ed. Dering.
SIR,
YOu have without doubt already understood from the Public News-books, the
business of the Cardinal of Norfolk, which will serve you as a most evident
proof of the affection which the Pope does bear unto the concerns of England;
from whence you may draw a most assured consequence, of what you may hope when
the Affairs of the Duke shall need the assistance of Rome.

I am very glad to understand that his Affairs do not hitherto receive any
prejudice by the Proceedings of the Parliament, and I shall be overjoyed to
know the particular of his concerns, of which you gave me hope by your last,
which was of the 7th of April, since which I have received none from you, I
expect them with impatience, and so much the more, because our friend, for
ought I see, excuses himself from sending me any news of the Duke, upon this
reason, that you had given him hopes that you would inform me most particularly
of all that passes in this matter.

Oblige me therefore with the communication of your Letters, and believe that I
am really,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, ALBANY.

Rome, October 19. 1675.
Translated November 1, 78. by Sir Ed. Dering.
SIR,
YOurs of the 30 of August came not to my hands till the last week, by the
means of our common friend who lives in this City, which I am obliged to tell
you, that you may not think I have forgot my duty in delaying my Answer so long.

I am over-joyed to understand by the news you write me, the good condition in
which the Affairs of the Duke and the Catholics are at present, and for what
concerns the matter of which I have been more particularly informed by your
friend, I will not fail speedily to acquaint the Emperor, and it is he who is
all powerful with the Pope, with the reasons why it is for the benefit of the
Catholics, to defer the execution of that censure, which might cause some
divisions among them, and give occasion of advantage to the Parliament thereby.
My advice has been received very favorably, so that I am not only assured
that they will delay for some long time the design of that business, but I hope
also that the matter may possibly end so, as the person whom you recommend,
does desire.

The consideration of the connection which all this may have with the interests
of the Duke, has been the most prevailing motive to the persons with whom I
have been obliged to treat in this affair, to persuade them to what you did
desire, and you may know by that, the passion that there is in this place, to
contribute to all things which they believe are for his service. I beseech you
to assure him of the zeal with which I will always employ my self therein. I
am, without reserve,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, ALBANY.

From Brussels, September 7, 1674.
Translated by Sir Humphry Winch.
SIR,
YOurs of the 21 of the last Month, which just now I received, has given me
much trouble, by the dangerous condition whereunto the Dukes Process is
reduced. I wish I were able to contribute to his service by the means of my
Friends, and particularly of the Emperor and the Pope. But hitherto I see not
wherein they can advantage him. The Pope endeavors, what, you observe, which
would be the properest remedy for his Affair, but the Parties will not yet
declare themselves upon that business. If you will explain your self, what may
be done on this side, in the present occurrences of Affairs, I doubt not but
all that is possible will be done. I beg the communication of your news, and
am, without reserve,

SIR, Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant, ALBANY.

The following Letters were written from France to Mr. Coleman by Mr. St.
Germain, in French, and Translated, some by Order of the Privy Council, and
some by several Members of the House of Commons.
A Letter from St. Germain to Coleman.
Paris 11/21 December, 1675.
I Will tell you besides, Extract.
That the King of France does not seem yet resolved to recall Monsieur De
Ruvigny from the Trade where he has engaged him; Lect. pro Rege.
he perceives he does more harm than good; but other Considerations delay the
Business. One of your Friends says, He will see if he can make things appear;
but Coleman must well explain to me his End, and the Means he will make Use of.
This Friend says besides, That he has given the King's Confessor to understand,
That the King of France ought not to do any thing with the King of England, but
by the Duke of York; and he has Promised and Engaged upon his Life to the
King's Confessor to make all succeed, in case that way be made use of. Has he
done well, and do you know this Friend? He will call himself henceforward 41,
for I see none of this Name in your Ciphers.

Translated out of French according to the Cipher, received from the Lords of
the Committee appointed to Examine Coleman's Papers.

A Letter from St. Germain to Coleman.
Paris 15/25 December, 1675.
I Cannot forbear to Write to you once more this Week; having Two things to say
to you; The one is, That I have seen Mr. Sheldon, who intends to go to Trade
secretly in your Parts. He will depart in 8, or 10 Days, but take no notice of
it, lest it be known from whence you had it. He would have had me carried him
to see the King's Confessor, whose Favor he endeavors to get by all means and
helps. He will not pass for a Merchant, and therefore he wears a Sword by his
side, and lives with the Archbishop of Dublin: Both of them, I am told,
Prosecute the Affair concerning which he has written to you, and that you
Communicate it to me. The other thing is, That the King's Confessor tells us,
That the King of France thinks in earnest to recall Monsieur de Ruvigny from
your Traffic; but he that is to be sent in his Place, does not please Mr.
Sheldon, because, as he says, he is not of the most considerable Merchants of
this place, though he have a great deal of Wit; and I am of his Mind, as well
for this Reason as for others that are known to me, and which I cannot yet
impart to you. Wherefore if Mr. Coleman would know of the Duke of York, if
there be any Merchant here that would be acceptable to him, he may acquaint
Monsieur de Ruvigny with it, and he will take care that by the means of the
King's Confessor, it may be proposed effectually to the King of France.

This would be very well for the Traffic of the Catholics.

I expect to hear from you. I saw yesterday my Lady Throckmorton, that is come
to Paris to lie in, and who is shortly going back to Pontoyse, she has a Sore
Leg contracted in Childbed.

My humble Service to Madam Coleman; Pray take no notice of me to others, for I
do not believe it fit for any one to know that I write to you so often: Believe
me Sir, that I am altogether

Your Servant De Pontheia.

Translated out of French according to the Cipher, delivered by the Lords of
the Committee appointed to Examine Coleman's Papers.

A Letter from St. Germain to Coleman.
19/29 January, 1675/6.
THe Brother of my Lady de Ruvigny, Extract.
who is an Abbot, has made a Visit to St. Germain, in order to engage him to
speak in favor of the Prorogation to the King's Confessor; Lect. pro Rege.
but St. Germain would do nothing without knowing from Coleman what his Opinion
is thereupon. St. Germain has made the King's Confessor understand what the
Duke of York could do by the Disgrace of Two Persons, of whom Coleman has
written to St. Germain; and that the vigorous Councils that were all absolutely
necessary to produce Success in the Traffic of the Catholics did proceed from
the Duke of York, by the Inspiration of Coleman, who was most perfectly
addicted to the good of the Traffic of the King of England, the Duke of York,
and the Catholics. This St. Germain is very well intentioned, but he must be
taught what he is to do.

Translated according to the Key delivered by the Right Honorable the Lords of
the Committee appointed to Examine Coleman's Papers.

For Monsieur Coleman the Duchess Secretary in Deans-Yard, London.
January 19/29, 1675/1676.
I Know not whether you do receive my Letters, but I well know that I receive
yours punctually enough, as I think. I have had your two last of the 6th and
10th, your Style, but they have given me some disquiet; you Promise to tell me
many things, and afterward you fall very short therein, sometimes Twelfth-Day
is the Cause, and after it is because you had not my Letter of the 5th. To put
both you and my self out of pain; I will tell you that I have writ to you the
5th, the 8th, the 12th, and the 15th of this Month, your Style; and that I
write to you to Day again, which is your 19th; you see one cannot be more
exact. In all these Letters, I have writ to you of things that deserved
answering, Especially concerning the Conduct which Monsieur St. Germain ought
to use toward the Confessor of the King of France, and the new Ambassador; for
he will not nor cannot do any thing till Coleman has let him know his
Thoughts. The Letters of the 8th, speak of a Matter concerning which they will
have me give an account; there was Five Letters in that Packet, one whereof
was for the Duke of York. Put me out of pain in this matter. The Secretary of
Monsieur Ruvigny went on Saturday from France for England; the Secretary of the
Ambassador from England in France, went also about the same time with him; you
ought to know more of this Business than I. The Brother of the Wife of Monsieur
Ruvigny, who is an Abbot, is come to see Monsieur St. Germain, concerning the
same Business about which Mr. Coleman wrote to Monsieur St. Germain, to the end
that he might engage him to speak in Commendation of the Prorogation, to the
Confessor of the King of France; but Monsieur St. Germain would do nothing till
Mr. Coleman had let him know his thoughts thereupon. Monsieur St. Germain has
observed to the Confessor of the King of France, how great the Power of the
Duke of York is by the Disgrace of the Two Persons, concerning which, Mr.
Coleman had writ to Monsieur St. Germain; and that the vigorous Counsels, which
were all absolutely necessary whereby to succeed in the Traffic of the
Catholics, came from the Duke of York, by the Inspiration of Mr. Coleman, who
also alone was the most truly Linked to the welfare of the Commerce of the King
of England, the Duke of York, and the Catholics. This Monsieur St. Germain is
very well intentioned; but it is necessary he be instructed what he must do. He
has not dared to speak of any Matter to the Successor of Monsieur Ruvigny, and
yet it is meet that he do instruct him; for the Secretary of Monsieur Ruvigny,
has been to see him, and it is to be feared lest he has given him evil
Counsels, with which the new Ambassador being prepossest, perhaps he will act
in such a manner as may not please Mr. Coleman, nor the Affairs of the Duke of
York, and the Catholics. I write to you by a new way, to see if it be more
sure; give me also a new Address, and such a one concerning which, there may be
no occasion of Fear.

Translated by Sir George Downing.
29 Jan. 75. 8 Feb. 76.
THis is the Fifth Letter that I have written to you, and of which I have had
no Answer. I see by your last Letter of the 17/27 of Jan. that you have
received Two of mine; That of the 5/25, and of the 8/18 of Jan. but you make no
mention of those which I sent you besides (viz.) of the 15/25 and 19/29 of Jan.
and of the 22 Jan./1 Feb. and of the 26 Jan./5 Feb I give you these Dates, to
the end you may see whether you have received as many as I have sent to you. I
am glad that (93) the Duchess, thinks upon (49) St. Germain. And (62) Coleman,
cannot do him a greater pleasure than to employ him as he does in serving (93)
the Duchess. This cannot but produce a very good effect with (163) the King of
France. He will see thereby that People esteem him in the Country of (110)
England. And that (39 and 93) the Duke and Duchess, being so far satisfied
with him, as to give him Commissions, he will become more engaged to give ear
to the Letter of Recommendation of (39) the Duke, which (35) Montecuculi has
promised to send (49) St. Germain, though he has not yet done it. And (62)
Coleman will do a kindness to enquire of (34 and 35) the Earl of Peterborough
and Montecuculi, what hinders that he has not yet received it. Besides, that
(49) St. Germain is, and always will be most ready to deliver Messages in
favor of (39, 93, 300, and 62.) the Duke, the Duchess, the Catholics, and
Coleman, to (488 and 163) the Confessor and the King of France; believing
himself most strongly engaged thereto by the Testimonies of Goodness, which he
has received from them in time past. And though he is without (80) Money, he
will not cease to act as he ought, with Zeal and Fidelity, provided he be not
sent elsewhere, but left where he is; which yet may happen after Easter, he
having no employment to detain him where he is, unless (62) Coleman write to
(488) the King's Confessor, either from, or as from (39 and 93) the Duke and
Duchess, to signify to him that those two Persons desire to make use of him,
as a Correspondent in their Traffic between them (62, and 488, and 163)
Coleman, and the Confessor, and the King of France. In which case (49) St.
Germain would take his time to act in favor of (62) Coleman with (488, and
163) the Confessor and the King of France, and to bring to pass that (62)
Coleman shall obtain (26) a Pension of 100000 l. Sterling for himself. If (49)
St. Germain receive the Letters which he expects from (35) Montecuculi, and
they have their effect, he will have wherewith to pay the Charge of his
remaining where he is, and of all the Affairs of Commerce, whereof Commissions
shall be given him. (49) St. Germain will have no need of (80) Money, till
after Easter. But at that time, if the Letters of (39) the Duke to (163) the
King of France has no success, it will be impossible for him to enter into the
Commerce, unless (62) Coleman obtain from (93 or 39) the Duchess or Duke, one
quarter more, like that which he received being in the Country of (110)
England; that is to say, between Thirty and Forty Pounds sterling. And if this
be once done for all, it will give him the Means to subsist with Ease for above
a Year; during which time, he hopes to put himself into a Condition of serving
all the World, without importuning any body for ever. (49) St. Germain desires
you to tell all this to (62) Coleman, that he may take his Measures
accordingly, and send his Opinion thereof to (49) St. Germain. As for the
Affairs of the Carmelites of Antwerp, (49) St. Germain will undertake it with
warmth, as soon as ever he receives the Letters concerning it, which he expects
by the next Post. According to what (62) Coleman writes to him, by his Letter
of the 17/27 of Jan. 75/6, which is to be at Eight a Clock this Evening: I
desire you, Sir, to Deliver Mr. Rogers the Letter of Thanks which I write to
him for his good News; I will send him in exchange a Writing against the Enemy
of (49) St. Germain, and Mr. Beddingfield shall have it on Wednesday next at
farthest, when he departs from hence. I am glad that that Enemy is decry'd
there where you are, as well as he is here. But has (62) Coleman nothing to say
to the new (41) Ambassador -- by the intervention of (49) St. Germain? He
desires it, to the end to have occasion of speaking to the new (41) Ambassador
-- concerning (62) Coleman; and by that Means to be the better believed by the
new (41) Ambassador, when be shall speak good to him of his best Friend (62)
Coleman. I leave Mr. Warner to send you the News, which are all concerning War.
The Spaniards refuse the Passports, because the King terms the Prince of
Lorrain Cousin and not Brother, in those which he has given to the
Plenipotentiaries of the other Princes. It Is said that the Jansenists fall
short of their Expectations at Court; and that the King shows himself averse to
them in all the steps which they make to ingratiate with him. Mr. Arnauld has
not been able to make his Peace, though he has offered to Subscribe the
Doctrine of Mr. Amelot, Priest of the Oratory, touching sufficient Grace,
according to the sense of this Author. And the Archbishop of Paris has
suspended a Predicator, for not having spoken of the Popes and Councils as he
ought. If I were in the Street of St. Antoine, as I am in that of St. Jaques, I
should know more News. Adieu, I pray believe that you have not a more faithful
Servant, nor a more true Friend than me in all the World.

Translated by Sir Henry Capell.
To Mr. Coleman, Secretary of the Commands of her Royal Highness, Madam the
Duchess of York, in Deans-yard, Westminster.
The 1/11 of March 75/76.
I Have received your Letter of the 25 Feb./2 Mar. I did not write to you on
Saturday, Sir, and I shall send you very little by this Ordnary; because that
the Letters from England being not Arrived before Tuesday, and not upon Monday;
I know not yet if there be any from you to me. In those they send me, I expect
the Dutchesses Letter, to desire Monsieur St. Germain to Treat with the King of
France. Just now I have received a Letter brought me from England; but there is
none from you. I thank you for your Good will for the Lady. Send me News of Mr.
Sheldon, (an English Priest) what he does in England, will he stay there
always? Monsieur St. Germain thanks Mr. Coleman for the Marks of Friendship he
gives him. And he has already thanked him, as he says, by his Precedent Letter;
Monsieur St. Germain will send to know of him why Mr. Coleman would not have
him speak of what he sends him concerning One hundred Thousand Pound Sterling,
promised to the King of England, by the Means of the Duke of York. For it is to
the purpose, as he believes, That the King's Confessor should know it; to the
End he may serve him in the Business, near the King of France; Monsieur St.
Germain is of the Opinion with Mr. Coleman, as concerning the Great Treasurer.
And it is absolutely Necessary that it be known in the King of France's Shop;
otherwise it will hurt his Commerce. It suffices me to know that the Duchess
has received the Letter of Monsieur St. Germain. It was nothing but a pure
Civility, touching the condition she is in; and an Affair was recommended to
her, which is done since. I saw your Friend Yesterday, he showed me News of
you; He will come hither to Day to be present at a Comedy which will be
represented here. Monsieur de Vantelett is with me, and prays me to do you his
Civilities. Pray do mine to Madam your Wife, and to Monsieur Tartereau, when
you shall see him. We have no News. They prepare strongly for the War, and they
work strongly to Accommodate the Affair of Monsieur the Prince of Conde, to the
End he may go into Flanders, and make Head against the Germains; who will come
with a very great Strength. I make you no Complements, Sir, neither in the
beginning or finishing my Letters.

Translated by Mr. Anchitell Gray.
To Mr. Coleman, Secretary to her Royal Highness the Duchess of York, in
Deans-yard, Westminster.
March 8/18. 75/76.
THe slow arrival of your Letters, has very much disquieted me, I thought my
self Dead in your Remembrance; But that which you writ to me, of the 2/12 of
March, has again restored me to Life (at least for some time); for the dullness
wherewith the Business that you wot of, is carried on, will (I fear) let me die
no other Death; and that, for Reasons which you will hear of too soon. Those of
the Catholic Religion, have desired me to write to you, to let Coleman know
the Condition of their Affairs; which is, that being for the present out of
Purse, it is altogether impossible for them to keep up their Trade long,
without his help. Beside, That the Party apprehends that his Trade failing in
the Shop where he now is, he shall after Easter, be sent to set up in some
other Town. But if he could have obtained from the D. of York, the Papers for
which he has so long waited, he might probably e're this time, have concluded
his Business with the French King, by the Means of the King's Confessor; and he
might have put himself in a condition to have continued his Trade, to the
Advantage of those in whose favor those Papers were written; for having no
Employment in his Shop, for want of Money, it is impossible that he should keep
it long; since he wants Opportunity to make himself appear useful to the
Service of the Duke and Duchess; having no order to act in any thing
whatsoever.

I am overjoyed with what Coleman has said to the Duchess, and with what the
Duke has done for the grand Treasurer.

St. Germain has made himself Enemies, by maintaining the Opinion, That the
Duchess ought to be prevailed with, to manage her Affairs otherwise than she
has hitherto done. I would gladly understand what Answer the Duchess has
made to Coleman. St. Germain builds great hopes upon what Coleman writes to
him, about the Discourse which the Duke held with the grand Treasurer. But
Coleman may consider, That if the Duke shall Treat any thing with the French
King, through other hands than the Confessors, he shall meet with People that
will cousen him, and who will prefer the good of France, before that of the
Catholic Religion, and of the Duke; and principally of Coleman, who has many
Rivals about his R. Highness; and who is neither sufficiently known to, nor
has any Interest with the French King: If Monsieur St. Germain were a little
acquainted with Matters, he would Discourse them freely with the Confessor; and
learning from him the bottom of the Matter, he would (without Dissimulation)
Communicate all to Coleman; whereas now it is to be feared, that the other
Negotiators Cheat the English, for the Advantage of France, or for their own
particular Interest; for the chief Minister in the Councils of War, who has at
present an Absolute Power over his Christian Majesty, is altogether for War;
which is neither the Business of England, nor of the Roman Catholics. Be sure,
that you make Coleman fully sensible of all this; for it is one of their most
indisputable Articles of Faith.

St. Germain has desired me to tell you, That it is a hard matter to make
Coleman understand what he desires concerning the Lady's Business; who, if you
so please, will henceforth go under the Name of Madam de la Tremblay: Because
he plainly perceives, that those Persons who know altogether as much of that
Affair as he, stand upon their reserve; and will not disclose themselves in
what they know, nay of what they have acted with him. Nevertheless, I will tell
you (in hope that it shall go no farther than our selves) (no, not so much as
to take notice of it to Madam de la Tremblay) that Montecuculi, and the D. of
York are the Two first who ever thought of putting it into the Dutchesse's
head, to think closer of the Traffic than she had done; and that therefore
finding no body in her own Shop who was able to make her sensible of the
Importance of that Affair, and the means to succeed in it; and that she had
those Counselors about her, which made her do things that were likely to ruin
her whole Commerce; they concluded, that it was necessary to place some able
and trusty Person about her. They refused to make choice of any of the
Dutchess's own Country, by reason of the Experience which they had of him who
was there already; and because they understand not the way of the English
Trade, nor indeed of the English Men; as not having the Acquaintance of any, in
whom they might confide. The Person nominated was esteemed very proper, as well
for his own Merit, as because that Choice would oblige Monsieur Rouvigni, the
Catholic Party, and consequently the French King, to Declare for the Duke and
Duchess.

And that this Person being of the Catholic Party, and Rouvigni of the
Protestant, both sides would be well pleased. To bring this Matter about, St.
Germain, by the advice of Montecuculi, discoursed the Matter with Madam de la
Tremblay, who has as you know, all Power over the Person upon whom they had
cast their Eyes, to be plaeed in the Dutchess's Shop. Madam de la Tremblay
offered her Assistance in all that they desired. The Matter was then to be
approved by the Duke and Duchess. Montecuculi communicated it by Letter, to
the Banker, his Master (whose Correspondent in England, the Duchess is) who
embraced the Proposals, and promised to write thereof to the Duchess, as he
soon after did; but touched the Matter tenderly, being content at first to
recommend to her the Care of his Business; and to have a more watchful Eye over
it than formerly; and to take along with her the Advice of Montecuculi, who was
acquainted with all his Thoughts, and rightly set to contribute his best
Assistance toward the Success of his Affair. The Duchess thereupon enquired of
Montecuculi what was expected for her to do? Montecuculi gave her her Lesson in
Writing, to study it at her leisure, and without expressing the Matter plainly,
insinuated to her, that she wanted a good Apprentice to take care of her Shop,
and keep an exact Account of all that passed through his hands. That her eldest
Apprentice had not Wit enough, That the Second was ignorant of the Affairs of
England; and did not understand a word that was said to him. That he set
himself to no Business; nay, that he was of a malicious Spirit, making ill
Impressions in the Duchess of all the Boys in the Shop, to preserve himself
single in her favor. That the Third was Dull, Careless, Scornful, and an Enemy
to all Activity. All this was said to the Duchess by Montecuculi; not indeed
so downright as I have expressed it, yet so as the Duchess might understand it
if she pleased; and I believe she did so; but instead of receiving it as she
ought, she seemed to be out of humor; and has not (as I know) since that
time, written any Answer to Montecuculi; but has avoided all manner of
Correspondence with him. Wherefore Montecuculi and St. Germain thought fit to
proceed another way, and make the Duke acquainted with what the Duchess would
not seem to understand.

Montecuculi discoursed the Matter with the E. of Peterborough, without
acquainting him that they had any design to place the Friend of Madam Tremblay
in the Shop; but barely to engage him to acquaint the Duke, with the ill
conduct of the Duchess; and to lay before him the Necessity of applying some
proper and powerful Remedy. But afterward Montecuculi and St. Germain sought
other Persons less interessed, and better inclined than the E. of Peterborough,
for this Business. And if Coleman please, he may call to mind the discourse
which St. Germain had with him upon this Subject, representing to him the
Necessity there then was of placing a Head Apprentice or Foreman in the
Dutchess's Shop. Nevertheless he did not then speak all out, because the Friend
of Madam de la Tremblay, being not then in England, they expected his return,
to know of him if he would be content that Coleman should be admitted to the
knowledge of the Matter.

And accordingly St. Germain writ to Madam la Tremblay's Friend, who was then
in France, to press his speedy coming over, that we mght act jointly, and
without loss of time,

St. Germain had likewise Treated for Two other Persons; one of them he
labored to put into the good esteem of the Duchess, and succeeded therein;
and by the assistance of the First, introduced the Second. They are both well
with the Duke. But herein St. Germain gave himself work enough; for these Two
last Persons are such, that St. Germain neither can, nor will Treat with, by
any but himself; and he has such private Reasons for it, that he dares not
express them; and so forcible, that if he should utter them, all the World must
be of his Opinion, and do as he does. He undertook likewise to taste (but
obscurely) the mind of the Duke's Confessor, in censuring the weak conduct of
the Dutchess's Ghostly Father, by laying open the miscarriages of the Duchess,
which required a speedy and vigorous Remedy.

These are all the Proceedings, as likewise the Contrivances of St. Germain to
gain his two unknown Friends, which could not yet be carried so close, but that
some Observations have been made of them; but none could ever discover the true
Cause of the groundless Jealousies which have been raised upon St. Germain; and
which has been the chiefest Reason that he has been abandoned in his
Misfortunes, and that no body concerns himself to rescue him out of them.
Thus you have the whole Mystery of the Business, which has been so vigorously
agitated with Coleman, the E. of Peterborough, the two unknown Persons, and the
Duke's Confessor, upon the arrival of the Friend of Madam de la Tremblay in
England with intent (had not the accident befallen St. Germain) to persuade the
Duke to consent to the doing of the work; and after his consent obtained, A
fair la Coup.
to have proposed it to the Duchess, by her grand Banker Montecuculi: I should
utterly despair if any, beside your self, were made acquainted with this whole
Matter. I hope St. Germain will Pardon me the laying open of his whole Secret
to you: But I doubt whether he would be pleased that Montecuculi should know
that he had discovered it to you. Well then, Let Montecuculi come, and try if
he would or could re-enter into the same Negotiation with Coleman, the E. of
Peterborough, and the Confessor of the Duke; who certainly is highly displeased
with the Dutchess's Confessor, and with others, whom you will judge proper for
this Design. As for my self, who have no other part in it, but to advertise you
thereof, you may judge how unprofitable I am. But if the Duke would be
persuaded to write hither, That he wishes, or at least that he judges it fit,
that St. Germain should appear in England. I know that the Two concealed
Gentlemen would contribute toward it the utmost of their Power; and that then
the Duke will be more Powerful than ever amongst them, to make them act
vigorously. But this is a Fancy of my Brain, to which St. Germain will not be
brought, as judging it impossible; principally in regard of the Enemies which
the Enterprise of this Affair has raised him.

Translated by Sir G. Talbot.
St. Germain to Coleman.
18/28 March 75/76.
I Have received yours, of the 9/19 March, and omitted to write to you for two
Posts; by reason I received no Letters from you, I have given you an exact
account of the Affair of our Friend Madam de la Tremblay, in my last Letters;
to which I expect your Answer. St. Germain went Yesterday to Visit the
Confessor, and to deliver him the Dutchess's Letter for the King of France; and
this day he is to carry him a Memorial, to the End he may speak Effectually to
the King; and to the Satisfaction of the Duchess. The Confessor has received
Mr. Coleman's Letter, and St. Germain has already acquainted Mr. Coleman with
it; but his Great Affairs has made him forget it; If the Confessor has not
answered it, it is because he expected the Dutchess's Letter, to answer both at
once, after he shall have seen the Issue of the Business. It Is said, That the
King of France has been very Melancholy for some days (being a Lover of his
Country) the Affair of Messina causes his Discontent; Others say, That he had
formed some design (this year) for Trade, which has been frustrated; Others,
That it is only by reason of this time of Devotion; He would sometimes walk all
alone, contrary to his Custom. It Is said the Emperor Arms very powerfully. The
Electress of Bavaria is dead, and the Empress very sick; Madam de Brinvilliers
the great Poisoner, is taken Prisoner at Liege; They are demolishing Hug,
Dinant, and the Citadel of Liege: It Is said for certain the King will part
from Paris, Wednesday after Easter, which will be the 8th of April, our Style.

I have received yours of the 16/26 March, I could not send you this last
Saturday; I send it on our Holy Wednesday, being the 22 March/1 April. St.
Germain desires me to tell you, that you will do him a great favor to thank
Mr. Coleman, for all good Offices in his behalf; for which he can never
sufficiently return Thanks; he is of Opinion, That the Confessors with you, had
great reason to formalize on his Proceedings; which he would Condemn himself,
if he had not the Reasons, which he told Mr. Coleman, and which are such in the
present state of Affairs, that if those two Confessors were in his Place, they
would do the same. Mr. Coleman will also do him a Kindness, to make his
Complements to Mr. Mountecuculi, whom he knows to be in all things his true
Friend. For his Voyage into England, he leaves it in the Hands of Providence;
but he does not believe that we ought to begin, by engaging the Confessor to
solicit this Affair, unless the Duke does desire it, or think it fit; The
Duke's Lord Treasurer is very well disposed to the good Success of this
Business, as they tell St. Germain; and he has reason to believe it True.

It is Necessary (I say) absolutely Necessary, that Mr. Coleman make himself
better Known in France, and to the King of France and his Confessor, by
Negotiations concerning his Traffic; Therefore St. Germain wishes, That the
Duke had some Occasion to send him into France, to Treat of some Point of
Commerce; because appearing and acting, they would Interest him more deeply in
the Trade. St. Germain has given a Memorial to the Confessor, concerning the
Affair of Antwerp; and the Confessor has put it (in the presence of St.
Germain) in the Packet with the Dutchess's Letter to the King of France; and
the Confessor has promised St. Germain to speak very earnestly of this Affair;
He went to Court on Sunday last, where he will stay 8 days; because in that
time they are accustomed to take a review together of the whole years account.
Above all, St. Germain has recommended to the Confessor to act so, that the
King of France might write back to the Duchess, who was angry the last year,
that she received no Answer to a Letter she writ to him. If Mr. Coleman did
take a turn into France, I do not doubt but he might obtain something
Conformable to the Promises of Mr. Ruvigny; but then he must be empowered in
this Voyage, by the Duke's Commissions. Send me some News of the Duchess of
Mazarin, whom I will hereafter call 98; and of the Duchess of Portsmouth, whom
I will call 89; for several things are discoursed here, both of the one, and
the other. The Duchess of Cleveland arrived at Paris, Monday Evening 20/30
March.

Translated by R. Whitley.
To Mr. Coleman, Secretary to her Royal Highness the Duchess of York in
Deans-yard in Westminster.
Paris 5/15 April 76.
I Do almost like you, I write not to you when you write not to me; and send
you only small Letters, when you send not me great ones; and besides, our News
is yet very little. The King goes from hence to Morrow, but it is not yet known
whither; some say, to Besiege Cambray; others say, toward Sedan, to be betwixt
Germany and Flanders; there are some who will have the King to go to
Philipsburg, to oblige the Enemy to a Battle, at which he has a great desire
once to be.

For other things, St. Germain desires you will tell Mr. Coleman, that the
King's Confessor has positively assured him, That the French King will write
to the Duchess concerning the Business that is on foot; the Confessor told it
to St. Germain in such a manner, as he believes it will be to the Satisfaction
of the Duchess. The Confessor also added upon what St. Germain represented to
him, That the French King leaving his home to make a round toward his Enemies,
could not so conveniently send the Letter of Exchange to Antwerp, as was
desired, if he did dot do it before his departure; That the French King thought
upon these Businesses as well Abroad as at Home: It is Necessary that Coleman
inform St. Germain of what shall happen, and if the Duchess have received an
Answer, and what it is. Madam Tremblay writ a Letter of March 26 New Style to
St. Germain, in which was expressed that Coleman had not seen her in Ten days,
to tell her what he had done. Madam Tremblay has writ to Madam Ruvigny's
Brother, to oblige him to speak to the King's Confessor in favor of St.
Germain, to procure him a Journey into England, if the Confessor had asked St.
Germains advice upon it, he would have counseled him not to take that way which
can never do well.

The new Ambassador's Secretary is very earnest with St. Germain to befriend
him with the Confessor, and seems very zealous for the Duke of York, but St.
Germain would know if this Secretary be as well with the Duke of York, as he
would make us believe, and if the Duke has all along trusted him with the
secret of his Affair. St. Germain entertains him with fair Promises, by that
means to understand things which may be useful to his Friends, and chiefly to
Coleman. This Secretary is much astonished at the rumor that is here of the
Duke of York, having received no News of it; and St. Germain is a little angry
at Coleman, that he has writ nothing to him of it.

Translated by Sir E. Jennings.
For Mr. Coleman Secretary of her Royal Highness in Deans-yard, Westminster.
July 15/25. (No year Named.)
I Did not believe Sir, that I should have written to you this day, because Mr.
Gray will himself write to you, to whom I told all my News; so that you are to
expect none from me now. You may assure Mr. Coleman, that Monsieur St. Germain
will deliver that Letter to Madam la Tremblay, which he addressed to her; but
at the same time that he promised it, he said that he had not lately heard any
thing of her, nor could he certainly tell whether she were yet arrived, but he
would make a diligent Inquiry, and pay his Devoire in all things to Mr.
Coleman, and would perform even more than was desired when ever he could.
Monsieur St. Germain is in good earnest highly Obliged to Mr. Coleman for all
those Industrious pains he takes upon his Account, and in a particular manner
for those Papers we wanted, that he wants Language to express his Gratitude.
Monsieur St. Germain has received a Letter from the King's Confessor, and from
the Ambassador, wherein he is to make his Address to that Confessor, that the
Successor of St. Germain be not sent, nor indeed any other of the French
Nation; as Mr. Coleman seems to be engaged in this Paper, St. Germain entreated
me to write every thing which related to Coleman, who was thereupon to take his
Measures; for I see very well, that Monsieur Rouvigny is strangely bent against
the Jesuits, and the Duke and Coleman, and I much apprehend his giving the same
Sentiments to the King of France, and to his Confessor, and the Minister of
State: And therefore Mr. Coleman must manage carefully this Affair, without the
least taking notice that he knows any thing from Monsieur St. Germain; you must
take especial care not to prejudice our Friend, that he may be the better able
to Traffic with the King's Confessor, and Mr. Sheldon. As to the rest, you
must know that the Duke has consented that St. Germain's Successor should not
go into England, Provided that the King's Confessor will name another; I could
wish that the Duchess would have Ordered a little Note to be writ to the
King's Confessor about this Matter, and that by an agreeing to his desires,
that the Successor might remain with him still, and not go into England, the
Duchess might then the better put him in mind of the Merchants of Supposed to
be the Jesuits.
Antwerp; for the King's Confessor does apprehend the mentioning any such thing
to the King of France, because the King having given his direction already to a
Minister of State, who is at present in the Army against Holland, it belongs
only to that Minister to put this Affair in Execution; for it is the way here,
that no Minister dare to act in any Matter that is not committed to his
Province; for the King will have it so. And therefore if the Confessor be not
pressed with some new Motive, I shall hardly be able to make him act. Our old
Ambassador Monsieur Rouvigny is arrived in Town, where St. Germain now is, he
came on Saturday last, and St. Germain has let me know, that he will see him
either to Day or to Morrow; which he could not do before, by reason of his
Calling, which has taken him up without intermission till Yesterday. There is
no News yet, but is expected every Moment; The Town of Air is hard pressed,
and is believed will be soon taken. Monsieur Luxembourgh is taking Orders that
a Provision of Oats be sent to him before he goes to attack the Enemy.

Translated out of French into English by the Lord Ancram.
Postscript.
YOu will discern with Monsieur De Vertharnout, whether it be requisite that he
comes, because upon Friday last, the King of England has done somewhat to the
Portugal Ambassador (of which he told me the whole Story) and I likewise have
learnt it from Monsieur Rouvigny, who entertained me near an hour, under great
Confidence that they had absolutely taken from that Ambassador the total Use of
his Chapel; but besides that Monsieur Rouvigny said, That he finds that the
Storm will unavoidably fall upon France, and the Catholics who are very Angry
that Endeavors are made to bring a Successor to Monsieur St. Germain, of the
French Nation. And he further says, That it is absolutely to Ruin the
Catholic Religion, and to irritate the Enemies of France, Neither does he
doubt, but that it will also prove fatal to the Duke, for which he absolutely
blames the Jesuits and Mr. Coleman, Who are now more than ever in the greatest
Band of Aversion to the Protestants, and likewise to one part of the Catholics
and Ministers of State; for they are persuaded, says he, that those who are of
the Condition of the King of France's Confessor and of the Dukes, do Act most
impudently, in that they are entangled betwixt the King and the Catholics,
because they would introduce an Authority without Limits, and pushes Mr.
Coleman to make such strange Steps, which must precipitate them into
Destruction; and above all, they will attribute this to France: So that
Monsieur De Rouvigny is mightily ill satisfied with this Proceeding, for it is
most certain that the Persecution will be very Terrible against the Duke and
the Catholics, and all the Jesuits; and above all against France.



Translated by the Lord Ancram.
The following Letters were Written by Father Sheldon, (as he is commonly
called) Directed all ( at least except One) to Mr. Coleman.
May 22th. 1675.
YOu will please Sir with these to receive my Thanks for Two of yours, both
which came to my hands since the departure of the last Ordinary. The
Proceedings of the Parliament are sufficiently suspected by the King of France;
And it were to be wished, that Holland, and the Confederates had not so much
cause to flatter themselves that the Parliament may at last be able to effect
any thing of that kind, which is pretended. I suppose Monsieur Rouvigny is not
wanting on this Occasion to secure the Interest of the King of France. I expect
with impatience the Issue of the Ten days, which are to produce something that
you intend me for a Regallo. I hope It will prove a Dissolution, for a
Prorogation would be of no Use. Lord Treasurer, I fear, is not a Friend to the
Catholics; and yet I am told, That he has lately found the Endeavors of the
Duke to have been of great use to him. I shall not long trouble you with those
Affairs; her R. H. I hope will allow me to Address to her by your mediation,
and then I am sure the tender of my most humble Duty will be presented to her
with Advantage.

June the 1st.
I Cannot omit to give you this Trouble, to let you know, that you have fully
satisfied me, as concerning the Ten days, and I hope your next will add the
certainty of it, what the Issue may be of Dissolution, you may possibly
conjecture; but I fear a Prorogation would leave all things in the same posture
in reference to Religion, and then it must needs go ill with the Catholics,
but I hope the Duke will not be wanting to improve this occasion, and Duke of
Lauderdale will sure be of the same Opinion. I will not answer for Lord
Treasurer. I sent you one lately for the Duchess, I cannot tell whether it has
come to your hands. I shall not fail to serve your Friends at Antwerp, and
possibly I may go shortly into those Parts, and by the way find an opportunity
to get an Answer to their Request. I should be heartily glad of any occasion to
serve you, and to acknowledge your Kindness toward me, which I esteem in a
particular manner; being bound upon that account to be always your most
Obedient Servant.

There was not any Key found, whereby the first and great part of the following
Letter could be decypher'd; but toward the end is written some ordinary Matter
without Cipher. It does not certainly appear whether this were written to Mr.
Coleman, or some other Person.
Paris, June the 8th.
THe late Promotion of Cardinals does not please every where. The Duke D'Estre
Ambassador at Rome, being admitted to a private Audience, his Holiness having
answered him to the point concerning the Dispute betwixt the Ambassadors and
the Cardinal Patron, was going to ring his Bell; but the Ambassador hindered
him, and began to speak of the Promotion of Cardinals, challenging the Pope to
have promised him that the Bishop of Marseilles should be promoted; to which
his Holiness replied, That he had never engaged his Promise to do it, and that
the Importunity of the Ambassadors did not at all advance those Pretensions,
and thereupon rung his Bell; and when the Attendants came in, the Ambassador
said he had not finished his Audience, and staid in the Chamber until the
Company was about to retire, and then advanced toward the Pope's Chair, and
began to press for further Satisfaction in that concern of the Ambassadors;
upon which, the Pope rising up, the Ambassador with both hands pressed him down
to his Chair, and the Pope thereupon told him, he was Excommunicated; This
passage is thus recounted by the chief Officer of the Nuntio here, who is now
made Cardinal, and has Orders from the Pope to complain of so rude a
Proceeding. Sir John Arundell sets forward on Tuesday, by whom I shall write to
several of my Friends. I am yours from my whole Heart, and must desire you to
get me an Answer from Sir George Wakeman.

Paris, the 25th of June.
Lect' pro Rege.
THese are only to beg, Sir, your Excuse for not answering at this time the
Particulars of your last Packet which I received, and have performed your
Commands in all respects. I hope I shall hear often from you, and that you will
give me some Commissions to Monsieur Pompone, when I shall be at a convenient
distance to perform them. I approve of all that you were pleased to write, and
am confident you hit the Design, and hope you will give your Instructions in
order to procure that it may be timely prevented. The Duke will take, I hope,
other Measures, and then you will have some need of the King of France, who
methinks is not secure, unless he advance what you propose. Consult with your
Friends, and advise how France may be Instrumental toward it. Limbourg is
taken. The Prince of Orange after his great Bravour, Retreated to the other
side of the River upon the appearance of 15000 Horse of the French. Monsieur
Turenne has Defeated Three Regiments of the Enemy, and secured the Passage of
the Bridge of Strasbourg. I shall attend with impatience to receive some
Commands from you.

Paris, June the 29th, 75.
I Know not Sir, by what mistake yours of the 3d came Yesterday to my hands,
with your last of the 14th. Though I am at a great distance from Pompone, yet
if you think it convenient, I shall find means to inform him of what you shall
Judge fit to impart. In your last, I had no particulars, and yet I have learned
from others, that Lord Shaftsbury had not so cold a Reception, as you intimate;
Was not the Duke interessed in it? and if so, Must it not prove of Consequence
to the Catholics, and drive at the same design against the Protestants, as is
observed by you? I am glad to perceive that you are so well with Monsieur
Rouvigny, and that you concur in Opinions. France can never rely upon a sure
Foundation, till the Duke be able to Secure it; and Monsieur Rouvigny I fear is
not sufficiently persuaded that it is feasible to set the Duke in such a
Posture, and therefore it is not attempted; But did the King of France interess
himself in it, much might be effected, and to invite him to it, it is
requisite, That he should be informed, that all difficulties which oppose, may
easily be removed; but the Cards are not yet shuffl'd, when they are Dealt you
will know how to direct the Playing of the Game; and I hope you will discover
to me some Hands. I wish I were able to contribute any thing to your
Satisfaction; you know the Power which you have over your most Obedient Servant.

Paris, July the 13th. 75.
I Had not leisure to Answer yours of the 24th. by the last Ordinary; for which
I beg your Pardon. To put the Duke into the posture you speak of, ought
certainly to be the endeavor of the King of France, and Monsieur Pompone; but
as you observe, Mr. Rouvigny is no proper Instrument for that purpose. I have
already declared my sense, but most especially to the King of France's
Confessor, who was sensible of it, and told me, That the several
Inconveniences and Incongruities should be remedied; and when the Occasion
offers, I shall further insist by way of humble advice, if I have no other
Ground to press it more seriously, that the French Ambassador may be wholly
subordinate to the Duke, and that nothing can more secure the Interest of
France and Pompone, than to make it appear, that they do Espouse that of the
Duke. If Lord Berkley be Ambassador, then Sir Ellis Leighton will not be idle;
and there may be good use made of such an Instrument, if the right way be
taken. I should be glad Lord Shaftsbury had better footing, and that he were
interessed for the Duke. Our last Post is not yet arrived; but we are assured
that the Parliament will not fail at the due Season, and that Lord Treasurer
fails of nothing. I hope you are sufficiently assured that Sheldon will serve
you upon all occasions, with as great Fidelity as you can desire; but if he may
not in some sort be serviceable to the Duke, it will be more convenient for him
to change his Station; but in this he will be influenced by your Self.

Colombe, the 17th. of Aug.
Lect' pro Rege.
I Have scarce time, D. Sr, to give you my Thanks for the Favor of yours of
the 2d of Aug. which I will acknowledge like a Correspondent, God willing, by
the next Ordinary. In the mean time allow me to assure you, that Coleman has
made the best Judgment of the Proposal of Mr. Sheldon, that the Subject, in
regard to all Circumstances, was capable of; neither did Sheldon design that
the old Clothes should be thrown away till Spain proffered new ones; That which
was chiefly recommended to Coleman was, to find out means to suggest to Spain
that he should fit the Duke with such a Suit, as is there proposed, and then
perhaps the Dutchess's Friend would not refuse to wear the Livery. Sheldon nor
Bishop of Dublin cannot at this Distance make any advance in it; but the
latter, who understands the humor of Spain, thinks that if it were suggested
with all the advantages that will ensue, the proffer will come from those of
Spain. France is not in a Condition to quit his Friends upon mere Suspicions;
on the contrary, they will render them more considerable to him. Here is a
Person in this Town, that is called Sir Charles Prettyman; who has
Correspondence with several Parliament Men, from whom he says he is assured,
that the difference betwixt the Two Houses is already composed, and that they
are agreed to enter no more into those Disputes, but unanimously to Endeavor a
War against France, and to Unite the King's Subjects in that Design, to give
Liberty of Conscience, knowing very well, that then the Papists themselves will
be as earnest against the French as any others; which I take to be a very
reasonable Judgment. I wish you could give me some assurance of this. But let
Coleman know, that Sheldon in this Conjuncture cannot tell what may be more for
the purpose of the Duke and Catholics, than what Coleman desires to know,
whether it be the wish only of Sheldon, and indeed it is only his wish; because
he cannot tell at this distance how to advance any thing toward the suggesting
to Spain how he might find his Accounts in it, and from that Conviction induce
him to proceed; but he hopes that Coleman may have Opportunities to do this,
and that Effectually; His Reflections are just, and comprehend the whole to the
full; If this way be not taken, I conceive a languishing condition will be the
hard Fate of many to whom we wish well. The French King's Condition is in a
decline; you will infer from thence what is necessary. When I told you that the
Ambassador of Spain was suspected, in reference to the Dutchess's Friend, I did
not intend to say positively that the Duke was thereupon suspected by France;
but that those that belong to the French King, did entertain some Jealousies
upon it, and that the Ambassador of Spain was frequently with the Dutchess's
Friend, was told me by the Correspondent of the Duke; who he is, the Bearer of
these can tell you.

I hope to have the Dispatch for your Three Friends by the next Post. If you
are satisfied with the Bishop of Dublin's and Sheldon's Proceedings, they are
at ease; but were afraid that things had been ill represented to you, since
those of that Party have been found too blame upon that account, by the next
God willing you shall have more upon that Subject. I pray God continue and
prosper the hopes you give of your Mistress. I am, without reserve, Yours.

Colombe, Aug. the 30th.
SIR,
I Have yours of the 12th, which I had answered by the last Post, if I had not
spent so much time in the search of K. from whom I expected the Dispatches for
your She friends. I am sorry they are not yet ready, and that you must have
patience till the return of the Court from Fountainbleau. I am glad you are
satisfied with the Bishop of Dublin's and Mr. Sheldon's Proceedings; and I
desire you not to apprehend that any prejudice will fall upon Religion or the
Catholics upon a Controversy of that account, which being now wholly referred
to Rome, must expect such an Issue, as shall there be determined; but they are
not usually too Expeditious in those kind of Dispatches, and therefore I assure
my self, it will be a considerable time before you hear any thing more
concerning that Subject. Yet because you seem to expect to have from me the
utmost of what can be said upon it, though I dare not undertake for so full an
account; yet I shall endeavor to give you a Testimony that I shall not be
wanting to Contribute all that I can to your Satisfaction, but I cannot
undertake for it by this Post, both by reason of other Dispatches, which lie
upon my hands, as also because my Indisposition of Health which binds me to the
observance of Physical Prescriptions, and other mournful Accidents, do take up
the greatest part of my time, and too great a share of my Thoughts.

Now I must Inform you, That the immediate Predecessor of Monsieur Rouvigny did
send for a Friend of ours, the next in Degree to Lord Almond, and desired to
know his Opinion of the Project, which the Ambassador of Spain had laid to draw
the King to make War against France, and thereupon told him how it was
contrived, that the House of Lords and Commons, should upon that Condition
furnish Money, and accommodate the Catholics; those of France seeing how far
they are from any present Capacity of offering such Advantages, and how easy
it is for those of Spain to procure them, they can scarce allow their Fears to
prevail above their Hopes after they have rightly weighed the Interest which
Religion has in it. Yet he did not omit to say, That the Duke would not desert
France, though he could not doubt but that Religion would have the Ascendant.
Your Friend, and my Kinsman Mr. K. well known to the Confessor of the Duke, and
of the same Profession, might, methinks, be highly serviceable upon this
Occasion, if he would only sound the Spanish Ambassador upon this Subject, and
represent to him, according as Occasion shall be given, the many and great
Advantages which would accrue to Spain, and of the great Damages that would
ensue to France upon this account; but to make it efficacious he must show the
Necessity of engaging the Duke and Catholics in the Concern of it, without
which it will never have any steady Effect. I need not suggest to you any
farther Considerations on this Subject, the Prudence of Coleman will direct
you, and from thence I shall hope to see a good Issue for the Catholics. I
have not many Discourses with Sir P. but he is still of the same Opinion as
formerly, and affirms, that no other means can effectually conduce to the
Satisfaction of the House of Lords and Commons, and those whom they are engaged
for. If you see no appearance of Success this way, be so kind as to show me
some other Scheme, upon which we may ground any comfortable Expectations. In
the mean time we must content our selves, with such hopes as we are able to
furnish.

Colombe, September. the 24th, 75.
I Have yours of the 6th, and one Weekly from Coleman's Man, for all which I
return most hearty Thanks; and though it be my Misfortune not to have hitherto
succeeded in the Pretensions of our Shee-Friends; yet upon the delivery of the
second Memorial, I was promised an Infallible Dispatch this Week, which will
cost me another Journey to Versailles, and I hope to send it to you by Mr.
Nicholls. He and his Charge arrived at Paris on Friday last late at Night. I
was the next Day in Town upon no other Design than to meet Pompone upon the
account of that Business. He told me some days before, That the Interest of the
Religion of the Catholics, was likely to be promoted by the Spanish
Ambassador, and the Friends of the King of Spain; I replied, That it was too
great an Undertaking, and that it could not take any Effect, especially since
they did employ no Endeavors to gain the Duke and his Party to that Interest;
and though it was reported here that the Duke had frequent Conferences with the
Spanish Ambassador; yet I did assure, that there were no such Applications
made, and that the Duke was as much attacked to the King of France as ever. It
would have become Mr. Sheldon to have said this, though he had not been so sure
of the Truth of it, as he is by the Information of Coleman. The Decline of
Spain; I confess, must needs require a long time to regain Power, and that
first to secure his own Interest, before he can be in a posture to promote that
of Religion. The hopes on * Spain's side, are not so remote, and you have
raised my Expectation from thence to no low Degree; because Coleman feems not
only to approve of it, but to think it worth his pains to lay out his
Contrivances and Endeavors upon it. I with my Kinsman were engaged, and
possibly the opportunity may now be favorable; at least if he will not enter
into the Negotiation, he may easily introduce Coleman, with those Advantages,
as may make him be esteemed a fit Instrument, and worthy to be trusted in that
Concern, and he having such an Introduction, I shall not doubt but that he will
be able to give a very good account of the Business. It draws near the 29; but
I hope there is yet time enough to dispose things in order to that Design. I do
not well comprehend how the Danger is over on the part of the Prorogation;
unless it be in Reference to that Opposition of the City of London. I should be
glad to Promise my self that it were in Relation to the Duke; who is said to be
the Person that obstructed the Prorogation, and the Procurer of the Parliaments
present Installation; The Design of my Lord Treasurer, I hope will have no
Effect. The Alliance with the Prince of Orange, some say, is sought for by the
French King, for one of the Dukes of France; but this is but a guess; yet such
a one as gives suspicion to Spain, that there is like to be some Clandestine
doings betwixt Holland and France; But why do I so much entrench upon your
better Employs? I shall only assure you, that Mr. Sheldon is your Servant, and
that Coleman will always find him so to his Power.

Colombe, October the 10th. SIR,
I Have yours of the 20th of September, And whereas you seem to intimate that
it is almost a Month since you received any from me, I have called my Self to
an Account, and cannot find that I have effectually been so much wanting to my
own Satisfaction, as not to continue upon you sufficient Provocation to allow
me the Favor of your Correspondence. I am become so mistrustful upon this
reproach, of my own Memory, that I could almost persuade my self to doubt
whether I have informed you of a delay that is cast upon the Pretensions of
your She Friends, which I hope will soon be removed, since it only depends
upon a Return from Lisle, whose Magistrates were to be consulted in that
Concern; and upon their Answer, I hope you will have Satisfaction to the
Address which has been made. Have I not likewise bemoaned my misfortune, for
having had only a Glimpse of Mr. Gray, having disappointed each other, by my
going to him, and his coming to me, upon the same Day? This I do chiefly
resent; because, I suppose he might have had some particular Commission from
you, and had not Opportunity to make me partaker of it. The Secretary of
Monsieur Rouvigny, has informed me of your good Correspondence with his Master,
which must needs render you Suspected to the Spanish Ambassador; but I shall
expect according to your Promise, the Issue of my Kinsman's Negotiation; What
Measures the Spanish Ambassador has taken with the Parliament, a little time
will discover; but unless the Spanish Ambassador ingages the Duke upon the
account of the Catholics, the King of Spain will not find his account. The
Duke, I suppose, has gained no small Credit with the Parliament; It is
reasonable to think so, if Common Report may be allowed for Truth. What must
that produce? any Advantage to the Catholics? Does not the Duke expect to be
Re-enstall'd? Was not that promised by those of Prorogation? Are there any
Appearances of these Expectations from the Parliament?

We are here informed, That the Parliament designs to give Money for the Fleet,
upon Condition the King will reduce the Number of the French Men of War, to the
account which they formerly kept with Queen Elizabeth. The King here has of
late been ill disposed, and subject to a little Vertigo. He has laid a Tax upon
the men of the Roab, which will furnish a vast Sum without any burden to the
People; and he has given out Commissions for great Leavies for the next
Campaign.

I shall not over-charge you with News, you are better informed from other
hands. Your Town will shortly be the Scene of News, and then I hope you will
make me Partaker of the Transactions. In the mean time I am,

SIR, Your most Obedient Servant L. S.

THe Letters next following were written by Sir William Throgmorton to Mr.
Coleman.

And his general manner of Writing was this; he wrote a Letter with ink
concerning some ordinary trivial matter, as about Persons taking Coach to
Travel, about the fashion of wearing Crape, etc. writing the lines at a pretty
broad distance, leaving a space between for interlining: In this space, and
upon the remaining blank of the Paper, he wrote with Juice of Lemmon the Secret
Matter which now is here printed.

The use of such Writing was, that if the Letters were intercepted, or
miscarried, nothing would appear to the Casual Reader but the frivolous Matter
writ in Ink, but when they came to the hands of his Correspondent, he heated
them at a fire, and that made the Lemmon Juice appear, and become legible.

But it falls out in this way, that if the Writer do not strictly watch, he
will sometimes write dry, the juice which was in the Pen being spent. Also by
unwary holding too near the fire the Paper is liable to be singed.

By such accidents there happen to be several Obliterations, and Blanks and
Breaks in these Letters; which interrupts the Current of the Discourse in some
places; and thereby part of this Evidence is lost.

Paris 1. December.
MR. Pompone returned me my Paper again yesterday, Lect. pro Rege.
and told me that the French King had seen it, and was extremely satisfied with
it, that nothing pleased him more, than the assurance I thereby gave him of my
Confidence that the Duke was resolved to continue his kind purposes to him,
that he desire me, that I would assure the Duke that nothing should turn him
from this toward him, and that he should not rejoice in any thing more than to
be able to help him to be, or to see him by any means chief Factor for our
Company, for that he very well knew, that nothing but that could secure his own
Stake there, what therefore his Sentiments of Lord Arlington were we might
guess, and how gladly we Would see him disposed of as we desire, but that he
thought his meddling in it would rather hinder than advance our design, however
that he was willing to receive directions in it from the Duke, and that he
should always be ready to join and work with him in any design he should judge
for the good of that common Trade.

That as for the Dissolution of the Parliament to be, he he judged it an
admirable, nay necessary work, but that the time being yet pretty far off, and
that Spain, the Emperor, and Holland, having chosen the King for the Umpire of
the Differences between them and him, he thinks he may stay a little in that
point, till he hears from the King upon his Umpirage, and sees what course he
intends to take for it, but that he absolutely relied upon the Duke, for the
choosing of proper Sides-men in that business, for that he put his only
confidence in him for it; he told me moreover, that the French King would
gladly have writ to the Duke, but for fear of accidents, which might turn it to
both their disadvantages, but that as he absolutely believed the account I gave
him of the Company, and Trade, and the Dukes great affection to him, though I
had no Order from the Duke for it, because he very well knew how I was
concerned for him, for he hoped the Duke would put the same confidence in this
that I told him from his part, that all this was very fine and head, but that
for all that to delay working for the dissolution of the Parliament might be
dangerous, and that therefore I desired him to move the French King to consider
of it again, that for my part he saw I was an unimployed person in it, and had
no other design but their good as they were common Traders, but that by what
insight I had in the Trade, I thought they ought to lose no time, and so hazard
little accidents for so great a good, for that at this rate of third hand
talking they would never understand one another, or effect any thing, though
they did me great honor to offer me so much trust upon my private credit, that
yet by that means and general Talk they would never be able to carry on the
Trade roundly: We parted then with this after a long discourse and many
arguments, that he would again propose the thing to the French King, and that
he thought my reasons were so convincing and kind to them, that he doubted not,
but the French King would either himself, or order him to write, and that in
four or five days I should hear from him.

Pray direct your Letter to Mr. Mer at the Corner of the street of St. Benet in
the Fobourgh of St. German at Paris, and (...) in the bottom and give me sum
for you (...) I cannot doubt that I could of my friend here and some others
make half an O, try you what you can there in case the French King should be
backward in that point, and that that ingredient should be requisite to carry
on the work (...) I spoke with Mounsieur Pompone again, of whom I had almost
the same story I gave you in my former, but that truly had not had opportunity
to speak to the King, yet alone (...) but that he would, and much of that; they
seem to wonder much they hear nothing from the King, yet upon this late
business, his Factor here has had yet no manner of orders what it concerns
them, as themselves say, to have the Duke their friend in this business, but
yet I begin to doubt they would willingly engage him to be so through the
reason of his own interest and as many fair words, and what else you please,
but pence: that that is the reason they were writing, yet for fear of coming to
close dealing, that is the Parliament is set far off, and they think cannot
possibly come to join till the Spring, if in the mean time by the Duke his
heartiness for them, which, as I said, they think his own interest and their
own great expressions of kindness will engage him to, they can get a good
accommodation and regulation among all the dissenting Brothers they have their
aim, if not they think the same price will do four months hence as well to stop
them as now, though they are infinitely mistaken (...) all I can for to keep
that interest on foot against them will certainly be the greatest perhaps the
only means (...) of compassing what they so much desire; but parting with ready
money you know is a hard thing, especially with Merchants: if you can think of
any thing more for me to say upon this score, pray write it in French, that I
may show it them, that is what you think fit they should see, for Pompone
desired me that I would let him know when I heard any thing, but if I hear
nothing from you, I think it is the best way to let him alone a little, perhaps
it may make them the forwarder, especially if Sweden and Holland court the King
so much to draw him the one way, and the other the contrary, as I hear they do;
and if the Duke will but play that Game cunningly, he may certainly bring the
French King to what he pleases, though I must confess I had rather have him
have 200000 pounds of the Catholics, than 300000 l. of the French King, that
is to get the Parliament dissolved, for that would show the French King what
the Duke was, and would make him much more helpful and complaisant to him; but
here is the Work you will say, and I must confess, it is such a one too, as takes
up my thoughts night and day, and I would have Coleman think of it too, for it
would be a great work, as it is a difficult one, and perhaps is an absolute
necessary one: I shall in a little time let you know somewhat certain from it,
but I believe I may venture to promise half 100000 l. from hence; sure 100000
l. on your side might be compassed. The Man I so often spoke to you of in this
business is the best Man in the World, he swears it shall not stick at all his
Estate, but the Duke shall be accommodated. And with all this his chief
Friends, as Pompone, and Colbert, and Louvois, as much divided about war or
peace as is possible. Now, I say, with all this if the Duke would strike the
stroke without them you would see what an operation it would be, and on my soul
I believe a quarter of 100000 l. or less in the glistering metal to the King
of England himself into his own pocket may weigh as much upon an occasion with
him, as ten times as much into the common Stock, or buy Land with, and if such
a business (...) to the Duke he may make his account on it when he pleases, he
shall not want it long for that purpose. I then resolve not to see Pompone for
these reasons: you say you had not spoke with the Duke, but he had had a long
discourse with Ruvigny, which you knew not what it was, nor what the Duke knew
of Lord Arlington in his business, nor what perhaps he now would have me do.
Ruvigny failed to write what he knew, and what the Duke told (...) I will not
therefore come to them with my fingers in my mouth, nor to be caught, in that I
resolve not to see them, till I hear from you again: You say not a word, how
the acceptance of the King for Umpire relishes with you, nor what the King
intends, who shall go and so forth, pray be plain in all these points; your
direction is a Mounsier Mercers au evine de la ruz St. Benvoist Fauxbourg, St.
German (...) I have asked you (...) but you forget it, I writ to you in my
first Letters to Mr. Bradshaw about the 100, l. I doubt I must have more ere
long, but you shall have six weeks time for it: What you writ here concerning
helping my self to money, one way which you mention is a ticklish point, the
man is of a Jealous humor, and if I should do any thing should look like
self-interest I should spoil all, you may be sure I say all to him (...)
imagine, but I must not seem to aim at (...) but let it come of it self.
Adieu, I am sure I am tired.

MOunsieur Pompone came to Town last night, but I am of opinion still, that I
ought not to speak to him again, till I here more from Coleman, and that for
many reasons, drawn both from Coleman, and his own Letters, from observations
of things here, and from some discourse, as I had lately on the Exchange with
the King of Englands Factor here. He is certainly one of the shrewdest dealing
men that I know, and that makes me extremely close with him, pretending great
ignorance in all sorts of Commerce; but for all that his goodness to me (as he
would have me believe it) flows so naturally from him, that we are never
together (...) as often as he can contrive it, he (...) of himself to dine with
me, which is a freedom you know not usually taken by Merchants, and upon all
little occasions inviting me, but he enters with great seeming confidence and
freedom into a Discourse of the most mysterious points of our Trade, and how he
came by it, for he would have me understand the Duke was not by him now:
whether this be a wheedle of theirs upon him, or that he intended it as one
upon me, I know not, but their backwardness makes me suspect Mounsieur Ruvigny
has some underhand dealing, and that he may keep them here in expectation of
it, and that he holds them in hand, that it is time enough to think of the
Parliaments being dissolved if that fails, and that the Duke will let nothing
slip to secure the Parliament dissolved however for his own sake; and at last,
if all does fail, that which we ask, they think, is a sure Card to make the
King and us do what they list, when nothing else will: Now methinks indeed in
my humble judgment, I would not have the Duke fail them in this; I would have
him push with all the vigor and force imaginable to dissolve the Parliament,
and I would have (...) for on my Conscience (...) without two or 300000 l. do
it as with them, and then if he would give me leave, methinks I could turn it
instantly more to his advantage, by showing them how little he wanted two or
300000 l. to help him in that or any thing else, and that now if they would
come upon terms. Now what his design in this may be, God knows, but I am sure
if it be to pump me he shall lose it, for I never discover more knowledge of any
thing than a man of my converse in the World and Genius, which he is well
acquainted with, must be thought to have; or perhaps it may be that by the old
friendship I have had with Coleman, he may think to secure him by me, and so if
Trade grows naught on the other side, for you remember how Lord Berkly and Sir
Ellis Leighton have always spoke of his behavior between Duke Lauderdale and
Lord Arlington, and how he, they say, has attached himself to the latter (...)
ingratiate himself at least with the Duke, or perhaps he may have a real
intention of serving the Duke, if you please in Charity and Generosity we will
believe, but in Prudence we will not trust too, and therefore I continue the
same Ignoramus; and the more full he is in his praises of the Duke, and in
Discourses of him, the King, and Lauderdale, and Lord Treasurer; the less I
either know the Duke his concerns, or any things else. Often we talk too of the
French King and Monsieur Louvy, and of War and Peace, and in this Discourse he
told me the day before yesterday, that he found the French King and his had
great expectation of what Lord Arlington should do for them, nay, that he
believed, they might have some confidence in him or it, he wondered how they
came to little things equally and fair between us, (without which nothing can
last) we will being thereto led a little by interest, but much more by
inclination) give them the preference and refusal in all bargains, but if not,
we may then truly tell them we must endeavor to make our best market; they
know the advantage Fortune has now more than ever put into our hands, by
giving us the Scales to hold, wherein all European Commodities are to be
weighed, and I hope then the dissolution of the Parliament being compassed, the
Duke will never suffer the King again to quit that; if this does not bring them
to any thing you call reason I will give you my head; for I must tell you the
French King is mightily divided at this very hour in his thoughts, and perhaps
more agitated than ever he was in making any resolution, having (or I am much
mistaken) one Boot on and (...) sought something (...) in him making him a
little weary of what is on already, and another thundering (...)

The rest not legible.

I Am heartily glad to hear by your Lady you will be returned to London to
receive this, which, I pray, lose no time to show his H. I wrote you word
before you went that I thought I should soon be in England, for I am confident
they would have sent me, but your going into Flanders (of which they had notice
before you would have been cross the Sea, I cannot imagine, but sure I am they
told me of it as soon as I came to the Army) I suppose may have hindered that,
and retarded the propositions, which I have order to make his H. till now, for
they have been much disquieted about it, and I have had much a do to assure
them, that I was confident there was nothing designed by it, to their
prejudice, for that I was sure the Duke was as much by inclination as interest
disposed to prefer their Alliance and Friendship to all others, and that they
would take it for a certain rule, that if they were not wanting to themselves,
we should never be wanting to them. The King here is certainly disposed as much
as can be for the interest of his H. but is wise and very cautions, however by
these Propositions, which I have order to make to his H. and which are word for
word as I took them from Pere Ferriers mouth, for I writ them down presently,
and showed it to him afterward, and keep it for my justification, that I writ
no more than I was ordered, you will see that it now depends only upon his H.
to consider of a way, that will best secure his interests, and with all a good
correspondence with them here, for that we must always persuade our selves in
the thing they propose to themselves by it, I say let but his H. consider of
that, and then what he would ask of them here in order to it, and I doubt not
(God willing) if he will honor me with his instructions and commands, but I
shall procure him any thing which in reason he can expect, either of money or
any thing else; if therefore his H. shall be pleased to think well of this, and
proceed in it, I will meet you any where privately to receive his H. commands
and instructions by you, or if he will, I doubt not but I can put my self in a
private way to come for a night to receive his Orders my self, I pray be very
cautious that there be no suspicion given of any thing of this by you for the
King is very scrupulous here even of some of his chiefest Ministers, whom
perhaps he may apprehend people have been, or at least have endeavored to be
dealing with, and Pere Ferrier positively charged me to communicate it to no
one, but the Bishop of Dublin, of whom they have a good opinion, for he said
they would have to do in it with none but us, but I prevailed at last that I
might do it by you or Colonel Talbot in England, for that being they would not
yet let me go my self, and it was impossible, but I must employ some body,
therefore I would not write to the D. and that I answered for you as for my
self, to which at last they consented: I intended to have taken the liberty to
have writ to his H. but this to you I think will do better, I pray you
therefore present my most humble duty to him, and if I have done any thing
amiss in this, it is for want of judgment not of affection and duty, and I am
sure of one thing, that if perchance our Counsels should go another way, I have
done nothing that can prejudice him, if they be not, but that this alliance
shall be adjudged advantageous, I have had the good fortune to work my self
into such an esteem and opinion here with some of the ablest to serve his H.
that I am an honest man, that I dare promise my self they will put confidence
in me, and I shall be able to serve him, for to do which pray assure his H.
with all humility, that I shall always be ready to venture my life and fortune.

December. 15. 1674.
I Am heartily glad to hear by your Lady you will be returned to London to
receive This, which I pray lose no time to show his H. I wrote you word before
you went, that I thought I should soon be in England. For I am confident they
would have sent me; but your going into Flanders (of which they had notice
before you could have crossed the Sea, how I cannot imagine, but sure I am they
told me of it as soon as I came to the Army) I suppose may have hindered that,
and retarded the Propositions, which I have order to make his Highness, till
now. For they have been much disquieted about it, and I have had much ado to
assure them that I was confident there was nothing designed by it to their
prejudice: For that I was sure the Duke was as much by Inclination as Interest
disposed to prefer their Alliance and Friendship to all others, and that they
should take it for a certain Rule, That if they were not wanting to themselves,
we should never be wanting to them. The King here is certainly disposed, as
much as can be, for the Interest of his Highness, but is wise, and very
cautious. However, by these Propositions, which I have order to make to his
Highness, (and which are word for word as I took them from Father Ferriere's
mouth, for I wrote them down presently, and showed it him afterward, and keep
it for my justification, that I wrote no more than I was ordered) You will see
that it only now depends upon his Highness to consider of a way that will best
secure his Interests, and withal a good Correspondence with them here. For
that we must always persuade our selves is the thing they propose to themselves
by it. I say, let but his H. consider of that, and then what he would ask of
them here in order to it, and I doubt not (God willing) if he will honor me
with his Instructions and Commands, but I shall procure him any thing which in
reason he can expect, either of Money, or any thing else. If therefore his
Highness shall be pleased to think well of this, and proceed in it, I will meet
you any where privately, to receive his Highness Commands and Instructions by
you; or, if he will, I doubt not but I can put my self into a private way to
come for a night to receive his Orders my self. I pray be very cautious there
be no suspicion given of any thing of this with you; for the King is very
scrupulous here, even of some of his chiefest Ministers, whom perhaps he may
apprehend people have been, or at least have endeavored to be dealing with.
And Father Ferriere positively charged me to communicate it to no one living
but the Bishop of Dublin, of whom they have a good opinion. For he said, they
would have to do with none but us. But I prevailed at last that I might do it
by you, or Col. Talbot in England. For that being they would not yet let me go
my self, it was impossible but I must employ some body, and that I could not
else write to the Duke, and that I answered for you as for my self: To which at
last they consented. I intended to have taken the liberty to have wrote to his
Highness; but this to you I think will do better. I pray therefore present my
most humble duty to Him; and if I have done any thing amiss in this, it is for
want of Judgment, and not of Affection and Duty. And I am sure of one thing,
that if perchance our Counsels should go another way, I have done nothing that
can prejudice him. If they do not, but that this Alliance shall be judged
Advantageous, I have had the good Fortune to work my self into such an esteem
and opinion here, with some of the ablest to serve his Highness, that I am an
honest Man, That I dare promise my self that they will put confidence in me,
and I shall be able to serve him. For to do which, I pray assure his Highness
with all humility, that I shall always be ready to venture my Life and Fortune.

Paris, December the 22th, 1674.
I Am sorry to hear by your last, that you know so little of Lord Arlington's
proceedings; for I judge, nay, am morally sure, if the Duke be really so, that
the Duke is juggled with and kept in the dark, and D. Lauderdale, and the
Treasurer too perhaps; for it is impossible but that the King must have known
something of what has been done at least that he was upon his return before
yours was writ, when the King's Factor hear could tell me three or four days
ago that he had a Letter from him, in which he told him he was upon his
departure, and that he should not stay there above four or five days at most
longer. I must confess Ravigny is much suspected by me, and the French King's
backwardness in coming to the point, and other little circumstances which I
observe, but cannot so well express, makes me believe he had an underhand
dealing, which keeps them in suspense. I told you in my former that if the Duke
had power enough upon his own stock to carry on the Trade, and compass the
Parliaments Dissolution, that it was my humble Advice, he should do it upon any
terms in the world; for that they would be glad to come in Partners, after they
see it was done upon any advantageous terms to the Duke whatsoever: but if you
find you cannot probably do it without two or three hundred thousand pounds,
you must resolve to give some body some power to make Treaty, backed with your
Athority, and to endeavor to color the business, and show them (as on my Soul
it is their true Interest) what ever Projects other people may have put them
on; for they have so mean an Opinion of the King, and do so little regard his
Word or Government, that you cannot imagine how they despise him, and all the
Company: And if the Duke shall suspend this too, and not pursue it vigorously
some way or other; that is, endeavor to do it himself, if possible; if not,
use such means as are proper to induce them to help them: I say, if he does
not, I really fear they will judge Sloth and Idleness an Epidemical Disease; and
he tainted with it, as well as the rest, and consequently no more to be valued
or depended on. I would therefore earnestly desire the Lord Arundel and Coleman
seriously to consider and advise with the Duke about it. The first, without
doubt, if upon his own score and strength, would do his business in all
respects: but if that cannot be, we must endeavor to make the best Market we
can with the French King.

This is my Opinion: if it be wrong, correct it, but pardon me. One Vardell, a
famous Man-Midwife, (Author of the Book the Abbot sent you) was yesterday with
me, and, in short, offers me a set of Coach-Horses, if I can prevail to get the
Duke send for him over, and to be but by at the Duchess her Labor, he hopes
there will be no occasion to make use of him, nor any of his kind, nor does not
ask a penny of Money; for, he says, he desires only to be sent for, the noise
of which will get him ten thousand pounds. I hear the Abbot Rizzini has writ
for him to Mr. De Puy and the Countess: If it can be compassed, I tell you what
I shall get, let him look to what he shall get: Methinks the thing should not
be difficult, for help and advice cannot be amiss; they may choose whether they
will make use of him or no; and they cannot have him at a cheaper rate than for
nothing.

Paris, December. 16. 1674.
I Am extremely glad you were satisfied with mine of the 15th, and that seems
to be so, I am sure there is nothing in the World I covet more than that he
should be so. I shall long for your next, and that the Parliament be dissolved
(...) for then sure we shall see what the King will do, though I believe he has
not been so silent to his Factor here (...) for I am confident he had Orders
for something two Posts last, though for what I cannot possibly learn. On my
word it behooves your Traders to bestir themselves now, for it is that which
will cause Enemies, and it is Resolution must do the business. I am glad you
approve of my not seeing Pompone; though I should be glad to have something to
the purpose, to see him withal. Methinks I could talk otherwise if my.... were
raised but a little, which it would be to some purpose if the dissolution of
the Parliament were compassed. On my word, I see not that things go so bad, but
that such a business would make them very reasonable Men. My Lord Duras is
coming to you, you know I have always loved him, and am much his Servant,
whether he makes me such a return I know not; he is most extraordinarily
outwardly civil to me, that his inwards is not so I have some reason to doubt.
I only ask you to look that he does the Duke no prejudice. We have had here the
same Story of my Lord Arlington's refusal at the Hague, that you had in London.
Pray see what you can do for the Man-Midwife; he would be a great help to me;
it goes to my heart to press you thus always for Money: I assure you I spend not
a Shilling, that I think the Duke's Service does not require, but yet I cannot
help it; Money goes like the Devil. Once more, pray look to Duras, for I am
confident he would do both of us a prejudice if he could: As to the quarter of
the 100000 l. I know not what you call reasonable conditions, let me know if
you please, what you mean by yours, but I mean for the procuring the
dissolution of, or facilitating of it; and then I assure you that I am very
sorry for (...) that is the subject of it. For it is as public as his being
here, and scandalizes many good People, as also her Mother's being with child;
this (...) appease for God's sake. Let us be virtuous if we can; but if we
cannot, let us not to satisfy their Vanity, lose our Wit quite, but be wise
and cautious. I swear upon my Soul, the reputation of Virtue, with that of his
Truth, will do him more good than ten Millions.

January 19th, 1674/5.
I Think I must state the case in Writing again, and give it Pompone to show
Fr. K. I doubt the Bishop of Dublin's sending to Louvoy's Father: For you must
know that the Bishop of Dublin is the lyingst Rogue in the World, he has done
our business no good, for he speaks with Confidence, and makes them believe he
is the Man in the world with the Duke, and tells them whatever he pleases,
which must make them have a mean opinion of the Duke; or if they do or do not
absolutely believe him, it must make them the more diffident of Sir William
Throgmorton: The truth is, I wonder Pompone does so well with Sir W. Throg. as
he does, considering that the Bishop of Dublin speaks the contrary with as much
Authority as appears to them, as Sir W. Th. does what he says. I told you all
that was between him and Louvoy his Father six weeks ago, for I trace him every
where; and surely never Man made Falsehood, Lying and Knavery so much his
business as he does. I had yours of the 4th, and if I think it as proper, after
a nights consideration, as I do yet, I may french it to Pompone next time I see
him, for I like it very well. Why should you not get Ruvigny write to Pampone
the discourse Coleman had with him, and his liking of it? It would help Sir
William Throgmorton mightily, at least it would give him some more Credit. I am
overjoyed to hear what you say about dissolving the Parliament, though 300000
l. should not be compassed, not that it shall make me a jot the less active, or
sollicitous for it; for I am, I assure you, of their opinion, as much as is
possible, that nothing will settle businesses lastingly, like joining the Fr.
King's and the Duke's interests together. And when I told you there might be an
advantage made by gaining the Parliament to be dissolved without 300000 l. I
did not mean (...) the Fr. King, but only that that would make these about the
Fr. King (seeing the Power the Duke has) a little more reasonable, and that
then they will come with the Duke to terms of accommodation more equal than now
they will; and let us think or propose what we please, it is certain that
nothing but a just balance of things can keep their Interests long linked, and
therefore I judged it for the Duke's advantage by such an Action, to gain that
Reputation with them as shall show them their benefit of coming to such an
Accommodation with him, which then may keep their Amity linked fast for all
their lives. I never was blinder nor wearier in my life. So adieu. I could not
help the 100 l. Bill for....... Pray tell Mauson I have done his.... as he
desired. He is with my Wife, but I cannot write to him this Post.

February 6. 1674/75.
I Account my self most extraordinary unhappy that my illness has hindered me
from seeing Mounsieur Pompone, since businesses go so with Lord Arlington as
they do. I assure you if it had been nothing but the hazard of my Life lain at
stake, I should have ventured it to have given you an Answer this Post, but it
would have alarmed all the World to see one go out in such a condition; by the
next Post however I promise you an Answer, for I will either speak or write to
him. If Ruvigny has but in any measure done his part, I promise you I will do
mine: And if the French King will do nothing, I know not how to help it; but
the truth is, he has so mean an opinion of the King and all his Partners, that
I doubt he thinks scarce any thing they can do, worth 300000 l. It must be
therefore, I believe, something immediately from the Duke that I must tell him,
that will persuade him to hope for better things when he shall govern. Adieu. I
can say no more.

Superscribed, To Edward Coleman, Esquire Secretary to her Royal Highness.
Postscript.
This is Abbot Mountague's Letter, which should have come the last Post.


Transcribed, 8. November. 78. Ed. Dering.

Paris, Febr. 9.
THrokmorton was yesterday to speak with Pompone, whom he found alarmed by
Ruvigni, for the King's Resolution about the Parliament; he had told him the
greatest part of the story of the Lord Treasurer, concerning the Lord
Arlington, though he said he took Throckmorton's coming to him very kindly, and
heard him speak with great attention; which opportunity Throckmorton made the
best use he could of to press the thing: he told him, that the Duke had
hitherto done his utmost endeavors to hinder the Resolution of the Parliament,
and to procure a Dissolution of it; That he had been in great expectation of
the French King's Assistance, in which if he had but contributed in any
measure, the thing might have been done six months since. Indeed Throckmorton
has no orders from the Duke to ask any thing yet; but yet however Throckmorton
knew the Affairs a little, and that he had great reason to believe the Duke
would not be able to resist the Parliament any longer, if he were not very
speedily assisted by the Fr. King. That the Parliament was certainly very
opposite to both their Interests, but irreparably to that of the French King's;
for that, as he had told him before, the Duke, if he would have quitted the Fr.
King, might have made good Conditions for himself, and so he shall yet when he
pleases, with the Parliament; but that for the French King he must expect no
such thing, for that infallibly the Parliament would engage the King, the very
first moment, to join in War with Spain, Emperor, Holland, Prince of Orange,
and Spanish Governor in Flanders against him; that he must not judge of the
Power of the King's Play now, by what he played for him whilst the Lord
Arlington was Trumps, and therefore, believe it, would not be more against him
if the Lord Arlington should continue Trumps with the Parliament; for that I
assured him it would be most powerful, and carried against him with great
animosity and heat; as on the other side, if Trumps should be changed by the
French King's help, and the Duke taken for Lord Arlington at the Parliament, he
might promise himself somewhat a warmer and usefuller Assistance; that he had
made him discourses to this purpose heretofore; that he had thought to have
quite desisted, finding so little encouragement, and fear of being thought
importunate; but that the War not now just upon new shuffling of the Cards,
should warn him once more, but that now he had done, for he had discharged his
Conscience, in doing his utmost for the Common Good; and if God did not see fit
to bless his endeavors with success, he would sit down quietly, though never
contentedly, before that the Catholics and his Interest should be thus
abandoned, tho there were no other Interest of the Duke's or the French King's
in it. And there I began to tickle Pompone upon that Point; in which you must
know he does much -- himself. That Throckmorton needed not to say any more to
clear himself from any suspicion of private designs or interests in it, as from
imposing any thing upon them, for that themselves knew he never did, nor never
would benefit a shilling by them; and that the event of things had always
showed them that his Intelligence was right, and his Advice sound.

Pompone began to answer with a confirmation of the conclusion of his
Discourse, and told him that the King had the same opinion of him that he could
wish, etc. but came to his old [what Remedy?] again: for that Throckmorton had
asked three, four, or five hundred thousand pounds; a thing unpossible to be
compassed. Throckmorton told him, that was a mistake, for that half of the
latter, perhaps, might do it; and then told him the substance of Coleman's
Letter of the 21th past, as to time, and other circumstances too: but
Throckmorton told him, that after all this, if there were 500000 l. or double,
whether he thought in his conscience it were any better parting with it for the
French King, than to have the Parliament join with Holland, etc. And whether he
believed that double and treble that would not soon be set flying, in case of a
War, supposing these circumstances? Then he cried, Huy par Dieu. Then, Sir,
said the other, Look to it, for it will certainly be. Then he came to it again,
and said, that the Duke said to Ruvigni, that notwithstanding he always told
him the King had said free and friendly things on the French King's behalf. I
answered, as you may guess, to that; but suspecting by all this, that Ruvigni
might be his Creature, and that he was afraid he might be excluded in this
business, Throckmorton told him, you may imagine, that I bear Ruvigni no good
will. I protest to you the contrary; and to show you how little that is in my
thoughts, tho I must confess I think I could put them in a shorter way of doing
it; Give Ruvigny but a sufficient Power to do it, and a strict Command to
execute it, and I desire never to know it, nor will I trouble you any more to
enquire after it; and shall think my self sufficiently happy if I have in any
wise forwarded the thing for the doing of it effectually, which is the only aim
I have, and therefore cared not by whom it was done. (...) had promised
Throckmorton, he would tell the French King the first opportunity all his
discourse, and that he would do it with kindness, and desired Throckmorton to
come again the beginning of the week, and he would tell him the King's Answer.
This is all Throckmorton could do. And if they are blind or mad, you must have
patience. But sure something they will do, and let it be what it will, or how
it will, if the Duke can do his business by it, pray let him not reject it. His
turning 300000 l. into 400000, makes me believe they intend to do something. I
must confess I shall be overjoyed to see it to confirm the Duke: for if he give
ground, Arlington and the Parliament have no bounds -- You must imagine
Throckmorton enlarged upon these heads. They had some discourse of Coleman too,
who Pompone said he heard was a Man of Parts, etc. Throckmorton replied to
that, what I think he could have wished himself had been said.

I had yours of the 25th just now: If you cannot read mine better than I do
yours, which is soiled one half, your Paper blots so, I do not wonder that you
understand not what I would have you get Ruvigny to write. I would have nothing
more than what he has done. He has done his part well; nor would I have him
say any thing about the Bishop of Dublin, tho he is the greatest Knave alive,
for fear of mistakes; and I know you cannot explain your self clearly to
Ruvigny in that point.

The King's Factor is much discontented against Pompone, Louvoy, and in fine
all the rest. He gave me yesterday great signs of it, and pretty touches too
against Duke Lauderdale. The French King has cleared the business again with
Sueden, and they are resolved again to act, you know (I suppose) what -- rub in
the way. They ofter to furnish them with 24000 Men in the Spring, provided they
will pay them three months now; which I think is almost a Bargain. How this may
work as to some other Affairs you know of, I cannot tell; but I think, however,
this should be no hindrance. Adieu. I am almost tired to death. Pray get better
Paper, and be more careful, for I cannot read half your Letter.

Superscribed, To Mris Coleman.
Transcribed November. 8, 1678. Ed. Dering.

February the 13th.
I Told you last Post, how Throckmorton had disposed Pompone to speak to the
French King, and how they were agreed, that Throckmorton should come again, to
know the French Kings Answer: which yesterday he did, and Pompone told him,
that the French King had ordered him to write to Ruvigny effectually on this
concern; that was, That Ruvigny should join (...) that he should take Measures
and Directions from the Duke; that he should consult with him about the means
to prevent the Parliament, and get the Parliament Dissolved; and that all
things that were possible to be done on the French Kings side, to Dissolve the
Parliament, should be done. Throckmorton told him, this would do very well;
that he was resolved to keep his word, for that he would not be inquisitive to
know the other particulars, which he hoped however there were, or else they did
nothing; that he was extremely glad it was put into Ruvigny his hand, for that
he believed him a good man, and an able man; that his late experience too, had
taught him, that he would the better know how to behave himself among so many
Knaves; that he had now only two things to recommend to him, strongly to
inculcate unto Ruvigny, that is (Secrecy and Promptness) for that Throckmorton
did not know, whether all that he had said, and which was however as much as
could be said to it, had evinced him that the thing did press as much as it
did, but he did assure him that if either of these were wanting, or if he
continued beating the bush, the business would be lost: that for Throckmortons
part, he had no other design but the common good, etc. he took him and embraced
him, and told him the French King was very sensible of that, and gave all the
(...) imaginable to what he said; and therefore begun now, and would do all
that was possible in his power, and as the urgency of the Affairs required.
This is all Throckmorton for his life could do in this business, and perhaps as
much too, as any other could have done in his circumstances. For I am confident
he omitted nothing that could press him, as you may see by his Papers, when the
young Gentlewoman comes; what the success of this may be, God (...) and is
certain that Louvy, who has hitherto been against him, and for War, is now so
much turned again, hearing some disgrace by him, that it is believed he will
carry the French King to embrace Peace presently, upon any terms. Now if this
were so, and Louvy a wise man, it were the fairest way for us in all the world:
for nothing (it is certain) would do us more kindness, than to see the
Parliament Dissolved. But if Louvy be a Fool and a Beast, (...) who can assure
us of their patience, for this way and not called to his passion of fear (...),
and let any underhand little Engineer write to you on the whole or in part,
this is all I apprehend: for unless this be an underhand way of his, I am
confident there is nothing (...) and then we are well enough; for let the
French King beat about as he pleases now, he shall be forced at last to come
to the Duke, and his terms too; and therefore I am clearly, with all
submission, in my poor judgment, for this; That if the French King does not
help vigorously to gain the Parliament Dissolved, that then the Duke should not
be against the Parliaments coming; for I think it is not morally probable, that
the Duke will be better armed against the Parliament three or four Months
hence, than he is now: but on the contrary, six Months hence, in the first
place, the Parliament will be more incensed and violent against him than now;
for it is certain, they all take it for granted, that he does his possible for
the Parliaments Dissolution. It Is a prejudice to which the longer he is about,
and cannot comply it in his heart, the more it will render the Parliament
audacious, (...) mean and despised by him: for it is clear, that whilst the
Duke is at shall he, he looses ground (...) Peace yet, and the French King will
not have made terms of Peace for all his dodging. Now when the Parliament shall
begin to play his prank, the French King shall without doubt assist the Duke
with all he can in the world against the Parliament. But who will ensure that
the French King and Peace will not be friends eight or nine Months hence? and
if so, I am sure the French King says then, Fight Dog fight Bear, what can the
Duke clear himself from the Parliament? let him but show as much Resolution in
his Mind, as he has often done Valor in his Person, and not be startled or led
away by Knaves; or by Men's fearful Councels, as he has too many about him of
the one and other sorts, who mind themselves more than his service, and what
can hurt him? I wish I had ten thousand Lives, and I would stake them all for
him, only that a (...) Throckmorton and Coleman may go to pot, and it may not
do so well for the Catholics and his (...) at first, but for the -- Gods will
be done; and for the other, really I cannot well pity some of them they having
been so base and mean in his concern and their own as they have been. Let them
smart, it will turn their good. I think if the Duke thought well of it, if
Coleman speak to Rouvigny upon this now, and that he urged him to the utmost in
it, about 300000 l. it would not be amiss, and then Coleman will find what is
not: for Throckmorton has done what he could here, except he has new matter:
for it is clear that this which Pompone told Throckmorton is only either a
putting him off civilly, and that they intend to continue to dodge as they have
given Rouvigny Orders, and resolve to act only by him; suppose which you will,
I think it will be necessary to Coleman thus to deal with Rouvigny, that is,
openly and home: for if they intend to do any thing, it will certainly be by
Rouvigny; and if they intend to do nothing, you will by his shuffling discover
it. I expected what you told me in your last from them both; no doubt they will
Court the Parliament or the Devil, if they think him like to be uppermost: but
let the Duke consider of it accordingly (...) the Duke nor Rouvigny trust the
King with more than needs be: you know he is not good at keeping Secrets.

Dated February le 20, 75.
I Am not at all surprised at what I hear of Lord Treasurer and Lord
Lauderdail, but should have bin much, had they done otherwise than they have
done: let us remember Dr. Creytons Cat, and we never will confide in them, nor
rely so much on them, as that any thing they can do shall be able to dismay us;
and I hope the Duke is not at all, by what has happened yet. Throckmorton has
done what has bin in his power with Pompone; the whole business, as he has
told you in his two former Letters, is put into Rouvigny his hands, and truly
as much as appeared to Sir William Throckmorton, with auspicous circumstances
enough; it is therefore now between the Duke and Rouvigny, for it seems to
Throckmorton, that the thing must be done by Throckmorton, or that they have
not a design of doing it at all; and if it should happen to be the later, for
Jesus sake be not dejected at it, but on the contrary encourage and comfort the
Duke all you can; for on my Soul and Conscience, without affecting the
Preacher, I dare confidently utter my opinion, that God intends it for his
good, and that if he pleases but now to make use of those rare virtues of
courage and constancy with which Heaven has endued him, all this will turn to
his glory and advantage. My humble opinion in this case then, if I might give
it, (...) that if the King of France shall still continue to dodge, and give
the Duke no vigorous assistance for Dissolving the Parliament, that then the
Duke shall not continue to shuffle between the Parliament Dissolved, and the
Parliament (as I have given you my Reasons in my former Letters) but in Gods
name let the Parliament proceed and prosecute his Suit; it is true, this is not
the way one would have chosen, if the French King would have been persuaded to
understand his own interest; but if that cannot be, what great prejudice can
accrue to the Duke by the Parliament? none in the world say I, if he pleases
but with magnanimity and scorn to shake off those little wretches and their
Counsels, whom he has with too much patience hitherto suffered to bait him
continually to stoop and sneak to the Parliament; and will resolve never to
receive them again that have once betrayed him, but on the other side put on a
countenance, but above all, a mind full of noble and virtuous resolution and
courage, which will make him look boldly upon his worst, and make good use of
his best fortune; I say, if he pleases but to do this, and besides show all
(...) by the regulation of his Family (...) as the virtuous conduct of his own
person, how much he abhors and detests the debauchery of the Kings house, which
has made it so odious to all the Nation and the world, he will find that he
will have all the Wise, Sober, good people, and such as are worth having, as
well Protestants as Catholics on his side; and he shall live to see Lord
Treasurer, and D. of Lauderdail, and Lord Arlington, and all the rest of that
crew, knock themselves to pieces with the Parliament; and his resolution and
courage, and virtuous behavior, will not only keep the Parliament at a bay,
but will keep him also in his bounds too. For it is by the King his stooping to
the Parliament, the prejudice and dis-reputation will in great measure redound
upon the Duke, that the Duke is to apprehend damage from: now this the Duke his
resolution will in great measure prevent, by keeping the Parliament in some
sort within his limits; and it will over and above, when Lord Arlington, and
Lord Treasurer, and D. of Landerdail shall have bruised one another; and be at
last all crushed by the Parliament, necessitate the King to throw himself into
the Dukes Arms, who by that time will not only be strong in reputation, but in
reality too, by the conjunction with him of all (...) and generous men of
whatsoever Party, with which then he shall usefully be able to serve the King
and himself; for be not persuaded that the Protestants and Catholics make a
difference in this point, but between such as are Rogues, and design a Faction.
And to show you that this opinion is not only speculative, but that I can give
you a proof, that the Dukes cause by what is happened yet, is not at all lost or
deemed desperate in the opinion of (...) men; if you find that the Duke is
disposed to take this course, and this way defend his Birthright, his Honor,
and his Conscience altogether, I will then make you a Proposition of a number
of persons, who you will not doubt have honor and courage by this their
resolution, and I assure you are reckoned amongst the soberest and wisest part
of the Nation, most Protestants, or are at least in show, and 4000 l. or 5000
l. a year apiece, who ask or expect no Reward or Offices, but only ask that
the Duke will give them assurance, that he will not be persuaded hereafter to
abandon his own interest and them, and they will give him all the assurance on
their sides (...) desire, that themselves and their fortunes shall sink and
swim with him, and these are such as I dare assure shall perform their promise,
and not do as Lord Treasurer, and D. of Lauderdail; and some of them perhaps
have good interest with the Parliament too, that is, are of the same Families
(...) we are of his Cabal, but I am engaged upon my honor not to discover
them, till I know the Duke will take that course that they may be useful to
him, for they are unwilling (as you will believe they have reason) to expose
themselves and fortunes, and do the Duke no service neither: for to deal
plainly with you, they are so afraid of some that the Duke has about him, who
they say betray him, and would do them so too, that they by no means dare
discover themselves what is in their hearts, they are for the Dukes cause and
his disposition, which keeps multitudes of others in the same suspense say
they, for they all avow that it is not his being for the Catholics startles
them; they ask but the Duke to be resolved to continue governing himself with
virtue and moderation, to throw off such people as they say are about him and
betray him, and then give them his word, and they will stick by him against
Lord Arlington, and Lord Treasurer, and Landerdail, and the Parliament, and who
he pleases. I do not doubt but the Duke is courted now by the Lord Arlington
his Party, and some of the Parliaments too, but if ever he receives any that
have betrayed, he will go nigh to run the King his fortune, that is, always
abused by Knaves, when they see it for their purpose, and never trusted nor
relied on by honest men. I had yours of the 4th just now. Mr. Boteman sets out
on Sunday.

A Paper Entitled INSTRUCTIONS.
SEeing that his most Christian Majesty was angry that I went to England, but
that he did not show it for fear of giving any umbrage, and that for the same
reason he has not spoken with me, yet he has since prayed me to assure his
Highness, of some secret way that his Majesty does take his part in all
interests, and will serve him to the utmost of his power; and that he is
strongly persuaded that my Lord Arlington is not in the esteem of his Majesty,
nor in that of his Highness, although that some do labor to persuade him to
it: he says, The re-assembling of this Parliament will not be profitable for
the King or for his Royal Higness, although my Lord Arlington will endeavor to
uphold it; if therefore his Royal Highness shall judge it necessary to have
another Parliament, he will assist him with Money to have such an one and as he
shall desire; and prays him to make his Proposals thereupon, or upon any
other thing that he shall judge either needful or profitable, being resolved to
do all things possible for his Service. The Father has told me of the Knavery
of Monsieur de Sessaube, and of the folly of some others of ours; but
notwithstanding all that, and also though his Majesty knows very well, that
his Highness has sent into Flanders, which in truth gives him a little
umbrage, notwithstanding his Majesty is resolved to conside entirely in his
Highness, and to afford him all imaginable assistance; but above all, he
prays his Highness that he will endeavor by all ways and means to confirm a
perfect intelligence with his Brother; he told me morcover, that if Monsieur de
Rouvigny was not a Man to your liking, nor such a one upon whom you may wholly
rely, that if his Highness would give me the least order to advertise his
Majesty thereof, he would endeavor to send over another person.

The following LETTERS were writ by Cardinal Norfolk to Mr. Coleman.
Rome, January 4.76. SIR,
I Received your two this week, one of 19 November, by your Friends way here,
the other without date, by Sir H. Tichb. I am glad of the Prorogation, so that
the Parliament will not now in have trouble you again or others; and if finally
the King will resolve well, and keep close to it, all may yet do well; if not,
God have mercy on ye. I wrote last week, as I enclose now another to the same,
and assure the Duke I both can and will serve him and his faithfully to good
purpose, having already for the short time put all in excellent way, of which
more hereafter in due time, I having now very little, for so much I have to do.
Mr. Hayes at Arundel-house can tell you something particularly of my condition
here; time giving only leisure to add, I am

Yours as you know.

Rome, 8. Feb. Stilo Novo, 76. SIR,
I Suppose you received my Answer to your (...) received since my being here,
and the Duke my Answer unto his by Sir H. Tich. And you may be sure, that the
Pope will do all he can to serve the Duke in all occasions, as I can as
assuredly also answer for Cardinal Norfork both for his Affection and Duty,
hoping before very long to show it by deeds, in a due time and proportion. I
have in the interim written pretty full to Mr. Hayes (at my Brothers as you
know) to confer with you, what my time is too short to repeat about the old
business, in which the Portuguese would get the Queen to give Cardinal Norfolk
his place to a Portuguese, under several specious pretexts, as some of your
Friends give out here, will speedily be done; and if the King had not at first
hindered, would have been done by the Queen. Now therefore you are desired to
deal with the Duke, that he speak privately and efficaciously with the King, to
hinder it on all scores, both at present or at any time hereafter, etc. as Mr.
Hayes can tell you.

Another business is, that Cardinal Norfolk being written unto from Paris by
the Prince William of Furstenburg's Brother, to move the Pope's and others
credits with the Emperor for that Prince's Liberty; it is thought good (if the
Duke will please) to desire the King to send his Command to his late Envoy now
with the Emperor, to join his endeavor with those of the Pope's Minister now
at the Emperor, for the Liberty of the said Prince William, and also for the
Peace; and that Cardinal Norfolk may know from you or others securely, that the
King has sent such express Orders to his Envoy, now with the Emperor; of
which I will accordingly acquaint the Pope: who in the interim will send Order
there, to join with the King's Envoy's endeavors for that and the Peace. In
the same Order the King may also please to command his said Envoy, to join his
endeavors with another, who will quickly be sent by the Pope for the Peace; as
also the like is desired be sent to my Lord Barkley, Temple, and Jenkins, to
join with the Pope's Minister for the Peace; and please to let me know of all
fully, that I may accordingly dispose all here for the best, that I may
likewise my self write by the Pope's Minister to my Lord Barkley and the rest
about it. Henceforth, please to direct yours to me thus, A Monsieur Monsieur
Chaumont, commis du general des Posts, en son Office a Bruxells, pour fair
tenir a Monsieur Thomas Grane; and with this Superscription he will send them
me safe, as I have ordered him, and will also send mine to you safe and with
less expense, putting mine to you on my account as far as Bruxels; and if you
think it safest and quickest (as I think it may be) he can direct mine to you
by my good Friend Mr. Cook's way, who you know. I should have told you, that
although the French Ambassador nor his Brother the Cardinal, do neither
receive or give any Visit, or converse with any of the Cardinals of the last
Promotion, yet the said Cardinal has sent many Excuses and Complements to me,
how sorry he is, that he cannot at present visit and confer with me, as he does
mightily desire, etc. And I have as often sent the like Compliments to him; and
finally the other night at a great Assembly at the Queen of Sweden (who often
in public speaks mighty well of England and our Nation) her Majesty spoke to
me (ex abrupto) in French, (although she used always before in Italian) and
presently called on the Cardinal d'Estre (who was there with fifteen Cardinals
more) to hear how well I spoke French (as she said) better than herself; and he
approaching to her Majesty and me, who were alone talking, could not well but
speak to us both, which when he did to me, I answered accordingly, and
presently the Queen left us alone, so that I then began to talk to him of the
business you know, of which he said much, and I answered as much, hoping that
after the fury will be past, these Preliminaries may conduce to a good effect,
as is wished by

You know who.
Pray acquaint your Master and Mr. Hayes, and Mr. Vincent also.



Sir,
THe Bearer hereof being heretofore known to you, and having relation to me,
will not need many long Lines to desire you to believe him in what he can much
better inform you, than my Letters at this distance; and if betwixt this and
September you have any thing more particular to inform him, or to acquaint me
by him, he will about that time be returning hither; and in whatsoever may
concern your Master or Mistress, he will be most faithful and active; as
likewise for your self, whilst I need not reassure you of the same on my part,
being

Yours as you know, C. of Norfolk.

Rome, March 1.76.
Sir,
TIme being extraordinary short with me, Lect. pro Rege.
I cannot often answer yours, but ordered Mr Leybourn my Auditor to supply. Now
to your four last; unto the first I understand the Duke had mine, and was
pleased to say he would answer; however I wrote again unto him by Mr. Conne,
who I sent hence some days past, and I do now again, this Post, to him and the
Duchess (whose Answer to mine which you sent me I acknowledge) and desire
their Pictures. I send them as usually to the Portugal Ambassador, but if you
would have them sent to you, advise me that I may do accordingly: What you
write of the Archbishop of Dublin, his apparent Victory at Rome against his
Adversary is quire the contrary; for the Archbishop of Dublin is not in esteem
here, for that nor his other practices there, which are very ill relished;
neither did Cardinal Norfolk ever write or trouble the Duke with those affairs
which were more out of Faction than otherwise, and Cardinal Norfolk took Order
long since, That no Proceeding should be in it before his Arrival, that all
might be well Examined; and those unto whom it was committed, do much approve
of the Archbishops Adversaries Books. I wonder Mr. Sheldon makes so much
Noise in that affair also, having had no such Commission to trouble himself or
others in it, and if (as you say) he came thither chiefly about that business,
he might more quietly return as wise, and to as much purpose as he came; thus
much in short to your two first and two last which contain the same: And let
the Duke be assured Cardinal Norfolk will serve him and all the Catholics
whether they will or no, although the Archbishop of Dublin and his Friends are
enough to inflame all, if their Malice were not well known at Rome, and by
Cardinal Altieri, Fra. Barberin, and many others; But I dare answer Cardinal
Norfolk is of no Faction, but against the Factious, who are in great number but
cannot prevail in iniquitatibus suis. The Secretary of the Dutchesses Cipher is
not large enough, besides has not the Alphabetical Letters (necessary to make
words) and I find some numbers in his Letters which are not in the Cipher, pray
desire him to amplify it accordingly. The Archbishop of Dublin wrote hither to
Cardinal Altieri a very foolish, ridiculous malicious Letter against Cardinal
Fra. Barberin, as he has often other such like and worse ones to others of
manifest falsities, which I my self have seen and have actually, written by his
own hand; besides his forging false Letters is a constant old Custom of his. I
will say no more at present, lest I should say too much; but this I dare say,
that if the Duke make use of him or show him his Favor, he will much disgrace
himself and his Cause, and put both English and Irish Catholics in great
Division, which will be the easiest way for the Protestants to destroy them,
and every one wonders how Mr. Sheldon should be of late so great a Protector
and Friend of the Archbishop of Dublin, when to my knowledge (and many others)
he was quite the contrary (as he told me) not long before the Archbishop
pretending to Mr. Sheldons place about the Duchess, but it appears that Mr.
Sheldon and his Confederates by their late violent bending for the Archbishop
and his ways against the other is more out of Faction than Zeal: However let
not the Duke be troubled, Cardinal Norfolk will take care all be done according
to Justice, let it be for whom it will, Fiat Justitia and pereat Mundus. But
now I must tell you, I cannot but be sorry to understand (by Witnesses which I
can produce) that some chief of Mr. Sheldons Confederates have informed that
the Dukes affection is so much and only for those and the Confederates of the
French Kings Confessor, That he absolutely declared it, and said he would be
served by them only, which if so Vincent de Torre, and Cardinal Norfolks
Confederates may shut up their Shop and Traffic elsewhere, and I should be
glad to know it, to provide accordingly, for although it is most clear and true
what I said often in England, That if Cardinal Norfolk had not sent Fa. White
in Post haste from Rome where the Duchess was then, and that he and another of
his Confederates had not stoutly resisted and conclusively argued against the
Potent confrater of the French Kings Confessor, with the Duchess, that that
Duchess and none else as the other would have, (to put off the concluding of
this Duchess) was fitting, and to be had for the Duke, the whole business
(which was then broken off) would have been spoiled and broken off for ever;
But Cardinal Norfolk having notice from Paris at first of the breaking off of
the other Treaty, a particular Friend of his there thought first of that
Duchess which (God be praised) is, and spoke to Lord Peterb. of it. etc. (of
all which the said Lord Peterb. can tell you) and at the same time Cardinal
Norfolk wrote to several at Rome about it, and posted the abovenamed Fa. White
with full Instructions to employ all his little Wits and those of his
Confederates (whose House joyneth to that of the Duchess) to act all possible,
as they did to the right purpose, and ( nolens volens the juggling of others,)
argued so hotly and well that it was concluded quite contrary to the intention
and expectation of the Juggler's; My Lord Peterb. can tell you something of it,
and I can much more; but since the business is done its no matter, I did it not
to pick thanks, or for recompense to me or mine, but to serve the Duke and
Catholic Religion in England, yet I must tell you that not only Cardinal
Norfolk, but his also are as able to serve the Duke and Catholic Religion in
England as any whosoever, and both are in a greater power and esteem with the
Pope and Cardinal Altieri, and General all of his sort, and at Rome and Spain
than any whoever, and if the Pope live some considerable time (as its likely)
he will make a third like Cardinal Norfolk alive in great Esteem, Birth,
VVorth, etc. I will say no more, but as Cardinal Norfolk has served the Duke
long since in Flanders and England when he least thought of it, and yet knows
not of, so as he did it merely out of Affection and Duty, he will in all times
and places he can continue the same. Yet Cardinal Norfolk is not ignorant of
many ill Offices several others (whom God forgive) endeavored to do Cardinal
Norfolk with the Duke and Duchess, and also with the King and Queen for their
factious ends; however Que ambulat simpliciter, ambulat confidenter, as
Cardinal Norfolk always did, those malicious endeavors being but small
Flea-bitings, although they endeavored the like also with the Pope, Cardinal
Altieri, Barbarin, and all others they could at Rome, sed nihil occulium quod
non reveletur, Cardinal Norfolk had sufficient notice in England of all, and
now a more ample; but I will ever go the old straight way with the Pater noster
of demitte nobis debita nostra sicut and nos dimittimus debitoribus nostris,
which I do with all my heart, continuing with that other old Prayer of demitte
illis Domine quia neseiunt quid faciunt, and sic finitur. But unto the other
part of this point. I must again take leave to tell you, That it may do the
Duke no small prejudice, if the Catholics of England, or the Pope and Cardinal
Altieri with his Confederates of Rome should be persuaded of the Dukes
partiallity to any whatsoever: He may be a good Friend to any in general or
particular (amicus Plato sed magis tamen amica veritas) but partial to none, so
far as to the exclusion of others; Pray Sir, excuse my freedom, which posteth
my Pen beyond my first intention, whilst ex abundantia cordis os loquitur, and
let it not be that veritas odium parit, my intention is good whatever the
effects may prove. Finally, Liberavi animam mcam.

Now Sir, ad hominem (quia fragites sumus) excuse Cardinal Norfolk's humanity,
which must be mentioned whilst in this Valley of misery, as becomes an English
man, for the reputation at least of the King, Queen, Duke, Duchess and the
Catholics of England, if any of them have a true sense thereof, if not v deant
ipsi the fault, and shame will ly at their Door, and damage not Cardinal
Norfolk's, who will however be well able to do his Duty coram Deo and
hominibus; Is it not a shame for them all to thrust Cardinal Norfolk totally on
the Pope and Rome, who have already motu proprio done so much, beyond all
imaginable expectation? nay, is it not worse that the King others, should
endeavor to thrust Cardinal Norfolk on France, Spain or the Emperor, by most
whereof Cardinal Norfolk has several years since had great offers, but would
never bite at, and since made Cardinal Norfolk more powerful offered. But if
the King and the rest Judge him not worthy of wearing his own Masters Livery,
he will rather appear so naked as yet to cover pudicitiam patris (sive patriae)
sui with his own simple Coat, rather than Embroider it with others Livery, to
appear like a Bastard of his ingratae Patria. To obviate which, I proposed last
week to Monsieur Vincent Torre, an old expedient, I had heretofore thought of,
for another good end, and was of late practiced for another purpose; but
reflecting since that not only Qui cito dat, bis dat, but that those who
efficaciously intend only to give good words and future contingencies, on which
non datur scientia and quae nihil ponunt in re, will so put off things of
Execution, and always create or find difficulties, insomuch that nothing is
effected.

To avoid this therefore, and better clear all, I have bethought my self of
another more facile expedient, viz. That if the King will at once consider
Cardinal Norfolk, it may be thus: To Grant a Barrony unto such a one, whom he
may name, of Worth, Estate, Fidelity, Desert, etc. for which Cardinal Norfolk
may lawfully get a pretty Sum of Money, and of the rest, in due time, farther
Consideration may be had; This the Duke can best manage, neither will it be a
new wonder, or Scandalum Magnatum, although it should be even for a Catholic,
more than when the King would have made Sir Francis Ratcliffe what you know
(which was more) on the score, you know, I shall need say no more, Quia
sapienti and intelligenti pauca. If the King please to do it, and the Duke
please to Act the request and perfectioning of it with speed, Cardinal Norfolk
will gratefully acknowledge it accordingly, but if it be put off until better
or worse times of futuris contingentibus, I can although not Scientifically,
Prophetically (not as a Prophet, but as an etc.) guess it at an end, and will
no longer cast my ^^ap at it, but square it according to my other Mathematical
and Astronomical Instruments in other Regions, wherefore before the Actions and
Influences of the hot weather come on, I shall expect the determinations of
your cold Climates, least I should be frozen up before I can break the Ice in
due times and places.

Your last Letters were sealed on the Writings, that I can well make the
through sense out of them but by guess, your News is grateful, although your
old Friends have the same from you Weekly, but they have an Addition unto it,
which I was glad to hear of (although I vertually believed it,) of the Dukes
endeavors to hinder what the Protestants did to his Daughters of late, you
understand me, and if I had Letters (ut supra,) I could write more clearly of
somewhat else, in which the Pope was not so well satisfied as I wished, but I
have cleared the best I could, although I declared always my Opinion against
it; but others more Wise and Politic went the contrary way, and knowing my
Opinion, would not ask it me, as they did others, whom they thought to draw to
theirs, Sed in v^num Haboraverunt, not stating right, but Quibling and Juggling
the Question, and I having the Nuptial Vestiment, non fui vocatas ad naptias,
which I was glad of, however I often offered Cardinal Norfolk, and his
Confederates Services, which when accepted of, I hope to improve in all sorts
of respects as well as any; and as to a Pension for the Secretary of the
Duchess, I do not despair in time, when Cardinal Norfolk has a little more
entered into those and other affairs which he is now entering into, although you
know that Pensions are hard things to be gotten at Rome, yet in time I hope to
show how much Cardinal Norfolk is your true friend, as you know,

Rome, March 14. 76. My Time is quite spent, and Eyes almost out, writing so
much; no News, Cardinal Altieri had some misunderstanding with Cardinal
Barbarin the other day, Cardinal Norfolk keeps well with both.



Sir,
THIS Week we have no Letters by way of Flanders from England, Lect. pro Rege.
the French having intercepted them, as we are told; Sir Hen. Tich. is gone
away hence toward France, and so for your Quarters. The very morning early
before he went hence, I procured him a private Discourse with my Father here,
in which he was much satisfied, and will bring my Fathers particular
recommendations to the Duke and Duchess, although (as Sir Hen. wrote to you
sometime since,) at Rome they wonder the Duchess writes not to the Pope,
which when Cardinal Norfolk was first told of, he could hardly believe, being
those of Rome stand much on those Punctilio's, as you know, especially that the
Duchess being of that Country, either the Duchess or other about her should
remember her to do it, it being so easy a thing, nay, and on the matter a Duty,
wherefore if it be not yet done, I pray hasten it hither, and I will present it
with the best excusing Complements I can, for here they have a Good will for
the Duchess and the Duke, as they say, they showed to both in the Dispens.
which the Pope granted to the Duchess to be with the Duke, as they are,
although you know it was denied to the Duchess when she was in her own
Country which denial they say, was not on any ill will to the Duchess or the
Duke, but quite on the contrary, for both their good (the Pope having before
exhorted the Duchess unto it) but on other reasons which I suppose you know,
as also because the Pope was not fully satisfied of the Dukes being a
Catholic; which if so, there would have been no need of the Popes Dispens.
nay, that which then gave him doubt of the Dukes being a Catholic, and which
yet does not at all satisfy the Pope, or at Rome is the Duke doing as (they
esteem it) the contrary, by going (as you know) with the Protestants, which you
know was long since condemned by former Popes, that the Catholics could not,
etc. and in that point I confess I was put to my Trumps in Rome, when it was
objected to me, although I must as duly confess, it was never yet my Opinion in
England that any Catholic could do it, and so I did clearly declare my self,
when, and wheresoever I thought I ought, or that it was asked me, but I was
informed, not long before I left England, that otherwise people proposed
something confusedly (not to term it otherwise) to some whom they thought
convenient, to pick out in order to say something to that purpose, nascitur
rediculus mus; and so went on, as before, hand over head, it being well for me
not to have been called to so wise a business, since they and others knew I was
not wise enough to understand, being I did never love to go headlong in a
business above my low Capacity, nor endeavor to run hand over head, before I
can well go on my own Legs, much less on others Shoulders. Finally, I think I
could talk a great deal more Nonsense on this, than is fitting to be written,
it being more excusable, when ex abundantia cordis os loquitur; then when ex
stultitia manu scribitur; I would however say and write, that hitherto I cannot
perceive the right way has been taken for the Duke and Rome to understand
thoroughly one another, nor the Catholics and the Pope neither, but by
confused, undigested (and too often Factious) Notions, which will never do
rightly the Catholics of Englands affairs: The Pope does not at all desire the
Duke to do any thing indiscreetly, or precipitantly, that all England may
openly say, The Duke is a Catholic, leaving that unto his own discretion for a
due time: but to do any thing to the contrary, as Rome thinks (ut supra) the
Pope cannot approve of; I have however (I am sure) done my part with Rome for
the Duke, who is not so much to be blamed on his side, if others who should
know more do not condemn, but rather approve, or at least connive therein. But
of all this, and somewhat more, more hereafter: Interim, as to what you mention
of a 100000 Crowns or more from Rome for the Duke is a Noli me tangere at
present; which the very fear of so considerable a business so hard to be
gotten, would frighten Rome: In order to other more easy things for the Duke
and Catholics, we must first clear other small stumbling Blocks, least we run
on Precipices not so easily to be gotten off; and I hope all will do well,
although Rome remembers, and speaks often, how in last Queen of Englands time,
another Pope was deceived of much more than a 100000 Crowns, under pretense of
the Catholics in Ireland; However as I wrote unto you before, I am not out of
hopes in some time to get a Pension for the Dutchesses Secretary, but all
Affairs here must be well matured first, and a perfect understanding betwixt
the Duke and the Pope, and Cardinal Altieri and Rome: For although I assure
you, That both the Pope and Cardinal Altieri have a particular Esteem for the
Duke that must be improved, and well modelled, that if he come to need it, the
Cardinal of Norfolk may the better endeavor it: And, for this purpose I think
it not amiss, to tell you. That Cardinal Norfolk had some days since a Letter,
of the one and thirtieth of January, lest at his Lodging, from the Duke, by I
know not who, yet he called himself the Duke's Agent; and, by what Cardinal
Norfolks Servant tells me, He seems to be an Italian, as it is most probable;
for, if he were of England, I think, he would not so publicly give himself
that Name, which can do the Duke no good at present to be called so in Rome
publicly: Although I think it were very fitting, the Duke should have a good
one; and, if he like of it, Cardinal Norfolk offers him who uses to write to
you; Mr. J. Lay; for whose Ability, Fidelity and Activity, Cardinal Nortolk
will answer, and, what he cannot do, Cardinal Norfolk will supply, and this
without taking the name of it or any Interest, which, certainly others would
expect, and perhaps want; but he does neither. This you may offer the Duke in
Cardinal Norfolks and his name.

Here it is said, The Empress is not like to live; if so, why might it not be
thought of matching the Eldest of our Princesses there, or, if not, France or
Spain.

I am much obliged to the Duke and Duchess for Endeavors, if need be, That
the Queen of England should think of Removing Cardinal Norfolk: But, by what I
hear from the Portuguese and others, I think there is no such Intent: It having
been only the Invention and malicious Reports of some; however my Obligation
to the Duke, Duchess and Secretary is the same. I wrote of late by Sir He --
to the Duke and Duchess, and unto the Secretary, not long before; unto which I
remit my self.

Cardinal Altieri and Balberini have no great intrinsecal Friendship, which I
suppose you know.

April, 18.
SIR,
I Wrote to you a few Days since, and last Week received your Two together, of
the 17th and 20th of March; the Two precedent Post-Letters being lost: having
been taken a few Leagues from Bruxels, So that, if you, or any Friends wrote
any thing worth replying, please to give notice to them, as I do you: What you
wrote of the Dukes being Advanced one step toward the Catholic Religion, was
a most welcome News to Cardinal Norfolk, who presently rejoiced our Pope and
Cardinal Altieri with it: and now yours of the Twenty seventh has fully
completed Cardinal Norfolk, our Pope, and Cardinal Altieri's Joy with it; As
also the Dutchesse's Mother and Grandmother, who are in Rome, and Cardinal
Norfolk presently acquainted. No wonder if Fools talk like Fools, and Knaves
like themselves.

Your Correspondent I assigned you is your humble Servant: But we will not
always too often trouble you with superfluous Expensive Letters: ospecially my
self, who am mightily straightened for want of Time.

My Humble Duty to the Duke, whom I will serve unto the Death, the best I can;
as also the Duchess, who I hope will being forth an happy Catholic: Here some
are curious to know who will be Godfathers and Godmothers.

Yours, as you know
2d May Please to send Mr. Vincent word, I have his of the 24th of March.



May 16th, 1676.
Sir,
I Receive together your two of Friday the 7th, and Monday the 10th April,
being much rejoiced the Duke does so well, not doubting of Gods blessing, but
if the Duke or Duchess employ the Archbishop of Dublin, or his Adherents in
Rome, it will but confound their and the Catholics affairs with chymerical
Visions, which at Rome are not esteemed more than to spoil real affairs.
Neither will Rome esteem a Benedictine coming on such things as belong not
properly to his Trade. But suppose his business is to get a little Money for
himself, which is not so easily parted withal, and as to Prince Rinaldi's
affair, Cardinal Norfolk has twice (although no body ever spoke to him of it)
spoken earnestly about, but as affairs stand, nothing can at present be done
for many Reasons, and you may be sure that Card. Fr. Barberine, who has so
long endeavored it, and the Dutchesses Mother now at Rome, and Card. Norfolk,
will do their best when a fitting time and occasion will be, without others,
foolish impertinent busybodies; and as to the A. B. of Dublins prevailing
with the Duke in his late Resolution, few or none will believe it here, he
being so used to write falsehoods and forgeries, that his saying it makes it
not believed, but if it were so, de bono opere non lapidamus te. He did his
duty, for which God recompense him. And as to what Mr. Sheldon pretends to say
in the other point, betwixt the A. B. of Dublin and his adversary, Rome needs
not such learned wits, to teach those who know better, others have already as
foolishly been fidling, but neither Fiddler or Fidlestick is regarded. They may
teach fools to dance if they can, for that Tune sounds not right where a
better is used. The best employment Mr. Sheldon can for the Duke and Duchess
is to become a Benedictine, and pray for them quietly, whilst having nothing
else to trouble you withal at present I am,

Yours as you know.

Sir,
A Although I receive yours duly, yet I unwillingly trouble you with my empty
Letters, having nothing hence worth your knowledge, but as before, that
whatsoever I can with the Pope for Prin. Rinaldi being a Cardinal I shall do my
best in, and I am glad the Duchess will write to the Pope which if ever before
done, it is a wonder it was not delivered, as Card. Alteri (who should know)
tells me, but when this comes I will deliver it, and tell both how the
Duchess supposed hitherto a former was. Your Correspondent will be ready to
obey the Dukes commands when he shall be honored with them, and certainly has
good abilities for it. The new invented reports of a Bishop for England are
Chymera's; that having long since been disposed of, although the Benedictines
and others played the fools to stop the Execution of it in England when it was,
not intended to be made use of but in due time, which others (at least as good
as the Benedictines and the Caballers) ought to judge, and when due time will
be, the same party per se vel per alium, vel alios, may do what will be to be
done for since the Benedectines could not get to be a Bishop they would have
two Bishops in hopes to be the one, which would be altar contra altar, as in
Ireland betwixt Armagh and Dublin, but would be ever pejor priore, so that they
may set their Minds and Tongues at rest, and look well to what is committed to
them. The French fired the Spanish and Holland Ships and Galleys at Palermo
most shamefully, as I suppose you will hear more particularly from others. They
say many of English Mariners were with the French. My service to all Friends;
Mr. Conne I suppose with you. I am

Yours as you know.
June 20.
Sir,
I Shall not need to make any particular Recommendations unto you of the bearer
hereof, he being my Nephew, and in whom you may securely have all confidence in
any thing which may concern your Master, as your self, or me; for I assure you
he has a right esteem and fidelity for all, added to his natural good nature
as well as good parts; and as affairs may occur, he will from time to time
confer with you. He carries along with him some things for your Master and
Mistress from my Patron, which you will be glad to see, whilst I remit the rest
to him, remaining,

Sir, Yours as you know, Card. of Norfolk.
Rome 12. June, 1677.
Rome 27th July, 1677.
Sir,
THe adjoined Packet, which I now direct to you, contains the Pope's brief in
answer to the second Letter from his R. H. My Nephew, who carried the other,
may about this time be near his journey's end with it; I assure my self they
will both be very welcome, as that which occasioned them was to his Holiness.
God grant to this new Correspondence a blessing, whereof the whole Nation may
experience happy effects. I render you hearty thanks for your weekly favors,
which is all I can do at present, there occuring to me here no other kind of
return worthy your acceptance. The Animosity of those persons who formerly gave
you some trouble is now I hope much relented; since your late Letters have made
no mention of it. I wish you may continue to enjoy your satisfaction in this
point, that your friends may thereby have the satisfaction of better enjoying
you. I shall have my part herein, as being,

Sir, Your Affectionate Friend, Card. of Norfolk.

The Letters next following were written from the same place (Rome) by Mr.
Leyborn to Mr. Coleman. Mr. Leyborn is said to have been in nature of a
Secretary to the Cardinal of Norfolk.
Sir,
I Found in one of your last Letters to Mr. Grane, a desire of more punctual
Correspondence from me then Ordinary whilst the Conclave sits: This desire
shall be complied with, so far as it is possible for me, but I fear your
Curiosity will not thereby remain fully satisfied; those within the Conclave,
who look more religiously upon their Obligation, keeping their secrets to
themselves; And amongst the great variety of reports which fly abroad, it is
not easy to distinguish truth from falsehood. I shall therefore be sparing in
delivery of such particulars, leaving you to the public fame, which in the
Case may upon the matter be relied upon as well as the intelligence of those
who pretend to have the best information. You will find here the list of the
Cardinals which you desire, ranged under their several parties or heads, but
the order of their promotions is not exactly observed, especially in the
Creatures of Altieri and Ursini, (who before the other of the same name dyed
was called S. Sisto) should be in the fourth place and Baladonne in the 9th.
There may be other pretenders to the Papacy besides these which are mentioned;
But I mark those which are most remarkable. Card. Norfolk has received Letters
from the King and Duke, enjoining his adherence with France, which he answers
by this Post, that to the Duke the Secretary of the Durchess will see. I refer
you to other particulars to what I have writ unto my Lord Arundell; and Card.
Norfolk to Mr. Hayd. Card. Norfolk will not except the offer from France of
Albi, dreading the dependence which would follow. A like offer from Spain has
been refused; Many are of opinion the Conclave will last long, especially if
the French persist in their animosity against Altieri, who will be able in
spite of them to hinder the Election of any whom they would endeavor to have
chosen without his concurrence. It would be a great service to the Church if
this quarrel (which seems to have no deep bottom) were taken up; The present
conjuncture seems most proper for it, and Card. Norfolk might be a proper
instrument. I hear our Countryman the Cardinal of Norfolk has his health well
in the Conclave, and gains much in the opinion of his Brethren. As matter
occurs to feed your Curiosity, you shall hear further from,

Sir, Your most humble Servant. W. L.
Sept. 5.
Sir,
THe Letters which came from you the last week, had been acknowledged and
answered the ordinary day, and by the ordinary way, had not the expectation of
the great business perfected this morning made me willing to defer writing two
days longer. Cardinal Odeschelechi is the person on whom the great lot is
fallen, by an unanimous consent of the Electors, and who was designed before by
a general desire of the people; the two great Catholic Monarchs concurring
likewise in the Election, by their approbation of it, we have reason to promise
our selves that great matters will be done in his Pontificalte, for the
advancement of Catholic Religion. We want here no more at present to render
our joys complete, than to be assured that your Mistress is happily delivered
of a Young Prince. This we hope will be the Subject of your next Letter, which
therefore is expected with great impatience. My Lord has by the Currier who
carries these, writ both to your Mistress and the Duke: You need not be put in
mind, how requisite it is that the Duchess lose no time in this occasion, but
write with what convenient speed she can to his Holiness, from whom she may
promise her self all expressions that ought to be expected of a most tender and
Fatherly affection. The time I have for writing of this is stole from other
businesses, which now calling for it again, Oblige me to Subscribe,

Sir, Your most humble Servant. W. L.
Rome, Sept. 21. Card. Norfolk judges it necessary that the Duke write also to
the Pope, and that the Duchess Secretary may do well to propose; what was writ
in the last Letters concerning Prince Rinaldi will be taken into serious
Consideration: greater difficulties are to be overcome than you there without a
long Discourse will easily be persuaded of, however the person to whom the
business is recommended will not be wanting on his part: [This last P. S. is
writ with the Cardinals hand.]


Just now I understand of the Duchess delivery of a Princess, which I told the
Pope, and all the Cardinals of, who are all very glad; the Popes name is
Innocentius XI.



Rome, Apr. 17th.
Sir,
YOu will not wonder at my seldom Writing, if you consider how little there
occurs here to write of. Mr. Gr. desires me to render you his thanks for your
weekly favors, and to let you know that the Letter which the Duke wrote to the
Pope, and which was given to Mr. Con, has miscarried: The Nunce at Paris does
acknowledge to have received of Mr. Con the Packet in which it was, and does
say he sent it hither, but here it cannot be found. The Card. of Norfolk has
made this known to the Pope, and Cardinal Cibo, who says the only remedy now is
a Duplicat. I can give you no news hence worth your knowledge; Affairs at the
Palace go on in their flow train. Monsieur di Luca the Pope's Auditor and
Favorite has these days past been at death's door, but now there is hope of
his recovery. The common speech is, that his Holiness will shortly call to Town
some of his kindred, and confer Honors on them without Salaries. It is also
said there may probably be a Promotion of Cardinals about whitsuntide, but
nothing is more uncertain here than reports of this nature. Foreign occurrences
are the great matter of Discourse, in which how much our wise men mistake, you
may guess by a report, which some principal persons were Authors of last week,
and which upon their credit was much believed, viz. That his R. Highness was in
very few days expected in Florence, and that Sir Bern. Gascoyn by the great
Dukes Order was gone to receive him at the Frontiers of that State. Some other
passages concerning England, directly contrary to truth have been assured with
great confidence, and accordingly believed. The Pope has lately distributed
some small Pensions to the Cardinals of the last promotion, not sufficiently
provided for by his Predecessor. The C. of Norfolk has (as I hear) for his
share 1600 Crowns, part whereof is to expire at the end of 6 Years, according
to the style of Pensions given upon Benefices in Spain and Portugal. This help
is thought by those who know his Condition, to have but small proportion with
his necessities. But in this interressed Country, and thrifty Pontificat, any
little Provision of this kind is thought considerable. I wish you all happiness
and remain,

Your most humble Servant.

29, May.
Sir,
MY last was of April 17. which I hope got safe to your hands; it was to
acquaint you with the miscarriage of the Duke's Letter to the Pope, recommended
long since to Mr. Caun. But the Pope remaining sufficiently satisfied by Card.
Norfolk, that the Letter of the Duke was brought to Paris and given to his
Nuncios hands, and addressed to Card. Norfolk, resolved without expecting the
duplicat or such another Letter, concerning which I wrote in my last, to direct
a Brief to the Duke which will be carried by Mr. Thomas Howard. Card. Norfolk
does not doubt but the Duke will reply thereupon, and hopes in the mean time
that the expected duplicat, will meet with better success than the Letter last
sent.

June 5.
Now the Brief directed to the Duke is in Card. Norfolk's hands, nothing finer
or more full of that kind could be expected. Mr. (...) in few days does depart
with it, he carries also for the Duke and Duchess two pair of Beads from the
Pope, with most ample Indulgences. It was desired here that some English Priest
should be with the Pope's Nuncio at Nimegen, Mr. Godden was named by Card.
Norfolk, but he desiring to be excused, I think Mr. Caun will go. My service to
our Friend in Fleetstreet.

June 25.
Noise of peace is heard here from all places, we hope shortly to have it
publicly proclaimed by singing of a Te Deum. I thank you for your Postscript
which is concerning Mr. Platt, who is now so impertinent, as to declare that he
was always a Protestant in his heart. (...) expects with great impatience an
Order to recall him, and certainly Mr. Platt does deserve it.

July 9.
The hope you give that Mr. Platt will be recalled is very welcome to the Duke
of Florence. There is great need of it, for the Inquisition has already begun
to stir in it. Card. Cibo has made complaint of it to the Resident of
Florence, as I have signified more particularly to Lord Arundell. I long for
your next which because it promises much, which straitness of time made you
omit in the last.

July 10.
My last which was by the last Post acquainted you that the Letter of the Duke
of York to the Pope was received, the good man in reading it could not abstain
from Tears. Card. Norfolk does (...) answer will shortly be sent, though upon
the matter it has been done anticipatedly; greater tenderness, with expression
of kindness and esteem, could not be expected, as you are desired to signify.

July 16.
What has come to your mind concerning a Match with the Prince of Florence,
and our Lady Anne, deserves better reffections then I am able for the present
to make of it; setting aside the interest which might move the Duke of Florence
to desire it. I am verily persuaded that the great respect he has for the Duke
of York, would set a great weight upon his Inclination to carry him toward it;
I had yesterday a Letter from the Duke of Florence, who continues his pressing
earnestness for compassing the business which has been so often mentioned. I
doubt it may linger a great while if such a reason be expected as may satisfy
the Enemies of Religion. I think it might suffice to allege, that Mr. Platt is
very unwelcome to the Duke of Florence.

July 30.
The Court here will not be well pleased, till the new difficulties which
obstruct the peace at Nimegen be removed.

July 24.
Mr. Gr. is your servant, this day he has a brief of the Pope in answer to the
letter of the Duke.

Aug. 6.
These must acknowledge the receipt of yours June 28. and July 1. The
Postscript in one of them was very welcome, for the satisfactory matter, it
gave me for a Letter to the Duke of Florence, after two weeks silence to the
point he is so much concerned for. The same Post did also bring me a Letter
from Lord Arundell to the same effect, which I shall thank for shortly. Card.
Norfolk has writ to the King, and sent a Letter from the Queen of Sweden,
desiring him to take her into his protection at the Treaty in Nimegen. Reasons
to prove the Justice of her pretenses are sent to Mr. Cook. Card. Norfolk would
be well pleased if Mr. Coleman would promote this Interest with the Duke.

Aug. 13.
I have had thanks this week from the Duke of Florence, for the account gave
him the last, of what was contained in Letters from Lord Arundell, and Mr.
Coleman about Mr. Platt.

Aug. 20.
We have had this week three from you, one of them gave hopes of a Letter from
the Lord Arundell. I am indebted to our friend in Fleetstreet for two Letters.

Sept. 11.
A Brief was sent last year dated about the month of May, and carried from
hence by an Irish Bishop. Card. Norfolk would know if it were delivered to the
Queen, the answer was late expected. Card Barbarin is in pain to know whether a
Picture which he sent to her R. H. has been received.

Nov. 20.
Yours of October 5 and 8. found me in the Country with Mr. Gra. to morrow we
return to Rome. I am sorry that my Letter of September 11. as to that part
which was in Cipher, after the trouble it had given you, proved at length not
intelligible. That which Card. Norfolk would know if delivered to the Queen,
was a Brief sent to her from the Pope last year, about the month of May, and
given by Card. Norfolk to an Irish Bishop, who not passing by England delivered
it to the Lady

Nov. 28.
The Confidence with which Mr. Coleman ends his Letter to the Prince does much
please; But that delivered by Mr. Caun, in naming to Duchess Lauderdale the
Correspondent of Card. Norfolk is wondered at. I hope Mr. Coleman will on this
accident judge it necessary to proceed with more caution, and send a false name
to write to him. Card. Norfolk has had some answer from Portugal but no
resolution, Englands Competitor is not Card. D'estre but Rospilias, to whose
Uncle the Prince and Princess of Portugal owe their Marriage.

Dec. 18.
We are told the Duke of Modena intends a journey to London, Card. Norfolk will
to his power second the demand which Card. Barberin is to make in behalf of
Prince Rinaldo; he says that concern was never touched by the Duke or Duchess
in any Letter to him, nor did the Duchess of Modena when she was here seem to
relish it much.

Jan. 1. 1678.
The Letter of the Duke to the Pope, about the Marriage of his Daughter to the
P. of Orange has been delivered. I confess the Pope remains satisfied that the
Duke was in no fault, but in his intended answer will not touch that point.
The business of the Prince Rinaldo I fear is not yet ripe.

October. 1. 1678. Intercepted.
This Week's Post brought but one from you under date of Aug. 23. it was
almost overtaken by an Express dispatched from Nimegen by the Pope's Nuncio,
who yesterday morning brought the welcome Nevvs of a Peace made betvveen
France and Spain: His Holiness went yesterday afternoon to St. Marie Major to
thank God for that public benefit, and Te Deum like to be Sug:

There were several Letters writ to Mr. Coleman by the late Earl of Berkshire
under the borrowed name of Rice. The names of principal men and matters are
therein expressed in words of Cabal or Cipher: which there was not any key
found to open and explain. But at the Committee of Lords there was the
following key made; but made by Conjecture only; and therefore it is not
warranted for certain. But, the Reader may use this or his own sense, and
Conjecture upon the 4 or 5 of the Letters here exhibited.

March the 7th 1674/5 William Rice.
Lady D. York Patch Arlington Brother D. York Trees Great men, Lord Treasurer
Ladys Sister The King Oak The Treasury Lady to be passively neutral, etc. D.
York to be passive in the matter of dissolving Parl. Adversaries The Protestant
party The two Trees Parl. and Protestant party Yorkshire and Dorset Atturnies.
Buckingham and Shaftesbury Bothoakes Lord Treasurer and L. Ladies Niece Duke of
Monmouth The Aunt The Duke


October. 20. 1674.
Wife of Shaftesbury The Nonconformist Interest


Without Date.
Dorc. Atturneys Letter Shaftesburys letter to Carlisle Gardiners brother The
Duke The two trees The Parl. and Protestant Religion, or, Protestant Relig. and
Property Ladys Sister The King Ladys house Romish Religion Plenipotentiary Lord
Treasurer Champerty Court dissimulation, or undermining My Friend D. Buckingham
Ladies friend over the Dike The French King A Term A Session of Parliament New
Assize A New Parliament His Mistress The Popish Cause The Grand Jury The
Parliament Men


September 10. 1674.
SIR,
I Have received yours dated August the 28th. and if your Lady pleases with
Confidence to retain me in her Cause, as you say she will, she may rest most
secure to be both Faithfully and Uncorruptibly served, according to the old
English Oath of an Attorney, without Fear, Favor, or Affection; from hence
therefore I resolve not to stir, upon no other bodies Call nor Fees, until I
have her special Command to come up to Westminster, and full Instructions how
to move when I am there, which must be your part to see done and prepared in
the mean time, because I would think a little thereupon between this and then,
since the impertinentest of officiousnesses is to pretend to be wiser in other
folks concerns than they are themselves; yet give leave to say that I doubt
very much words will not be kept with her by those whom chiefly she does depend
on, not to shrink in the day of Battle, when bullets begin to fly thick and
near; and though my Brother Attorney of Dorchest. and his whole packed jury
saving two of the number, who are my Cousin Germains originally, are Cowards,
let not that comfort you at all, for if you remember after Clinias was driven
into the water, he fought like a lion; besides, the ills which they have
already done, to speak the plain truth, cannot be safe but by attempting
greater, wherein the Ladies Niece if good care be not early taken will have a
considerable portion.

I would you saw as I do because of my Ladies former displeasure toward me,
which makes them lie at something an opener Guard with me in this particular
then they do perhaps with others of the same profession, what postings, and
meetings there are up and down the Country about this matter, to the exaltation
of the Niece, usque ad Coelum, and to the crying down of the Aunt, nay and to
such an insolence is the little Atturny grown, that when applications are made
unto him, from the Center of all these lines, as you well observe, and the man
for whose sake I first fell into disgrace with the Lady to admit them into his
Counsels and interests, the urchin still answers quod cum impiis non vult
Conversatio, and that he intends to do his work not by such assistances, sed
solum ex pondere causae; wherefore if any Champarty masculine or feminine of
that kind could be proved in open Court it were not amiss, but when the thing
comes to the touch, you will see that it will not abide the trial nor bear water.

The giving of money then is all I can apprehend to be dangerous in this Case,
with a Condition to exclude the Aunt out of the entaile, because upon those
terms no separate proviso can serve her turn, only conduce toward the
invalidating the testimony of her witnesses and Friends.

I desire to here only that you have gotten this note safe into your hands,
show it unto my Lady at seasonable opportunities, and ever esteem me without
welt or guard

Your faithfullest Friend and Servant, William Rice.

October 20. 1674.
I Have Received yours dated the 13th. of this month, these come to you by a
secure hand, else I would not venture to write out of paraboles.

The new Parliament is that which the Dorsetshire Attorney, and all his Clients
have now in chase, Consultations are on foot how to frame addresses for it,
within the compass of the Law.

Tell our Lady from me that she has but one point seriously to intend, which
is to make herself, and not be denied the Commission, mediatrix of the Peace,
which France as well as Spain are more inclined toward than ever, because of
the unruliness of the German Confederates, for should either the Duke of
Buckingham, or my Lord of Arlington get that Employment from her, nay any one
besides, there is an end of her story: By reason if the new Parliament cannot
be obtained, to have their own Creatures trusted with this mediation, is the
only hope they have left; I mean the wife of Shaftsbury: could they and their
adherents be authors of the general peace upon the nick of this Conjuncture, I
am afraid France will not stick so close to the Lady, as perchance she
believes they would, since to my knowledge they are actually in treaty at
present with those two persons whom I last named to this very purpose,
therefore you see in this cause I do not juggle nor regard either peculiar
Interests, or friendship: for the Duke of Buckingham till he be at the brink of
death, will never be right to our Cause more, both because he does think the
Lady underhand has used him hardly in the matter of his late persecutions, as
also, that most of our persuasion were in the contrivance of the petition which
was delivered in Parliament against my Lady of Shrewsbury and him, though
perhaps both equally mistaken, however, I must be sincere always with you, for
so it is, and if my Lord of Arlington can obtain the Commission aforesaid, then
a rope for the Pope, and long live the house of Nassaw, you see clearly I trust
you, therefore I am sure you will not suffer the integrity of a poor Country
Cloathier to be abused.

I tell you again, if they can get the acting of the Peace into their hands, in
one word, they will be able to do their work, peractum agere, and much better
hilted than it was the last time, for so will they be Masters of the Case of
all Subsidies, both abroad and at home, which you cannot be ignorant somewhere
is a potent argument; but to those who look asquint upon things and men that
are above their reach, these I easily believe will be held Chimerical
Speculations.

Should the matter be ordered so as to make the new Parliament the Cause of the
Peace, or the Peace the means of the new Parliament, our Lady may when she
pleases retire to hunt at her hired house in Suffolk.

All that I desire from you is to let me know, as soon as you can, whether or
no this Parliament shall meet and sit again the 13th. of April, for the rest I
can better inform you of, than you me, in relation to Country transactions.

To conclude, nothing can save us but resolution, and throwing off the masque,
since none but children can be so weak as to imagine they are not known through
a vizzard, as much as without one on their Faces. My notes are ready, and
transcribing to be sent you, let the Lady consider them, and dispose thereof as
she thinks good; for it is a maxim I shall never quit, not to pretend to be
wiser in other folks matters than they are themselves. I beseech you burn these
after our Lady has seen them, I shall be very impatient till I am sure they
are safe come to your hands, farewell.

When I say Resolution, do not think I expect Impossibilities, Deus non coget
ad impossibilia, nor am Ignorant how difficult it will be to get that herb out
of a Garden, where nothing but irresolution grows.

November 20. 1674.
THese come to you by a very safe hand, therefore be not afraid to read them,
this was very unseasonable hunting weather, as I writ before, unless there be
something at the bottom of that resolution which we do not see, for never
think that these Carneval Plenipotentiaries go into Holland only to make
merry with their wives kindred there, and less that if my Lord Latimer goes
along with them, that he can either make or mar any sport, besides the treaty
betwixt France and the Suedes and Rohans Conspiracy, whether true or false will
have influences here that must of necessity make the little Dorsetshire Attorney
and his Associates look seriously about them in order to their own
preservation, you say that neither his R. H. My Lord Treasurer, nor the Duke of
Lauderdale knew any thing of this Mysterious Journey, and then you may be sure
it cannot be good, but thus much I can write upon certain knowledge, that their
Emissaries do go up and down from Country to Country, to settle the minds of
the people, that the Parliament will infallibly Sit, and meet in April again,
and for an earnest token thereof do give them instance by the sudden renewing
of the order for prohibiting of Papists from coming to Court, for out of whose
quiver that came I need not tell you, only this I can tell you, that since he
is Canonized not only for the best Statesman, but also for the best Protestant
that ever was in England since my Lord of Clarendan's departure, you say we
shall see something about the latter end of the Term, I pray God heartily that
the Lady do not too often take nothing for something, yet am not ignorant of
the difficulties she labors under neither, by my former Letters which I
wrote unto you touching the matter of the Peace, I still intimated that if the
Commission to treat it were taken out of her hands there was an end of the
story, for if this Parliament does ever meet again, good night, but standers by
cannot understand the course of the Cards so well as those that play them,
therefore will I say no more of this particular, though I be strongly persuaded
within my self, that the Prorogation was resolved only to try to make the
better bargain for the ruin of us all, which if it can be effected, remember I
tell you let those whom she most depends upon without naming any body,
promise never so deeply to the contrary, she will be deserted and left alone,
sicut passer solitarius in tecto, for this Convention of Bishops which you
mention, is only pararevias thereunto, since, to say the truth, that Church
has no other expedient left how to subsist, these few scribled lines are
directed to no other eyes but your own, pray write largely unto me once for all
by this bearers return who is secure and trusty, and believe that in the whole
world you have not a faithfuller Servant than

William Rice.

Show this Note to the Lady.
IT is my duty the Lady should know all things which come to me whatever they
are, considerable or not, to judge, and make what use of them she thinks best.

Here was with me last night one of the Caball and a near Relation, who says
he can propose the greatest matters unto her imaginable in order to her
preservation and no less, in case the Parliament does meet but with this
restriction to me, that proffered service stinks, it is a vain time, and the
present state of affairs makes most men more presumptious and vain than
otherwise they would perhaps be.

His Proposals consist but of two Parts, the one to obtain a proviso of
Exemption for her in the grand intended Bill against Popery, and the other by
the same proviso as he says he can demonstratively show that he is able to
make good, that all her former offices, Bailwicks and places shall be
re-invested in her again.

The Lady seemed to approve of taking in all persons, I will be caution that
this man shall not break his word, but not suretiship that he may not reckon
without his host, he will not come unless sent for, all which I submit to the
Lady's better judgment, having Commission to bring him thither whenever she
pleases to Command his attendance

William Rice.
Saturday Morning.
Oh formose Puer nimium ne creed dolori.
TO answer yours then of the 15th. March both Latin and English, I presume that
ever this you may have seen the Dorsetshire Attornys circular letter to his
Companions, because every Coffee-house has Copies of it, wherein he does not
only mention, a new Trial, but also a new Jury, or else resolves flatly not to
come up to the Assise.

But an intimate friend of his told me no longer agon than yesterday, that he
is sure nothing can be more remote from his heart, than a new Jury, and that he
does give out this only, Captare Benevolentiam with the Grand jury men, and
John Bothoaks their Solicitour, because says the crafty Pettifogger unto
them, I move thus only for your sakes, since whatever I desire, the Judge will
never grant, and so have dexterously avoided a new Jury by seeming to demand
one, which considering the humor of the man's dealing is not totally improbable.

Pray acquaint the Lady with this particular, because it is most true and worth
her knowing.

I am very glad to hear it again confirmed by you, that the Gardeners brother
proves a good man, he says right, the two Trees must down, which now there is
no more dispute cannot stand without the undermining of the Ladies house, but
all the craft will be how to get them removed, for which the Gardiners Brothers
Tools I doubt are not sharp enough, besides those who have promised to work
with him, when the Spade comes to the Rock it is to be feared may digg Counter,
for at present it is a tough piece of labor, and will continue so until the
Ladies Sister does feel the inconvenience of their standing there as well as
she herself has felt it already.

That the Lady has gotten a Plenipotentiary of her own choosing is good, if he
does not find that he must digg against the Rock too, for then as well as I
love the man, he is not to learn this lesson of the Ladies, of any Church
whatsoever, durum erit tibi contra stimulum calcitare, my friend, I begin to
hope may do well by something I have heard of him, whereof more by the next
return.

Send me word I entreat you what Bills are upon the Stocks, and whether there
be one in hand to exclude the Catholic Lords from Sitting and Voting in the
House of Peers, that I may prepare accordingly.

Since the Priests and Monks are all gone, when they are beyond Seas again, more
Masters of their Conceptions than they were here, I pray God that they may
write no foolish Books to inflame the reckoning, which by the way they are like
enough to do, unless warned to the contrary by the Lady, whose good they ought
to tender more then the pleasing of their fancies, since the penalty of their
follies, otherwise will certainly light upon her in the conclusion of things.

Since the Lady will go to a new trial, intend, proceed, prosper and reign,
the Gardener will not be long from you to accomplish his word; but if the event
does not prove otherwise than is expected I am much cousened, for either John
Bothoaks must heeds be stark mad, or he is sure of having already packed the
Cards enough to do his feat with the Jury before he comes to sit down at
primavisti with the Lady, in fine, though I knew Cassandra was an Ass for
Prophesying always where she was never believed, yet I cannot leave this kind
of style for my heart.

Let your new Instruments be never so acceptable to the Jury for a while, that
is to say, till the cheat be enacted, they will not have been long in the
Ladies hands, but they will become like the others heretofore, whom they so
much distasted, since their business is not to accept of her security upon a
change of officers, but right or wrong to reject it, whatever she offers, or
whomever she imployeth.

Another soruple too I have, which is, whether her friend over the dyke will be
true to her or no, for if so, as you well observe Orange Trees will not thrive
in our soil, farewell till I see you.

March 24th. 1674/5.
Coleman to Monsieur Le Chese, 29th Sept. 75.
SInce Father St. Germain has been so kind to me as to recommend me to your
Reverence, Lect. pro Rege.
so advantageously as to Encourage you to accept of my Correspondence, I will
own to him that he has done me a Favor without consulting me, greater than I
could have been capable of, if he had advised with me; because I should not
then have had the Confidence to have permitted him to ask it in my behalf: And
I am so sensible of the Honor you are pleased to do me, that though I cannot
deserve it, yet at least, to show the sense I have of it, I will deal as freely
and openly with you at this first time, as if I had had the Honor of your
acquaintance all my life; and shall make no Apology for so doing, but only tell
you, that I know your Character perfectly well, though I am not so happy as to
know your Person; and that I have an Opportunity of putting this Letter into
the hands of Father St. Germain's Nephew (for whose Integrity and Prudence he
has undertaken) without any sort of hazard.

In order then, Sir, to the plainness which I profess, I will tell you what has
formerly passed between your Reverend Predecessor Father Ferrier and my self,
about Three years ago, when the King my Master sent a Troop of his Horse Guards
into his most Christian Majesty's Service, under the Command of my Lord Duras,
he sent with it an Officer called Sir William Throckmorton, with whom I had a
particular intimacy, and who had then very newly embraced the Catholic
Religion; to him did I constantly write, and by him address my self to Father
Ferrier; The first thing of great Importance which I presumed to offer to him
(not to trouble you with lesser Matters, or what passed here before and
immediately after the fatal Revocation of the King's Declaration for Liberty of
Conscience, to which we owe all our late Miseries and Hazards) was in July,
August and September 73. when I constantly inculcated the great danger
Catholic Religion, and his most Christian Majesty's Interest would be in at
our next Sessions of Parliament, which was then to be in October following; at
which, I plainly foresaw that the King my Master would be forced to something
in prejudice of his Alliance with France, which I saw so evidently and
particularly that we should make Peace with Holland, that I urged all the
Arguments I could (which to me were Demonstrations) to convince your Court of
that mischief, and pressed what I could to persuade his Christian Majesty to
use his utmost force to prevent that Sessions of our Parliament; and proposed
Expedients how to do it: but I was answered so often and so positively that his
Christian Majesty was so well assured by his Ambas here, our Ambas. there, the
Lord Arlington, and even the King himself, that he had no such apprehension at
all, but was fully satisfied of the contrary, and looked upon what I offered as
a very Zealous mistake, that I was forced to give over arguing, though not
believing, as I did; but confidently appealed to time and success, to prove who
took their measures rightest. When it happened that what I foresaw came to pass,
the Good Father was a little surpised to see all the Great Men mistaken, and a
little one in the right, and was pleased by Sir W. Throckmorton to desire the
continuance of my Correspondence, which I was mighty willing to comply with,
knowing the Interests of our King, and in a more particular manner of my more
immediate Master the Duke, and his most Christian Majesty to be so inseparably
united, that it was impossible to divide them without destroying them all. Upon
this I show that our Parliament in the Circumstances it was in, managed by the
timorous Counsels of our Ministers, who then governed, could never be useful
either to England, France, or Catholic Religion; but that we should as
certainly be forced from our Neutrality at their next Meeting. as we had been
from our active Alliance with France the last; that a Peace in the
Circumstances we were in was much more to be desired than the continuance of
the War, and that the Dissolution of our Parliament would certainly procure a
Peace; for that the Confederates did more depend upon the Power they had in our
Parliament, than upon any thing else in the World, and were more encouraged
from thence to continue the War; so that if that were Dissolved, their measures
would be all broken, and they consequently in a manner necessitated to a Peace.

The Good Father, minding this Discourse somewhat more than the Court of France
thought fit to do my former, urged it so home to the King, that his M. was
pleased to give him order to signify to his R. H. my Master, that his Ma. was
fully satisfied of his R. H's good Intentions toward him, and that he esteemed
both their Interests as but one and the same; That my Lord Arlington and the
Parliament were both to be looked upon as very unuseful to their Interests, and
that if his R. H. would endeavor to Dissolve this Parliament, his Ma. would
assist him with his Power and Purse to have such a New one as should be for
their purpose: This and a great many more Expressions of Kindness and
Confidence Father Ferrier was pleased to communicate to Sir W. T. and commanded
him to send them to his R. H. and withal to beg his R. H. to propose to his
most Christian M. what he thought necessary for his own concern, and the
advantage of Religion, and his M. would certainly do all he could to advance
both or either of them; this Sir W. T. sent to me by an Express who left Paris
on the 2d of June 1674. S. N. I no sooner had it, but I communicated it to his
R. H. to which his R. H. commanded me to answer as I did on the 29th of the
same Month.

That his R. H. was very sensible of his most Christian M's Friendship, and
that he would labor to cultivate it with all the good Offices he was capable
of doing for his Ma. That he was fully convinced that their Interests were both
one. That my Lord Arlington and the Parliament were not only unuseful, but very
dangerous both to England and France; that therefore it was necessary that they
should do all they could to Dissolve it; and, That his R. H's opinion was, that
if his most Christian M. would write his Thoughts freely to the King of England
upon this Subject, and make the same offer to his M. of his Purse to Dissolve
this, which he had made to his R. H. to call another, he did believe it very
possible for him to succeed, with the assistance we should be able to give him
here, and that if this Parliament were Dissolved, there would be no great
difficulty of getting a new One which would be more useful, the Constitution of
our Parliaments being such, that a new One can never hurt the Crown, nor an old
One do it good.

His R. H. being pleased to own these Propositions, which were but only
General; I thought it reasonable to be more particular, and come closer to the
Point.

1. That if we happened to agree, we might go the faster about the work, and come
to some Issue before the time were too much spent: I laid this for my Maxim,
The Dissolution of our Parliament will certainly procure a Peace; which
Proposition was granted by every body I conversed withal, even by Monsieur
Rouvigny himself, with whom I took liberty of discoursing so far; but durst not
say any thing of the Intelligence I had with Father Ferrier.

Next, That a Sum of Money certain, would vertainly procure a Dissolution: This
some doubted, but I am sure I never did; for I knew perfectly well that the
King had frequent Disputes with himself at that time, whether he should
dissolve or continue them, and he several times declared, that the Arguments
were so strong on both sides, that he could not tell to which to incline; but
was carried at last to the continuance of them by this one Argument; If I try
them once more they may possibly give me Money, if they do, I have gained my
Point; if they do not, I can dissolve them then, and be where I am now; so that
I have a possibility at least of getting Money for their continuance, against
nothing of the other side. But if we could have turned this Argument, and said,
Sir, Their Dissolution will certainly procure you Money, when you have only a
bare possibility of getting any by their continuance, and have shown how far
that bare possibility was from being a Foundation to build any reasonable hope
upon, which I am sure His Majesty was sensible enough of; and how much 300000
l. Sterling certain (which was the Sum we proposed) was better than a bare
possibility (without any reason to hope that that would ever be compassed) of
having half so much more (which was the most he designed to ask) upon some vile
dishonorable terms, and a 1000 other hazards which we had great reason to be
afraid of; If I say we had had Power to have argued thus, I am most confidently
assured we could have compassed it; for Logic in our Court built upon Money,
has more powerful Charms than any other sort of reasoning: But to secure his
most Christian M. from any hazard as to this point, I proposed that his M.
should offer that Sum upon that Condition, and if that Condition were not
performed, the Money should never be due; if it were, and that a Peace would
certainly follow thereupon (which no body doubted) his Majesty would gain his
ends, and save all the vast Expenses of the next Campagn, by which he could not
hope to better his Condition, or to put himself into more advantageous
Circumstances of Treating than he was then in, but might very probably be in a
much worse, considering the mighty Oppositions he was like to meet with, and
the uncertain Chances of War; but admitting that His Majesty could Maintain
himself by his great Strength and Conduct in as good a Condition to Treat the
next year as he was then in, which was as much as could then reasonably be
hoped for, he should have saved by this Proposal, as much as all the Men he
must needs lose, and all the Charges he should be at in a year could be valued
to amount to more than 300000 l. Sterling; and so much more, in case his
Condition should decay, as it should be worse than it was when this was made:
and the Condition of H. R. H. and of Cath. Religion here, which depends very
much upon the success of his M. C. M. delivered from a great many frights and
real hazards. Father Ferrier seemed to be very sensible of the benefit which
all Parties would gain by this Proposal; but yet it was unfortunately delayed
by the unhappy and tedious Sickness which kept him so long from the King in
Franche Comte, and made him so unable to wait upon his Ma. after he did return
to Paris; but so soon as he could compass it, he was pleased to acquaint his
Ma. with it, and did write to the Duke himself, and did me the honor to write
also to me on the 15th of September 74 and sent his Letters by Sir Will.
Throck-morton, who came Express upon that Errand. In these Letters he gave his
R. H. fresh assurances of his M. C. M's. friendship, and of his Zeal and
readiness to comply with every thing his R. H had, or should think fit to
propose in favor of Religion, or the Business of the Money; and that he had
Commanded Monsieur Rouvigny as to the latter, to Treat and deal with his R. H.
and to receive and observe his Orders and Directions, but desired that he might
not be all concerned as to the former; but that his R. H. would cause what
Propositions he should think fit to be made about Religion, to be offered
either to Father Ferrier, or Monsieur Pompone. These Letters came to us about
the middle of our September, and his R. H. expected daily when Monsieur
Rouvigny should speak to him about the subject of that Letter, but he took no
notice at all of any thing till the 29th of September; the Evening before the
King and Duke went to New Market for a Fortnight, and then only said, That he
had Command from his Master to give his R. H. the most firm assurances
imaginable of his Friendship, or something to that purpose, making his R. H. a
general Compliment, but made no mention of any particular Orders relating to
the Subject of Fa. Ferrier's Letter: The Duke wondering at this proceeding, and
being obliged to stay good part of October at New Market, and soon after his
coming back, hearing of the Death of Fa. Ferrier, he gave over all farther
prosecuting of the former Project.

But I believed I saw Monsieur de Rouvigny's Policy all along, who was willing
to save his Master's Money, upon an assurance that we would do all we could to
stave off the Parliament for our own sakes, that we would struggle as hard
without Money as with it, and we having by this time upon our own Interests
prevailed to get the Parliament Prorogued till the 13th of April, he thought
that Prorogation, being to a Day so high in the Spring, would put the
Confederates so much beyond their measures, as that it might procure a Peace,
and be as useful to France as a Dissolution. Upon these reasons, which I
supposed he went upon, I had several discourses with him, and did open my self
to him so far, as to say, That I could wish his Master would give us leave to
offer 300000 l. to our Master for the Dissolution of the Parliament, and show
him that a Peace would most certainly follow a Dissolution, which he agreed
with me in; and that we desired not the Money from his Master to excite our
wills, or to make us more industrious to use our utmost powers to procure a
Dissolution, but to strengthen our Power and Credit with the King, and to
render us more capable to succeed with his Ma. as most certainly we should have
done had we been fortified with such an Argument. To this purpose I pressed
Monsieur Pompone frequently by Sir W. Throck. who returned from hence again
into France on the 10th of Nov. the Day our Parliament should have sat, but was
Prorogued, Monsieur Pompone, as I was informed by Sir Will. did seem to approve
the thing; but yet had two Objections against it: First, That the Sum we
proposed was great, and could very ill be spared by his Master in the
Circumstances he was in. To which we answered, That if by his expending this
Sum he could procure a Dissolution of our Parliament, and thereby a Peace,
which every body agreed would necessarily follow, his M. C. M. would save 5 or
10 times a greater Sum, and so be a good Husband by his Expense; and if we did
not procure a Dissolution, he should not be at that Expense at all; for that we
desired him only to Promise upon that Condition, which we were content to be
obliged to perform first. The second Objection was, That the Duke did not move
it, nor appear in it himself: To that we answered, That he did not indeed to
Monsieur Pompone, because he had found so ill an effect of the Negotiation with
Father Ferrier when it came into Monsieur Rouvigny's hands; but he had
concerned himself in it to Fa. Ferrier; yet I continued to prosecute and press
the Dissolution of the Parliament, detesting all Prorogations, as only so much
loss of time, and a means of strengthening all those who depended upon it in
opposition to the Crown, the Interest of France and Cath. Religion, in the
Opinion they had taken that our King durst not part with this Parliament,
apprehending another would be much worse. 2. That he could not live long
without a Parliament, therefore they must suddenly meet; and the longer he kept
them off, the greater his Necessities would grow, and consequently their Power
to compel him to do what they listed would increase accordingly; and therefore
if they could but maintain themselves a while, their Day would certainly come
in a short time, in which they should be able to work their wills; Such
Discourses as these kept the Confederates and our Malcontents in heart, and
made them weather on the War in spite of all our Prorogations; and therefore I
pressed, as I have said, a Dissolution, until February last; when our
Circumstances were so totally changed, that we were forced to change our
Counsels too, and be as much for the Parliaments sitting, as we were before
against it. Our change was thus, Before that time, the Lord Arlington was the
only Minister in Credit, who thought himself out of all Danger of the
Parliament, he having been accused before them and justified, and therefore was
zealously for their Sitting; and to increase his Reputation with them, and to
become a perfect Favorite, he set himself all he could to persecute Cath.
Religion, and to oppose the French; to show his Zeal against the first, he
revived some old Dormant Orders for Prohibiting To. Cath. to appear before the
King, and put them into Execution at his first coming into his Office of Lord
Chamberlain; and to make sure work against the second as he thought; prevailed
with the King to give him and the Earl of Ossery, who Married two Sisters of
Men, Here Dyke, leave to go over into Holland with the said Heeren, to make a
Visit, as they pretended, to their Relations; but indeed and in truth to
propose the Lady Mary, eldest Daughter to his R. H. as a Match for the P. of
Orange, not only without the consent, but against the good liking of his R. H.
insomuch that the Lord Arlington's Creatures were forced to excuse him with a
distinction, that the said Lady was not to be looked upon as the Duke's
Daughter, by as the Kings, and a Child of the State, and so the Duke's consent
not to be much considered in the disposal of her, but the interest only of
State; but this he intended to render himself the Darling of the Parliament and
Protestants, who would look upon themselves as secured in their Religion by
such an Alliance, and designed farther by that means to draw us into close
Conjunction with Holland and the Enemies of France.

The Lord Arlington set forth upon this Errand on the 10th of November 74. and
returned not till the 6th of January following; during his absence, the Lord
Treasurer, the Lord Keeper, and Duke of Lauderdale, who were the only Ministers
in any considerable Credit with the King, and who all pretended to be entirely
united to the Duke, declaimed loudly and with great violence against the said
Lord, and his Actions in Holland, and did hope in his absence to have totally
supplanted him, and rooted him out of the King's Favor, and after that they
thought they might easily enough have dealt with the Parliament; but none of
them had courage enough to speak against the Parliament till they could get rid
of him, for fear they should not succeed; but that the Parliament would sit in
spite of them, and come to hear that they had used their endeavors against it;
which would have been so unpardonable a Crime with our Omnipotent Parliament,
that no Power would have been able to have saved them from Punishment; but they
finding at his return that they could not prevail against him by such Means and
Arts as they had then tried, resolved upon new Counsels, which were to outrun
him in his own course, which accordingly they undertook, and became as fierce
Apostles and as Zealous for Protestant Religion, against Popery, as ever my
Lord Arlington was before them, and in pursuance thereof, persuaded the King to
issue out those severe Orders and Proclamations against Catholics, which came
out in Febr. last; by which they did as much as in them lay to Extirpate all
Catholics and Catholic Religion out of the Kingdom; which Counsels were in my
poor Opinion so detestable, being levelled, as they must needs be, so directly
against the Duke, by People which he had advanced, and who had professed so
much Duty and Service to him that we were put upon new thoughts how to save his
R. H. now from the deceits and snares of them upon whom we formerly depended;
we saw well enough that their design was to make themselves as grateful as they
could to the Parliament, if it must sit, they thinking nothing to be so
acceptable to them as the Persecuting of Popery; but yet they were so obnoxious
to the Parliament's Displeasure in general, that they would have been very glad
of any Expedient to have kept it off, though they durst not engage against it
openly themselves; but thought this Device of theirs might serve for that
purpose, hoping that the Duke would be so alarmed at this proceeding, and by
his being left by every body, that he would be much more afraid of the
Parliament than ever, and would use his utmost power to prevent its sitting,
which they doubted not but he would endeavor, and they were ready enough to
work underhand with him for their own sakes not his, in order thereunto, but
durst not appear openly; to encourage the Duke the more to endeavor to
Dissolve the Parliament, their Creatures used to say up and down, That this
rigorous proceeding against Cath. was in favor of the Duke, and to make the
Dissolution of the Parliament more easy, which they knew he coveted, by
obviating one great Objection which was commonly made against it; which was,
That if the Parliament should be Dissolved, it would be said that it was done
in favor of Popery, which clamor they had prevented by the severity which
they had shown against it beforehand.

As soon as we saw these Tricks put upon us, we plainly saw what Men we had to
deal with, and what we had to trust to if we were wholly at their mercy, but
yet durst not seem so dissatisfied as we really were, but rather magnified the
Contrivance as a Device of great Cunning and Skill; all this we did purely to
hold them on in a belief, that we would endeavor to Dissolve the Parliament,
that they might rely upon his R. H. for that, which we knew they longed for,
and were afraid they might do some other way if they discovered that we were
resolved we would not: At length when we saw the Sessions secured, we declared
we were for the Parliaments meeting, as indeed we were from the moment we saw
our selves used by all the King's Ministers at such a rate, that we had reason
to believe they would Sacrifice France, Religion, and his R. H. too to their
own Interest if occasion served, and that they were led to believe, that that
was the only way they had to save themselves at that time: for we saw no
expedient fit to stop them in their career of Persecution, and those other
destructive Counsels but the Parliament, which had set it self a long time to
dislike every thing the Ministers had done, and had appeared violently against
Popery, whilst the Court seemed to favor it, and therefore we were confident
that the Ministers having turned their faces, the Parliament would do so too,
and still be against them, and be as little for Persecution then as they had
been for Popery before; this I undertook to manage for the Duke and the King of
France's Interest, and assured Monsieur Rouvigny (which I am sure he will
testify if occasion serves) that that Sessions should do neither of them any
hurt; for that I was sure I had Power enough to prevent mischief, though I
durst not answer for any good they should do, because I had but very few
Assistants to carry on the work, and wanted those helps which others had of
making Friends: The Dutch and Spaniards spared no pains, nor expense of Money,
to animate as many as they could against France; our Lord Treasurer, Lord
Keeper, all the Bishops, and such as call themselves old Cavaliers, who were
all then as one man, were not less industrious against Popery, and had the
Purse at their Girdle too, which is an excellent Instrument to gain Friends
with; and all united against the Duke as Patron both of France and Cath.
Religion.

To deal with all this force, we had no Money but what came from a few private
hands, and those so mean ones too, that I dare venture to say, that I spent
more my particular self out of my own Fortune, and upon my single Credit, than
all the whole body of Catholics in England besides, which was so
inconsiderable in Comparison of what our Adversaries could command, and we
verily believe did bestow in making their Party, that it is not worth
mentioning. Yet notwithstanding all this, we saw that by the help of the
Non-Conformists, (as Presbyterians, Independents, and other Sects, who were as
much afraid of Persecution as our selves) and of the Enemies of the Ministers,
and particularly of the Treasurer (who by that time had supplanted the Earl of
Arlington, and was grown sole Menager of all Affairs himself) we should be able
to prevent what they designed against us, and so render the Sessions
ineffectual to their ends, though we might not be able to compass our own;
which were to make some brisk step in favor of his R. H. to show the King that
his Ma's Affairs in Parliament were not obstructed by reason of any aversion
they had to his R. H's Person, or apprehension they had of him or his Religion;
but from Faction and Ambition in some, and from a real Dissatisfaction in
others, that we have not had such fruits and effects of those great Sums of
Money which have formerly been given, as they expected: If we could have made
then but one such step, the King would certainly have restored his R. H. to
all his Commissions, upon which he would have been much greater than ever yet
he was in his whole life, or could probably ever have been by any other course
in the world than what he had taken of becoming Catholic, etc. And we were so
very near gaining this Point, that I did humbly beg his R. H. to give me leave
to put the Parliament upon making an Address to the King, that His Ma. would be
pleased to put the Fleet into the hands of H. R. H. as the only Person likely
to give a good account of so important a Charge as that was to the Kingdom; and
show his R. H. such reasons to persuade him that we could carry it. That he
agreed with me in it that he believed we could; yet others telling him how
great a damage it would be to him if he should miss in such an undertaking
(which for my part I could not then see nor do as yet) he was prevailed upon
not to venture, though he was persuaded he could carry it. I did communicate
this design of mine to Monsieur Rouvigny, who agreed with me that it would be
the greatest advantage to his Master imaginable, to have the Duke's Power and
Credit so advanced as this would certainly do it if we could compass it, I
showed him all the difficulties we were like to meet with, and what helps we
should have, but that we should want one very material one, Money, to carry on
the work as we ought; and therefore I do confess I did shamefully beg his
Master's help, and would willingly have been content to have been in
everlasting Disgrace with all the world, if I had not with the assistance of
20000 l. Sterling from him (which perhaps is not the Tenth part of what was
spent on the other side) made it evident to the Duke that he could not have
missed it: Monsieur Rouvigny used to tell me, That if he could be sure of
succeeding in that design his Master would give a very much larger Sum; but
that he was not in a condition to throw away Money upon uncertainties; I
answered, that nothing of this Nature can be so infallibly sure as not to be
subject to some possibility of failing; but that I durst venture to undertake
to make it evident, that there was as great an assurance of succeeding in it,
as any Husbandman can have of a Crop in Harvest, who sows his Ground in its
Season; and yet it would be accounted a very Imprudent piece of wariness in any
body to scruple the venturing so much Seed in its proper time; because it is
possible it may be totally lost, and no benefit found of it in Harvest. He that
minds the Winds and the Rains at that rate, shall neither sow nor reap.

I take our case to be much the same now, as it was the last Sessions, if we
can advance the Duke's Interest one step forward, we shall put him out of the
reach of all Chances for ever; for he makes such a Figure already, that
cautious Men do not care to act against him, or always without him; because
they do not see that he is much out-power'd by his Enemies, yet is he not at
such a pitch as to be quite out of Danger, or free from Opposition; but if he
could gain any considerable new Addition of Power, all would come over to him
as the only steady Center of our Government, and no body would contend with him
farther; then would Catholics be at case, and his M. C. M's Interest secured
with us in England, beyond all Apprehensions whatsoever.

In order to this, we have two great Designs to attempt the next Sessions: 1.
That which we were about before, viz. To put the Parliament upon making it
their humble Request to the King, That the Fleet may be put into his R. H's
Care. And, 2. To get an Act for General Liberty of Conscience. If we carry
these two, or either of them, we shall in effect do what we list afterward;
and truly we think we do not undertake these great Points very unreasonably,
but that we have good Cards for our Game; not but that we expect great
Opposition, and have reason to beg all the Assistance we can possibly get; and
therefore if his M. C. M. would stand by us a little in this Conjuncture, and
help us with such a Sum as 20000 l. Sterling, (which is no very great matter to
venture upon such an undertaking as this) I would be content to be Sacrificed
to the utmost Malice of my Enemies if I did not succeed; I have proposed this
several times to Monsieur Rouvigny, who seems always of my Opinion, and has
often told me that he has writ into France upon this Subject, and has desired
me to do the like, but I know not whether he will be as Zealous in this Point
as a Catholic would be; because our prevailing in these things will give the
greatest Blow to the Protestant Religion here, that ever it received since its
Birth, which perhaps he would not be very glad to see, especially when he
believes that there is another way of doing his Master's Business well enough
without it, which is by a Dissolution of the Parliament, upon which I know he
mightily depends, and concludes, That if that comes to be Dissolved, it will be
as much as he need care for, proceeding perhaps upon the same manner of
Discourse which we did this time Twelve months; But with submission to his
better Judgment, I do think that our case is extremely much altered from what
it was then in relation to a Dissolution; for then the Body of our Governing
Ministers, all but the Earl of Arlington, were entirely united to the Duke, and
would have governed his way if they had been free from all fear and control,
as they would have been if the Parliament had been removed: But they having
since that time engaged in quite different Counsels, and Embarked themselves
and Interests upon other Bottoms, having declared themselves against Popery,
etc. to Dissolve the Parliament simply, and without any other step made, will
be to leave them to govern what way they list, which we have reason to suspect
will be to the prejudice of France and Catholics, because their late
Declarations and Actions have demonstrated to us, that they take that for the
most Popular way for themselves, and the likeliest to keep them in Absolute
Power; whereas should the Duke get above them after the Tricks they have served
him, they are not sure he will totally forget the usage he has had at their
hands. Therefore it imports us now to advance our Interest a little farther by
some such Project as I have named, before we Dissolve the Parliament, or else
perhaps we shall but change Masters, a Parliament for Ministers, and continue
still in the same Slavery and Bondage as before; But one such step as I have
proposed being well made, we may safely see them Dissolved, and not fear the
Ministers, but shall be established and stand firm without any Opposition; for
every body will then come over to us, and worship the Rising Sun.

I have here given you the History of Three Years, as short as I could, though
I am afraid it will seem very long and troublesome to your R. among the
Multitude of the Affairs you are engaged in; I have also shown you the present
State of our Case, which may by God's Providence and good Conduct, be made of
such Advantage to God's Church, that for my part I can scarce believe my self
awake, or the thing real, when I think of a Prince, in such an Age as we live
in, converted to such a degree of Zeal and Piety as not to regard any thing in
the World in comparison of God Almighty's Glory, the Salvation of his own Soul,
and the Conversion of our poor Kingdom, which has a long time been oppressed
and miserably harassed by Heresy and Schism. I doubt not but your R. will
consider our case and take it to heart, and afford us what help you can, both
with the King of Heaven by your Holy Prayers, and with his M. C. M. by that
great Credit which you most justly have with him; and if ever his Ma's Affairs,
or your own, can ever want the Service of so inconsiderable a Creature as my
self, you shall never find any body readier to obey your Commands, or
faithfuller in the execution of them to the best of his Power, than

29 Sept. 1675. Your most Humble and most Obedient Servant.

Father le Chese his Answer.
From Paris October 23. 1675.
SIR,
THE Letter which you gave your self the trouble to write to me, Lec' pro Reg.
came to my hands but the last night. I read it with great satisfaction; and, I
assure you, that its Length did not make it seem tedious. I should be very glad
on my part, to assist in seconding your good Intentions; I will consider of the
means to effect it; And when I am better informed than I am as yet, I will give
you an Account: to the end I may hold Intelligence with you, as you did with my
Predecessor. I desire you to believe, that I will never fail as to my good
will, for the Service of your Master, whom I honor as much as he deserves, and
that it is with great truth that I am

Your most humble, and most obedient Servant, D. L. C.

A Second Letter from Coleman to Father Le Chese.
SIR,
I Sent your Reverence a tedious long Letter, on our 29th of September, to
inform you of the progress of Affairs, for these two or three years last past,
I having now again the opportunity of a very sure hand to convey this by, I
have sent you a Cipher, because our Parliament now drawing on, I may possibly
have occasion to send you something which you may be willing enough to know,
and may be necessary for us that you should, when we may want the convenience
of a Messenger. When any thing occurs of more Concern, other than which may not
be fit to be trusted, even to a Cipher alone, I will, to make such a thing more
secure, write in Lemmon between the Lines of a Letter, which shall have nothing
in it visible, but what I care not who sees, but dried by a warm fire, shall
discover what is written; so that if the Letter comes to your hands, and upon
drying it, any thing appears more han did before, you may be sure no body has
seen it by the way. I will not trouble you with that way of writing, but upon
special occasions, and then I will give you a hint to direct you to look for
it, by concluding my visible Letter with something of Fire, or burning, by
which mark you may please to know, that there is something underneath, and how
my Letter is to be used to find it out. We have here a mighty Work upon our
hands, no less than the Conversion of three Kingdoms, and by that perhaps the
subduing of a Pestilent Heresy, which has domineered over great part of this
Northern World a long time, there were never such hopes of Success since the
Death of Queen Mary, as now in our days: When God has given us a Prince who is
become (may I say, a Miracle) zealous of being the Author and Instrument of so
glorious a Work; but the opposition we are sure to meet with, is also like to
be great: so that it imports us to get all the Aid and Assistance we can, for
the Harvest is great, and the Laborers but few. That which we rely upon most,
next to God Almighty's Providence, and the favor of my Master, the Duke, is
the mighty Mind of his most Christian Majesty, whose generous Soul inclines him
to great Undertakings, which being managed by your Reverence's exemplary Piety
and Prudence, will certainly make him look upon this as most suitable to
himself, and best becoming his Power and Thoughts; so that I hope you will
pardon me if I be very troublesome to you upon this occasion, from whom I
expect the greatest help we can hope for. I must confess, I think his most
Christian Majesty's Temporal Interest is so much attracted to that of his R. H.
(which can never be considerable, but upon the growth and Advancement of the
Catholic Religion) that his Ministers cannot give him better Advice, even in a
Politic sense, abstracting from the Considerations of the next World, that of
our blessed Lord, to seek first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness
thereof, that all other things may be added unto him. That I know his most
Christian Majesty has more powerful Motives suggested to him by his own
Devotion, and your Reverence's Zeal for God's Glory, to engage him to afford us
the best help he can in our present Circumstances. But we are a little unhappy
in this, that we cannot press his Majesty, by his present Minister here, upon
these latter Arguments (which are most strong) but only upon the first,
Monsieur Rouvigny's Sense and ours differing very much upon them, though we
agree perfectly upon the rest: And indeed, though he be a very able man, as to
his Master's Service, in things wherein Religion is not concerned; yet I
believe it were much more happy (considering the posture he is now in) that his
temper were of such a sort, that we might deal clearly with him throughout, and
not be forced to step short in a Discourse of Consequence, and leave the most
material part out, because we know it will shock his particular opinion, and so
perhaps meet with Dislike and Opposition, though never so necessary to the main
Concern. I am afraid we shall find too much reason for this Complaint in this
next Session of Parliament: for, had we had one here from his most Christian
Majesty, who had taken the whole Business to heart, and who would have
represented the state of our case truly, as it is to his Master, I do not doubt
but his most Christian Majesty would have engaged himself further in the Affair
than at present I fear he has done, and by his Approbation have given such
Counsels as have been offered to his Royal Highness by those few Catholics who
have access to him, and who are bent to serve him, and advance the Catholic
Religion, with all their Might, and might have more Credit with his Royal
Highness than I fear they have found, and have assisted them also with his
Purse, as far as 10000 Crowns, or some such Sum, (which to him is very
inconsiderable, but would have been to them of greater Use than can be
imagined) toward gaining others to help them, or, at least, not to oppose
them. If we had been so happy as to have had his most Christian Majesty with us
to this degree, I would have answered with my Life for such Success this
Sessions, as would have put the Interest of the Catholic Religion, his R.
Highness, and his most Christian Majesty, out of all danger for the time to
come; but wanting those helps of recommending those necessary Counsels which
have been given his R. H. in such manner as to make him think them worth his
accepting, and fit to govern himself by, and of those Advantages which a little
Money well managed would have gained us, I am afraid we shall not be much
better at the end of this Sessions, than we are now: I pray God we do not lose
ground; by my next, which will be e're long, I shall be able to tell your
Reverence more particularly what we are like to expect; in the mean time, I
most humbly beg your holy Prayers for all our Undertakings, and that you will
be pleased to honor me so far as to esteem me what I am entirely, and without
reserve,

Mon tres Reverend Pere, le Votre R. Le plus humble plus obeisant Serviteur.

Coleman's Letter to Monsieur le Chese, the French King 's Confessor, in the
Duke of York's name.
ON the Second of June last, his most Christian Majesty offered me very
generously his Friendship, and his Purse too, for my assistance against the
Designs of my Enemies and his, and protested to me, that his Interests and mine
were so strictly bound up together, that such as opposed either, ought to be
looked upon as the Enemies of the other; and told me besides his thoughts of my
Lord Arlington, and of the Parliament, which are, that he does not believe that
either the one or the other were favorable to his Interests, or to mine, and
thereupon he desired me to make him such Propositions as I should think sit for
this Conjuncture. All this happened by the Interposition of F. Ferrier, who
made use of Sir William Throckmorton, a good and honest man, who was then at
Paris, and has corresponded with Coleman, one of my Domestics, in whom I put
great confidence.

As I was very well satisfied to see that his most Christian Majesty was
altogether of my opinion, I returned him an Answer on the twenty ninth of June,
by the same conveyance by which he writ me, that is, by Coleman, who directed
it to F. Ferrier, by the said Sir William Throckmorton; and I agreed entirely
with him, as well concerning the Union of our Interests, as how useless my Lord
A. and the Parliament were to the King, my Brother, and his most Christian
Majesty, and that it was very necessary for us to make use of all our Credit
jointly, for preventing the Success of the evil Designs that my Lord Ar. and
the Parliamentarians have formed against his most Christian Majesty and me,
which I promised to do faithfully, on my part, and whereof I have given since
that time sufficient testimonies; after this, I made some Propositions that I
thought fit for the accomplishment of what we were obliged to undertake,
assuring him, that nothing could support our Interests so strongly with the
King, my Brother, than the making him the same Offers of his Purse, by the
assistance whereof, I had great reason to hope, that I should be capable of
persuading him to dissolve the Parliament, and of frustrating the Intrigues of
my Lord Ar. who endeavors continually to advance the Credit of the Prince of
Orange and the Dutch, and to diminish that of the King, your Master,
notwithstanding all the Protestations he now makes to serve him.

But as our Propositions were delayed by the sickness of F. Ferr. our Business
did not succeed according to our desire, only the Father writ me word on the
fifteenth of the last Month, that he had communicated the Propositions that I
directed to him from his most Christian Majesty, and that they were very
acceptable unto him; but as they contained two things, one that concerned the
Catholic Religion, and the other the offer of his Purse, he gave me to
understand, that he did not desire I should treat with Monsieur Rovigny upon
the former; but for the latter, he told me at the same time, that Monsieur
Rovigny had order to concur with me in all that the Conjuncture of Our Affairs
should make appear necessary. I have expected the Effects thereof until this
time, but nothing being done, and perceiving besides, that my Lord Ar. and many
others endeavor, by a thousand Tricks, to break off the good Understanding
that is between the King my Brother, his most Christian Majesty, and me, for
the deceiving of all Three; I have thought fit to acquaint you with all that is
past, and to ask your Assistance and Friendship for preventing the Knavery of
all those that have no other Design than to betray the Concerns of France and
England too, and by their pretended Services, occasion their Disappointment.

I do refer you farther to Sir William Throckmorton, and to Coleman, whom I
have commanded to acquaint you with the particulars of our Affairs, and the
true State of England, that many others, and principally my Lord Ar.
endeavored to represent to you quite otherwise than it is; and these two first
are very much addicted to my Interests, so that you may treat with them freely,
and without any apprehension.

One of the Letters which could not be Decyphered by the Keys found.
Rome, January 12. 1675.
IT is certain, that the best way to render himself Master of the Kings Will,
and to take him off from the Amity with the Parliament, is that of Money, and I
doubt not but the Duke may by it make himself absolute upon his spirit, and
take for his purest and for that of the Catholics the advantages which you
observe in your last Letter, but when the Pope himself shall have the means to
do that which shall be necessary in his Affair, which is very much beyond his
power, for the reasons I gave when I had the happiness to see you, and of which
I advertised you in many Letters, he can never be pressed with Reason to do it,
but upon more solid foundations, and more probable assurances for the good of
Religion and of the Catholics, which are not yet such, as are contained in the
discourse mentioned in your last Letter, that which you propose touching
51666279669961 which is, 667177576661676676 cannot be put in execution
566662516 756665667 but with the 777699916699616797669961 of all 51679177
66629664996719 and only 667191776691 comprising 966699915167 91947151416791
you may then consider, if in the Lands where they are at present
5167916654566646267919680204. It would be to purpose for the Interest of the
Duke, to put in public an affair of such a nature as this, of which I assure
you with truth, and the Duke may be persuaded is what
66997766916564519167627664617199647671625167976664 91616267963204 will employ
6681272 and 5108126 and 51677762679 6646 for
51669191649161676266626791616694516464516651668126 6679981204 seeing that Rome
and the Emperor have a most particular zeal and affection for all that which
regard it. As for Gabriel he does employ himself both with the one and the
other, with the same passion he always had for the Dukes service, and you will
see, it may be, very shortly marks of it. It is said here, that the King has
not for some time been in good health, advise me how it is, and of our Commerce
you may continue till farther order, to send me your Letters by the same way
you have done to this time. I am, without reserve,

Your most Humble and affectionate Servant ALBANY.
The Cipher which I put into the hands of 300, and that you may have from him,
will serve you to Decipher that which is above.



There was several Faculties and Instruments found in the hands of one of the
Five Jesuits, and of Mr. Daniel Arthur, which follow in the Original Latin, and
Translated into English.
Facultates pro Reverendissimo Domino Joanne Laket, Sacerdote Anglo, in Regnis
Angliae, Scotiae, alissque Dominiis Legis Magnae Britanniae, excepta Hibernia.
I. ABsolvendi ab Haeresi, and Apostasia a Fide and Schismate quescunque, etiam
Ecclesiasticos, tam Seculares quam Regulares, non tamen eos qui ex Laicis
suerint ubi Sanctum Officum exercetur, nisi in Locis Missionum in quibus impune
grassantur Haereses, deliquerit, nec illos qui Judicialiter Abjuraeverint, nisi
ipsi nati sint ubi impune grassantur Haereses, and post Judicialem Abjurationem
illuc reversi in Haeresin fuerint Relapsi, and bis in foro Conscientiae tantum.

II. Absolvendi in omnibus Casibus, etiam in Bulla Coenae.

III. Dispensandi in tertio and quarto simplici and mixto Consanguinitatis and
Affinitatis gradibus in contractis Matrimoniis cum personis Catholicis, aut
Haeresin relinquentibus, idque in foro Conscientiae tantum, and prolem
susceptam Legitimam declarandi.

IV. Restituendi Jus petendi debitum amissum.

V. Administrandi omnia Sacramenta, etiam Parochalia, Ordine and Confirmatione
exceptis.

VI. Celebrandi Missam quocunque loco decenti, etiam sub dio, sub terra, una
hora ante Aurora, and alia post Meridiem, bis in die si Necessitas cogat; si
tamen in prima Missa non sumpserit ablutionem: and super Altari portabili,
etiam fracto aut laeso, sine Sanctorum Reliquiis and praesentibus Haereticis
aliisque Excommunicatis, si aliter celebrari non possit, etsi non sit periculum
Sacrilegii, dummodo inservient Miss, non sit Hereticus, and Excommunicatus.

VII. Deserendi sanctissimum Sacramentum occulte ad Infirmos sine lumine, ubi
est periculum.

VIII. Recitandi Rosarium, vel alias Preces, si Breviarium secum defer non
possit, vel Officium divinum, ob aliud legitimum Impedimentum, recitare non
habent.

IX. Tenendi and Legendi quosque Libros prohibitos, praeter contentis in Bulla
Coenae, and praeter opera Caroli Molinei, Nicolai Machiavelli, and Libris de
Astrologia Judiciaria, vel incidenter, vel alio quovis modo tractantes? dandi
etiam Licentiam Laicis ex justa causa, ut Libros Catholicorum contra
Haereticos, Anglico Idiomate scriptos, and Sacras Scripturas, in idem Ideoma
sideliter versas, legant.

X. Dispensandi and comutandi vota simplicia ex rationabili Causae, exceptis
Votis Castitatis and Religionis.

XI. Benedicendi paramenta and alia Vtensilia ad Sacrificium Missae
necessarium, ubi non intervenit Vnctio.

XII. Dispensandi quando expedire videtur super esu Carnium, Ovorum, and
Lactiniorum, etiam tempore Quadragessimo.

XIII. Concedendi Indulgentiam plenariam primo conversis ab Haeresi, and
sidelibus quibuscunque, in articulo mortis saltem contritis, si Consiteri non
possint.

XIV. Concedendi singulis Dominicis aliisque Dicbus Festis december annorum
Indulgentiam iis qui ejus Concionibus intervenerint, and plenaria iis qui
previae Sacramentali peccatorum suorum Confessione, sacram Eucharistiam sument
in Festis Natalis Domini, Paschalis, and Assumtionis Beatissimae Virginis.

XV. Lucrandi sibi cisdem Indulgentiis.

XVI. Singulis secundis Feriis, non impeditis Officio, novem Lectionum, vel iis
impeditis, die immediate sequenti celebrando Missam, de Requiem in quacunque
Altari etiam portabili, aborandi animam secundum ejus Intentionem a Purgatorii
poenis per modum suffragii, quas facultates concedimus and septennium duntaxat
duraturus, Ita tamen ut antea revocari etiam possint ad beneplacitum nostrum
sine ullius Causae expressione,

eaesque manu nostra firmavimus, Die 25 Mensis Junii, 1678. Per Cardinalis
Barbarinus Protector. Christ. Abbas Blancas Secretarius.

Faculties and Privileges granted to the Right Reverend Father John Laket an
English Priest; to be by him extended unto, and executed in the Kingdoms of
England and Scotland, and all other the Dominions of the King of Great Britain,
except Ireland.
I. OF Absolving all sorts of persons from Heresy, Apostasy, and Schism, and
that Ecclesiastics or Religious, both Secular and Regular, as well as others:
providing they did not live where the Roman Worship was used or practiced. Yet
always allowing that these may be Absolved, who in the way and places of their
Mission, Missionaries, are those who are sent to spread the Popish Doctrine in
Protestant Kingdoms, etc.
are thorough the power and prevalency of Heresy forced and laid under a
necessity of concealing themselves. However, they are not to be Absolved, who
having judicially and according to Forms of Law, abjured and renounced their
Heresy, do nevertheless withdraw and absent themselves from the Catholic
Worship, unless they be such as are born and do live where Heresy universally
obtains, as being established by Authority, or such who through their being
cast into such places, have after the abjuration of their Heresy relapsed into
it. And these are to be Absolved and Pardoned only, as to what respects
Conscience.

II. Of Absolving and Acquitting in and about all Cases, even those which are
contained in the Bulla Coenae, or the Bull of the Supper or Sacrament.

III. Of Dispensing and allowing a liberty to Catholics, and such who have
forsaken the Protestant Heresy, to Marry within the Third and Fourth Degrees
(whether simple or mixed) of Kindred and Consanguinity, and of declaring their
Off spring and Issue Legitimate, yet so, that this Dispensation do only extend
to Conscience.

IV. Of granting a liberty, and allowing a right to all from whom due
benevolence has been withheld, or to whom upon any pretense it has been
refused, of demanding and claiming the Duties of the Marriage Bed.

V. Of Administering all the Sacraments, except those of Order and Confirmation.

VI. Of saying and celebrating Mass in any vacant place whatsoever, whether it
be in the open fields, or in Vaults and Cellars, and that in case of necessity,
it shall be lawful to perform this twice a day, viz. once in the morning, and
once at noon, provided he have not at the first Mass received the Ablution. And
this may also Celebrate upon any moveable Altar, Ablution, is the Priests
having dipped his fingers in the Cup which leaving upon the Altar till he have
washed his hands, he afterward returns and drinks up.

Altars Portatile, is any Consecrated piece of Board or Stone, which the Priest
carries about with him to Celebrate the Eucharist upon.


though defaced or broken, and without sacred Relics. Yea, if it cannot be
otherwise conveniently performed, it shall be lawful to administer in the
presence of Heretics, and other Excommunicated persons, provided always that
there be no danger of Sacrilege, and that he who serves, assisteth, and
Ministers unto him at the said Mass, be neither an Heretic nor Excommunicated
person.

VII. Of carrying the Sacrament to any who are sick, and in cases of danger,
without Lights or Torches.

VIII. Of rehearsing the Rosary, or any other Prayers, when he cannot carry his
Breviary about with him, or when by reason of some lawful hindrance or
impediment he cannot repeat the Divine Office.

XI. Of keeping and reading all sorts and kinds of Prohibited Books, except
such which are contained in the Bulla Coenae, and the Book of Charles
Molinaeus, and Nicholas Machiavel, and such Books which either designedly or
occasionally Treat of Judiciary Astrology. And of allowing upon a just and
weighty cause a liberty to Lay People to read such Catholic Books as are
written in English against Heretics, and of reading the Sacred Scripture,
provided they be faithfully Translated into the English Tongue.

X. Of Dispensing with, making Commutation and exchange about, simple and naked
Vows, unless they be Vows of Chastity, and of entering into Holy Orders.

XI. Of blessing all the Accoutrements (paramenta) and Utensils required or
needful for the Celebration of the Mass, except they be such which ought to be
Consecrated.

XII. Of allowing Dispensations for the Eating of Flesh, Eggs, and all Meats
made or prepared of Milk, at all times when it shall be judged convenient,
though it be in the very season of Lent.

XIII. Of granting a Plenary Indulgence, or a Pardon from all sins, to all and
every person and persons, at and upon your first Conversion from Heresy, and
the like to all Catholics at the hour of Death, though they be not in a
condition to make Confession, providing only, that they be penitent and
contrite.

XIV. Of granting every Sunday and every Holy Day an Indulgence from all Sin
for ten years, to such as have been present at the Sermons or Religious
Worship: And a plenary Indulgence from all their Sins during their whole Life
to such, who having first made Confession, do receive the Eucharist at the
Feast of the Nativity of our Blessed Lord, the Feast of Easter, and the Feast
of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin.

XV. That the said Reverend may take the benefit of all these Indulgences
himself, and be participant of all these Pardons.

XVI. He shall have Power and Authority every other day, unless prevented by
the Office of the Nine Lessons; and in case he be so let or hindered, he shall
then have Power and Authority the day following, of Freeing and Redeeming any
one Soul, whom he pleases, from the Pains and Torments of Purgatory; and upon
his saying and celebrating the Mass for the Dead, called De Requie, upon and
portable or moveable Altar.

And these Faculties and Privileges we grant and allow, to continue and
endure, for, and during the time of seven years; yet so, as without the
assigning any cause or reason, we may revoke and recall them before the
expiration of that time, if we be so pleased, and it seem good unto us.

And these Faculties we have Ratified and Confirmed under our hand the 25th of
June, 1678. Card. Barberini Protector. Christoph. Abbas Blancas Secretary.


The like Faculties are granted to all Romish Priests who are here in England.

Cardinal Vendosms faculty to the Cannons Regular of St. Augustins in the
Gallican Church.
LUDOVICUS Sanctae Mariae in porticu Diaconus Cardinalis de Vendosme, nun'ctus
ad serenissimum Dominum, Dominum Ludovicum Franciae and Navarrae Regem
Christianissimum, and universum illius Regnum illiusque Provincius Dominia,
Civitates oppida terras and Loca eidem Regi subjecta dictoque regno adjacentia
caeteraque alia Loca ad quae nos declinare contigerit, S.D. N Clementis Divina
Providentia Papae IX. and sedis Apossolicae a latere Legatus, Dilectis nobis in
Christo filiis Canoniciae Regularibus Sancti Augustini, Gallicanae
Congregationis pro Conversione Infidelium, Hereticorum and Schismaticorum in
Domino salutem and benedictionem sempiternam, Nos igitur de vestra Pietate
Charitate prudentia integritate scientia and experientia plene confidentes
sperantesque quod ea quae vobis duxerimus committenda solicit fideliterque
gerere and adminisirare curabitis id circo vos ex nostra scientia liberaque and
spontanea voluntate magnos Missionarios and poenitentiarios Apostolicos secimus
and constituimus facimusque and constituimus vobisque plenissimam conceffimus
and concedimus facultatem verbum Divinum praedicandi confessiones quorum eumque
poenitentium Sacramentaliter audiendi ipsisque obsolutionis beneficium
impertiendi ab omnibus casibus and censuris aut aliis quomodocumque sanctae
sedi and Episcopis reservatis absolvendi, Sacramenta quaecunque excepta
confirmatione and ordinatione admitrandi; in votis exceptis castitatis and
Religionis and Juramentis cum Justa causa subest dispensandi sicut etiam in
observatione Jejuniorum aliisque Legibus Ecclesiasticis, neo non in
irregularitatibus quibus Libet ex delicto occulto provenientibus, aliisque
omnibus and quibuscumque casibus in quibus summus Pontifex dispensare potest
Libros prohibitos legendi and Haereticos in graemium Ecclesiae recepiendi
dummodo errores suos haereses and schismata coram notario and testibus public
vel privatim detestati fuerint abjuraverint and anathematisaverint injuncta eis
pro modo culpae poenitentia salutari, Denique omnia dicendi gerendi decernendi
and exequendi quae ad munas Missionariorum and magnorum poenitentiariorum
pertinet

in quorum omnium and singulorum fidem praesentes litteras manu nostra
signavimus ac sigilli nostri appositione voluimus communiri Datum parisiis die
vigesima Maij millesimo sexcentisimo sexagesimo octavo pn'tus ejusdem, S.D.N.
Papae anno primo. L. Cardinalis de Vendosme Leg. Locus Sigilli. De Bontils
Auditor and Secretarius Legationis.

Englished, as follows.
LEWIS of Vendosme, Cardinal; Deacon of Sancta Maria in Portico, Legate a
Latere from our Holy Lord CLEMENT the Ninth, by the Divine Providence Pope; and
from the Apostolic See, to the most Serene Lord LEWIS the most Christian King
of France and Navarre, and to his whole Kingdom and all his Provinces,
Dominions, Cities, Towns, Lands, and places belonging to the said King, and
adjacent to his said Kingdom, and to all other places where We shall happen to
come: To Our dearly beloved Sons in Christ the Canons Regular of St. Augustine
of the Gallican Congregation for the Conversion of Infidels, Heretics, and
Schismatics, Greeting in the Lord and Eternal Benediction. We fully confiding
in your Piety, Charity, Prudence, Integrity, Knowledge, and Experience, and
hoping that what we have thought fit to entrust unto you, you will carefully
and faithfully manage and administer, Have therefore made and constituted, make
and constitute you of Our knowledge and free and mere motion, great
Missi^naries and Apostolical Penitentiaries: And we have granted, and do grant
unto you full Power of Preaching the Divine Word, and of bearing Sacramentally
the Confessions of all Penitents, and to impart unto them the benefit of
Absolution from all Cases and Censures; and of Absolving from all things in any
manner reserved unto the Holy See, or unto Bishops; of Administering all
Sacraments, except Confirmation and Ordination; and of dispensing with Vows,
except those of Chastity and Religion, and with Oaths where there is just
cause, as also with the Observation of Fasts and other Ecclesiastical Laws, and
all Irregular (...) whatsoever proceeding from a hidden sin, and all other
Cases whatsoever where the Pope can Dispense. And of reading forbidden Books,
and receiving Heretics into the bosom of the Church, provided they do detest,
abjure, and anathemarize their Errors, Heresies and Schisms before Witnesses
Publicly or Privately, enjoining unto them a salutary Penance according to the
measure of the fault. Lastly, of saying, doing, decreeing and performing all
things belonging to the Office of Missionaries and great Penitentiaries.

In Testimony whereof We have Signed these present Letters with Our Hand, and
Sealed them with Our Seal. Given at Paris the 20th. of May 1663. and in the
first Year of Our said Holy Lord. L. Cardinalis de Vendosme Legatus De Bontils
Auditor and Secretarius Legationis. The place of the Seal.

An Instrument constituting Benedict Stapilton, Prior of Canterbury.
NOS Fr. Augustinus Hungate Praesbiter and Monachus Ordinis S. Benedicti
Congregationis Anglicanae ejusdem ordinis Praeses Generalis, etc. Reverendo in
Christo Patri ac confratri nostro Patri Benedicto Stapilton ejusdem
congregationis Praesbitero and Monacho Electo Priori Cathedralis Ecclesiae
Cantuariensis salutem in Christo sempiternam.

Visa Electione personae Reverentiae tuae in Priorem praedictae Ecclesiae
conventusque Cathedralis Cantuariensis Canonice and legittime celebrata,
acceptaque de more obedientia Reverentiae tuae nobis and successoribus nostris
promissa in scriptis exhibita facta quoque per Reverentiam tuam publica
Catholicae fidei professione juxta sacri Tridentini Concilii Canones and Bullam
Pii Quarti Pontificis Maximi, Authoritate Sae. Sedis Apostolicae, necnon and
Cap'li nostri G'ralis qua utraque hac in part fungimur Reverendam and delectam
nobis sraternitatem tuam Reverende in Christo Pater Benedicte Stap^lton in
dicto Prioris Cathedralis Officio ac dignitate tenore presentium Confirmamus:
Mandantes prout per presents pariter mandamus Conventui Cathedralis Ecclesiae
Cantuariensis praefatae, omnibusque ac singulis monachis quatenus Reverendam
Paternitatem tuam pro vero Priore suo Cathedrali legitimoque suo Superiore ac
Praelato regulari recipiant, habeant agnoscant, and eidem reverenter juxta
constitutiones nostras obsequantur

In quorum fidem has confirmationis literas nomine nostro Secretariisque nostri
subscriptas and Sigillo magno Sanctae Congregationis nostrae munitas expediri
jussimus. Datum Londini 14 Maii. Anno Domini 1666. Fr. Aug. Hungate Praeses
Gralis De mandato admodum R. Praesidis Fr. Gulielmus a Sancto Benedicto
Secretarius Praesidii. Locus Sigilli.

Englished as follows.
WE Fr. Augustine Hungate, Priest and Monk of the English Congregation of the
Order of St. Bennet; and general President of the same Order, etc. To the
Reverend Father in Christ, and our fellow Brother, Father Benedict Stapilton,
Priest and Monk of the same Order, Elected Prior of the Cathedral Church of
Canterbury; do wish Eternal Happiness in Christ.

Having seen Testimonial Letters wherein your Reverence is declared to be
Lawfully and Canonically chosen Prior of the said Church and Convent of the
Cathedral of Canterbury; and having according to form and custom received the
Obedience which your Reverence has exhibited in Writing and promised to us and
our Successors: And your Reverence having also made a public Confession of the
Catholic Faith according to the Canons of the Council of Trent, and the Bull
of Pope Pius the IV.

We by the Authority of the holy Apostolical See, as also of our general
Chapter whose power we in this execute, and whose place we discharge; do by
these presents confirm you the Reverend Father in Christ Benedict Stapilton in
the Office and Dignity of Prior of the said Cathedral, and we do by these our
Authentic Letters, charge and require the Convent of the aforesaid Church of
Canterbury, and all and several the Monks thereof, that they receive, esteem,
and acknowledge your Reverence for the true Prior of that Cathedral, and as
their lawful Superior and regular Prelate, and that with all Humility and
Reverence they obey you according to the Constitutions of our Order.

In Testimony whereof we have subscribed these Letters with our own Name, and
have caused them to be subscribed by our Secretary, and have also commanded
that they be Sealed with the great Seal of our Holy Order. Dated at London, May
14. 1666. Fr. Augustine Hungate, President General. By the Command of the most
reverend President. Fr. William St. Bennet, Secretary of the President. The
place of the Seal.

FINIS.

