The Second and Last COLLECTION OF THE Dying Speeches, LETTERS and PRAYERS,
etc. Of those EMINENT Protestants Who Suffered in the WEST of ENGLAND, (And
Elsewhere,) UNDER THE CRUEL SENTENCE Of the late Lord Chancellor, THEN Lord
Chief Justice JEFFERYS: WITH An Account of their Undaunted Courage at the Bar,
and afterward; with the most remarkable Circumstances that attended their
EXECUTION.

WITH ALLOWANCE.

LONDON, Printed for John Dunton, at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, over
against the Compter; and are to be Sold by R. Janeway in Queens-head-Alley in
Paternoster Row. 1689.

The Second and Last COLLECTION OF THE Dying Speeches, LETTERS and PRAYERS,
etc. OF Those Eminent Protestants who Suffered in the West of England, and
elsewhere.
A short Recollection of some Passages of Mr. William Jenkins, who Suffered at
Taunton, September. 30. 1685.
A Friend discoursing to him at Dorchester about his Pardon, and telling him
the doubtfulness of obtaining it, he replied, Well, Death is the worst they can
do, and I bless God, that will not surprise me, for I hope my great work is
done. At Taunton being advised to govern the Airiness of his Temper, telling
him it made People apt to Censure him, as Inconsiderate of his Condition, to
which he Answered, Truly, this is so much my natural temper that I cannot tell
how to alter it; but I bless God I have, and do think seriously of my eternal
Concerns; I do not allow my self to be vain, but I find Cause to be cheerful,
for my Peace is made with God, through Jesus Christ my Lord; this is my only
ground of Comfort and Cheerfulness, the security of my Interest in Christ; for
I expect nothing but Death, and without this I am sure Death would be most
dreadful; but having the good hope of this, I cannot be melancholy. When he
heard of the Triumphant Death of those that suffered at Lyme, he said, This is
is a good encouragement to depend upon God: Then speaking about the mangling of
their Bodies, he said, Well, the Resurrection will restore all with great
advantage; the 15th. Chap. of the first of Corinthians is Comfort enough for
all Believers: Discoursing much of the certainty and felicity of the
Resurrection at another time, he said, I will (as I think I ought) use all
lawful means for the saving of my Life, and then if God please to forgive my
sins, I hope I shall as cheerfully embrace Death. Upon the Design of attempting
an Escape, he said, We use this means for the preserving of our Lives, but if
God is not with us in it, it will not effect it; it is our business first to
seek to him for Direction and Success, if he sees good, with resigning our
Lives to him, and then his Will be done. After the Disappointments, when there
was no Prospect of any other Opportunity, he spoke much of the Admirableness of
God's Providence in those things that seem most against us, bringing the
greatest good out of them; for, said he, We can see but a little way, God is
only wise in all his Disposals of us; if we were left to choose for our selves,
we should choose our own Misery. Afterward Discoursing of the Vanity and
Unsatisfyingness of all things in this World, he said, It is so in the
enjoying, we never find our Expectations answered by any thing in it, and when
Death comes it puts an end to all things we have been pursuing here: Learning
and Knowledge (which are the best things in this World) will then avail
nothing; nothing but an Interest in Christ is then of any worth. One reading to
some of his Fellow Prisoners Jer. 42. 12. I will show mercy unto you, that he
may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own Land; he said,
Yes, we shall, but not in this World I am persuaded. September the 29th. at
Night, after he heard he must Dye the next Morning, he was exceedingly Composed
and Cheerful, expressing his satisfaction in the Will of God: The next Morning
he was still more spiritual and cheerful, discovering a very sweet serenity of
Mind in all that he said and did: Whilst he was waiting for the Sheriff,
reading the Scriptures, Meditating, and Conversing with those about him of
Divine things, amongst other things, he said, I have heard much of the Glory of
Heaven, but I am now going to behold it, and to understand what it is. Being
desired to Disguise himself to attempt an Escape, he said, No, I cannot tell
how to disturb my self about it, and methinks it is not my business, now I have
other things to take up my thoughts; if God saw good to deliver me, he would
open some other door; but seeing he has not, it is more for the honor of his
Name we should dye, and so be it. One saying to him that most of the Apostles
dyed a violent Death, he replied* Nay, a greater than the Apostles, our Lord
himself dyed, not only a shameful, but a painful Death: He further said, This
manner of Death has been the most terrible thing in the World to my thoughts,
but I bless God, now I am neither afraid nor ashamed to dye. He said, The
parting with my Friends, and their grief for me, is my greatest difficulty; but
it will be but for a very short time, and we shall meet again in endless Joys,
where my dear Father is already entered, him shall I presently joyfully meet:
Then musing with himself a while, he with an extraordinary seriousness sung
these two Verses of one of Herbert's Poems,

Death is still working like a Mole,
Digging my Grave at each remove,
Let Grace work so on my Soul,
Drop from above.
Oh come! for thou do know the way,
Or if to me thou will not move,
Remove me where I need not say
Drop from above.
He then read the 53d of Isaiah, and said, he had heard many blessed Sermons
from that Chapter, especially from the 16 th. Verse, All we like sheep have
gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, but the Lord has laid on
him the Iniquity of us all; seeming to intimate some Impress made on his Soul
from them, but was interrupted, then he said, Christ is all. When the Sheriff
came, he had the same cheerfulness and serenity of Mind in taking leave of his
Friends, and in the Sledge, which seemed to increase to the last, (as those
present have affirmed;) joining in Prayer, and in singing a Psalm with great
appearance of Comfort and Joy in his Countenance, insomuch that some of his
Enemies (that had before Censured his cheerfulness for unthoughtfulness of his
Danger, and therefore expected to see him much surprised,) now professed they
were greatly Astonished, to see such a Young Man leave the World, and go
through Death as he did.

The last Words of Coll. Richard Rumball, with remarks of what past at his
Trial in Edinburgh, Jan. 26. 1685.
ABout Eleven of the Clock he was brought from the Castle to the Justices
Court, in a great Chair, upon a Man's Back, where at first he was asked some
few Questions, most of which he answered by silence; at last he said, He did
humbly conceive it was not necessary for him to add to his own Accusation,
since he was not ignorant they had enough already to do his business, therefore
did not desire to fret his Conscience at that time with answering Questions;
after which his Libel being read, the Court proceeded in usual manner, first
asking him if he had any thing to say for himself before the Jury closed: His
Answer was, He owned it all, saving that part of having designed the King's
Death; and he prayed all present to believe on the word of a Dying Man, he
never directly nor indirectly intended such a Villainy, that he abhorred the
thoughts of it; and that he blessed God he had the reputation in the World,
that he knew none had the impudency as to ask him the Question; and that he
abhorred the thoughts of such an Action, and he hoped all good People would
believe this, which was the only way he had left to clear himself, and he was
sure that this Truth would once be made manifest to all Men. He was again asked
if he had any Exceptions against the Jury? he answered, No, but wished them to
do as God and their Consciences directed them: They having withdrawn, returned
their Verdict in half an hours time, and brought him in Guilty; the Sentence
following for him, To be taken from that to the next Room, and from thence to
be drawn in a Hurdle, between Two and Four of the Clock, to the Cross of
Edinburgh, the Place of Execution, and there to be Hanged, Drawn, and
Quartered. He received the Sentence with a devout Courage and Cheerfulness.
After he was delivered into the Town-Magistrate's hands, they brought to him
two Divines, to offer to him their Assistance upon the Castle, which he
altogether refused, telling them, If they had any good Wishes for him, they
should spend them in their Closets, and leave him now to seek God in his own
way: He had several Offers of the same kind of others, which he put off in the
same manner. He was most serious and servent in Prayer, the few hours he lived,
as was observed by several who were present all the while. The hour being come,
he was brought to the Place of Execution, where he saluted the People on all
sides of the Castle; and after having refreshed himself with a Cordial out of
his Pocket, caused himself to be supported by two Men, and spoke to the People
in these words.

Gentlemen and Brethren,
It is appointed for all Men that come into the World once to die, after Death
to Judgment; and since Death is a debt that all of us must pay, it is but
matter of small moment what way it be done; and seeing the Lord is pleased in
this manner to take me to himself, I confess something hard to Flesh and Blood,
but blessed be his Name who has made me not only Willing, but Thankful, for
honoring me, to lay down that Life he gave me for his Cause; in the which,
were every Hair on this Head and Beard of mine a Life, I would joyfully
Sacrifice them for it, as I do this day. And Providence having brought me
hither, I think it most necessary to clear my self of some aspersions laid on
my Name, that I should have had so horrid an Intention of destroying the King
and his Brother: (Saying over again what he had said before to the Justices.)
It was also said on my Name that I was Anti-monarchical; it was ever my
Thoughts that Kingly Government was the best of all, justly executed, I mean
such as by our ancient Law, viz. a King and Free-Parliament; the King having,
as I conceive, Power enough to make him great, the People also so much
Property* as to make them Happy, they being as it were Contracted to one
another, and who will deny me that this is the just constituted Government of
our Nation; how absurd is it then for Men of sense to maintain, that though
the one part of this Contract breaks all Conditions, the other should be
obliged to perform their part: No, this Error is contrary to the Law of God,
the Law of Nations, and the Law of Reason: But as Pride has been the Bait the
Devil has catched the most by, ever since the Creation, so it continues to
this day with us. It was Pride that caused our first Parents to fall from that
blessed Estate in which they were Created, they aiming to be higher and wiser
than God allowed, which brought the everlasting Curse on them and their
Posterity for ever: It was Pride that caused God to drown the old World: It was
Nimrod's Pride in building Babel, that caused that heavy Curse, the division of
Languages, to be spread among us at this day; one of the greatest Afflictions
the People of God groan under, that there should be so many divisions during
their Pilgrimage here; but this is their Comfort, that the day draws near,
whereas there is but one Shepherd, there shall be but one Sheepfold: It was
therefore the defense of this Party in their just Rights and Liberties: At this
they rattled the Drums, to which he said, They need not trouble themselves, for
he should say no more of his Mind on that subject, seeing they were so
ungenerous, as to interrupt a dying Man; only to assure the People that he
adhered to the true Protestant Religion, detesting the erroneous superstition
of many that call themselves so: But I dye this day in the defense of the
ancient Laws and Liberties of our Nation; and though God, for reasons best
known to himself, has not seen fit to honor us, to make us the Instruments
for the deliverance of his People, yet as I have lived, so I dye in the Faith,
that he will spedily arise for the deliverance of his Church and People, which
I desire all of you to prepare for; tho with grief I may say, this is a deluded
generation, veiled with Ignorance, and although Popery and Slavery be riding in
upon them, yet they do not perceive it; tho I am sure there was none marked of
God above another; for none came into the World with a Sadle on his Back,
neither booted and spurred to ride in: Not but that I am well satisfied that
God has wisely ordered different Stations for Men in this World, as I have
already said, Kings having so much Power as to make them great, and People as
to make them happy: And to conclude* I shall only add my wishes for all Men's
Salvation, who were Created for that end.

After ending these Words, he Prayed most fervently about three quarters of an
Hour, freely Forgiving all Men, even his greatest Enemies, begging most
earnestly the deliverance of Sion, particularly Praying for London, Edinburgh,
and Dublin, from which the streams run that rule God's People in the three
Nations: Being asked some hours before his Execution, if he thought not his
Sentence dreadful? he answered, He wished he had a Limb for every Town in
Christendom.

Mr. Ansley's Last Letter.
SIR,
I Now send you my last Farewell, being going to lay down my Life with Joy, and
assurance of Life Eternal; for which, Blessed be the Holy one of Israel, who
never leaves nor forsakes those that put their trust in Him, I give you many
Thanks for your Kindness to me, the Lord make it up to you, by pouring upon you
a Daily Portion of his most holy Spirit, and Deliver you from your Bonds. My
Eenmies have done what they could to Afflict this Body, but Blessed be the most
High, who has given me Strength, Patience, and Courage to Endure all they can
lay upon me. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Fellowship of his Holy
Spirit attend you; which is the Prayer of your Dying Friend, but Living Brother
in Christ Jesus,

Abraham Ansley.
From Taunton-Castle, Sept. 21. 1685.
A HYMN, made by Mr. Joseph Tyler a little before His Execution.
O Lord, how Glorious is thy Grace,
How wondrous large thy Love,
At such a dreadful Time and Place,
To such as Faithful prove.
If thou will have thy Glory henee,
Tho shameful Deaths we Dye;
We Bless Thee for thy Provedence,
To all ETERNIT^.
Let the Spectators see thy Grace,
In thy poor Servants Shine;
Whilst we by Faith, behold thy Face,
In that blessed Son of Thine.
The Men our Bodies may abuse,
Christ take our Souls to Rest;
Till Thou bring forth that Joyful News,
You are my Fathers Blessed.
Appear for those that plead thy Cause,
Preserve them in thy Way;
We own King Jesus and his Laws,
And dare not but Obey.
Great God confound thy Cruel Foes,
Let Babylon come down;
Let Englands King be one of those,
Shall Raze Her to the Ground.
Though Christ we yield our Souls to Thee,
Accept us on his score*
That where he is, there we may be,
And Praise the evermore.
Mr. Sampson Lark's Letter to a Friend, just before his Execution,
MY Dear Friend, I am ready to be Offered, and the time of my Departure is at
hand; I have through Grace fought a good Fight, have finished my course, have
kept the Faih, and am in hopes of the Crown of Righteousness prepared for me,
and all Gods Faithful ones; The experiences I have had of the promises; has
given me comfortable hopes that he will carry me to the full end of my Journey,
with his Name, and that Truth of his, which I have made Profession of* My great
Crime is for my being a Preacher of the Gospel, and here I am to be made a
Sacrafice, where I have mostly Preached Christ's Gospel. I think my Judges have
devised this punishment for my hurt, but I trust God will turn it to my good;
the great trouble I have, is for those good Hearts that I must leave behind me:
But this is my comfort, knowing that all such as fear God, he will be a Father
to them. My Dear Wife is greatly troubled, but through Mercy, much supported
and something quieted; if any of you have opportunity to give her help; I hope
you will do it; as for our confessing our selves Guilty, it was expressly as to
matter of Fact, and not of Form, and this I did with some freedom, and the
rather because all my worthy Brethren that went before me took that way, and
the many ways having been used to have a further Discovery, yet nothing of that
kind by any but only by Captain Jones; Since our Sentence some wretched-men
has been with us to draw from us a Confession of our being Rebels, that we
might have their Absolution. I Bless God he has hitherto helped me to be
Faithful, and I hope he will not leave me in the most needful time. I must
Conclude, being ready to be called away; my Dear Love to all my Christian
Friends, and especially those in the Goal; the Lord be with you all* Amen. Your
Dying Friend, in hopes of Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

Sampson Lark.
From the House of my Blessed Bondage in Dorcester, Sept. 7th. 1685.
The Last Speech of the Lady Alicia Lisle.
GEntlemen, Friends and Neighbors, it may be expected that I should say
something at my Death, and in order thereununto I shall acquaint you, that my
Birth and Education was both near this place, and that my Parents Instructed me
in the Fear of God, and I now dye of the Reformed Protestant Religion; that if
ever Popery should return into this Nation, it would be a very great and severe
Judgment, that I dye in expectation of the Pardon of all my Sins, and of
acceptance with God the Father, by the imputed Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
he being the End of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes; I
thank God through Jesus Christ, that I do depart under the Blood of Sprinkling,
which speaks better things then that of Abel; God having made this
Castisement an Ordinance to my Soul; I did once as little expect to come to
this place on this occasion, as any Person in this place or Nation; therefore
let all learn not to be high Minded, but fear* The Lord is a Sovereign, and
will take what way he sees best to Glorify himself in, and by his poor
Creatures; and I do humbly desire to submit to his Will, Praying to him* That I
may possess my Soul in Patience. The Crime that was laid to my Charge, was for
entertaining an Non-conformist-Minister and others in my House; the said
Minister being Sworn to have been in the late Duke of Monmouths Army; but I
have been told, that if I had denied them, it would not at all have effected
me; I have no excuse, but surprise and fear, which I believe my Jury must make
use of to excuse their Verdict to the World. I have been also told, That the
Court did use to be of Counsel for the Prisoner: but instead of Advice, I had
Evidence against me from thence; which though it were only by hear say, might
possibly affect my Jury; my defense being but such, as might be expected from a
weak Woman; but such as it was, I did not hear it Repeated again to the Jury;
which as I have been informed, is usual in such cases: However, I forgive all
the World, and therein all those that have done me wrong; and in particular, I
forgive Colonel Penrudduck, although he told me, that he could have Taken these
men before they came to my House; and I do likewise forgive him, who desired to
be taken away from the Grand Jury to the Petty Jury, that he might be the more
nearly concerned in my Death; as to what may be objected in reference to my
Conviction, that I gave it under my hand, that I had Discoursed with Nelthrope;
that could be no Evidence against me, being after my Conviction and Sentence: I
do acknowledge His Majesty's Favor in Revoking my Sentence; I pray God to
preserve him, that he may long Reign in Mercy, as well as Justice; and that he
may Reign in Peace; and that the Protestant Religion may flourish under him: I
also return thanks to God and the Reverend Clergy, that assisted me in my
Imprisonment.

ALICIA LISLE.

A Letter Writ by Mr. John Hicks, Oct. 5. the Day before his Death.
My Dear Nephew,
I Am yet in the Land of the Living, though in the Mouth of Death; I having
been concerned for you, next to my own Children before I die; I thought fit to
write two or three Lines to you, as a Manifestation of my great Love to you: I
earnestly desire the Welfare of you here, and to Eternity hereafter, next to my
own Wife and Children, you will want me when I am gone, but I hope the Lord
will take care of you; make it your business to walk with him, to serve him
faithfully; flee youthful Lusts, and Remember your Creator in the Days of your
Youth; be deeply concerned to have your Heart and Nature changed, and an
interest in Christ secured unto you: Death comes suddenly, you know not when,
where, nor how you shall die: Let time therefore be most precious to you; fill
it up with Work and Duty; Live by Faith more than by Sense; and this will stand
by you when you come to die: Seek the things which are above, and set your
Affections upon them; have your Conversation in Heaven, whilst you are upon
Earth. When you see your Parents, give my dear Love to them and their Children;
the Lord grant that we may meet in his Everlasting Kingdom: When you see any of
your Cousins, give my dear Love to them, and be not ashamed of my Sufferings: I
wrote last Saturday was a Seven-Night to my Brother George, but whether he is
at London or Worcester, I know not; I wrote to him, to desire him to Petition
the King, that some Favor and Mercy might be showed me, if he thought fit:
Things that are made to aggravate my Crime, I am clear from, as that I
persuaded the Duke of M. to assume the Title of King at Taunton, when I was not
there with him, nor in 13 days after he came into England, and that I rode too
and fro in the West, to persuade People to go into his Army, when I was in the
East, and came from thence to him in the West; but my Nonconformity cuts me,
and obstructs the Kings Mercy from being Extended to me, as I am told; but the
Will of the Lord be done; the Life to come is infinitely better than this: Many
more things are laid to my charge, which I am no more guilty of than your self.
If your Uncle be in Town, go speedily to him, and give him my Dear Love; I Pray
for you, who am

Your most Affectionate Uncle, J. H.
October. 5. 1684.
A Letter to his Wife, Sept. 23. 1684.
My Dearest Love,
I Hope you received a few Lines from me, by the way of London; once more I
write to you, by our faithful and trusty Friend W. D. who has been at Exon. If
there be need for it, he knows many of my Dear and Faithful Friends there, who
wish you would come and live among them; and if your Estate fail, I think it
very advisable so to do; I hope God will stand by you and defend you: My Dear,
see me in God, as I must you. I must now bid adieu unto all Earthly and Worldly
Comforts, and all the Pleasant and Delightful Objects of Sense. I bless God for
all present Mercies and Comforts hitherto I have had; what will be after this
day, I know not, but the Will of the Lord be done.

My Dear, be very cautious not to speak one Word, least it be wrested to wrong
Sense, which may ruin you; I have not writ what I would of this Nature, take
the Advice of Friends, and of what I send by our Friend. O let not the
Everlasting Arms of God be withdrawn from you one Moment; and let him
strengthen you with all Might, according to his Glorious Power, and to all
Patience and Long-Suffering, with Joyfulness! Pray hard for Victory over
Passion, and be much in private Closet-Prayer with God; and often read the Holy
Bible, and other good Books, the Lord continually guide, direct and counsel
you. My dear, I return you a thousand thanks for all the Love you have showed
me and my Children, and particularly for the high and great Demonstration you
have given thereof in this day of my distress; I hope my Daughters will be as
dutiful to you, and be as much concerned for your comfort and welfare, as if
you had traveled with them, and brought them into the World; God bless my Dear
Little-Ones and them together, I shall dye their most Affectionate and Praying
Father; God I hope will uphold, support, and comfort me at the last hour, and
enable me to overcome the Temptations I shall violently be assaulted with
before I Die: God by his Infinite and freest Mercies in Christ Jesus, Pardon
all the neglect of Relative Duties, (which I have bitterly lamented and
bewailed before God, with all the Sins I am guilty of) for the sake of our
Dearest Lord and Redeemer; the Lord make you grow in all Grace more than ever,
and make this great Affliction so humbly Purifying and Spiritualizing to you as
well as me, that it may work for us both, a far more Exceeding and Eternal
Weight of Glory; let him take your Soul into his most dearest Embraces, and
lodge it in the Bosom of his Love here, and make us to meet in the full and
Everlasting Fruition and Enjoyment of him hereafter; though it is dangerous for
you to vindicate that I die for, yet be not too much cast down for it: I will
say no more as to that. My hearty and affectionate Respects to all my Dear
Friends; I need not name them; I hope to meet them, with your self, to inherit
Eternal Life through the Merits of Christ's Death: Farewell my Dear, farewell in
the Lord; until we meet to be Married to him for ever; my Heart is as full of
Love the as it was the first day I Married thee; and if God spar^ife, it should
have been as fully manifested until Death; therefore I rest,

Your most Affectionate and Endeared Husband, J. H.
Sept. 23. 1684.
Another Letter.
My Dearest Love,
I Received your Letter by Mr. Skinner; I Bless God, that you and my Babes are
well; the Lord continue their Lives to be a Blessing and Comfort to you, and
enable you to see them well Educated in the Fear of God; and when God takes me
away, let him be a Husband to guide, direct, succor, comfort and support you,
and to lodge your Soul in the Bosom of his Love; and let him be a Father to
them, and their Portion for ever. Monday last my Brother went to London, to try
what could be done for me; what the success will be, I know not; I desire the
Lord every day to prepare me for Death, and carry me above the Fear of it, by
the discoveries of his everlasting love unto my Soul; and clearing up my Right
and Title to everlasting Life; and by Sealing up to me the Pardon of all my
Sins, through the most precious Blood of Jesus Christ: Let us Pray hard and
much for each other; when I leave this World, it shall be with Prayer for thee;
if God give me life, how shall I study to be a comfort to thee, and to live up
to my Marriage as well as Baptismal Covenant to all my Friends? Tender my most
affectionate Respects; I hope their Prayers will one way or other be heard for
me; let the Almighty be your Protector, Supporter and Comforter: There be two
Books I do recommend to you to read when you are retired, as well as in your
family; Pierces Preparation for Death; and Foxes Redemption of Time: Now let
our Souls meet together in one most Blessed God, in our Dearest Jesus, and
sweetest Savior; let them clasp and cling about him, and be Sick for the love
of him; and that we may meet to enjoy him fully to Eternity, and be satisfied
with his Love for ever; a thousand Loves, if I had them, I would send to thee,
next to my and (...) Jesus, and the things that are Heavenly, Spiritual and
(...): I love thee; what I can spare for thee, is conveyed to thee and my Dear
Children, from

Thy most Affectionate and Faithful Husband, and their most loving Father, J. H.

Another Letter.
My most Dear Love,
I Hope you have received my last once more, as a dead and living man (through
difficulty) I write to you, though I yet do not know when nor where I shall
dye, but expect Death every day; when that Message is brought to me, I hope,
through the Grace and Strength of Christ, it will be no surprise to me; that
neither my Lips, Flesh, nor Heart will tremble when I hear it; I know the cause
for which I Suffer; God has and has singled me out from many of my Brethren
(which I never have been without some apprehensions of for above these 20
years) to lay down my Life; how far it is for his cause, will be judged at the
last day; I bless God, who has kept me from all Temptations to Conformity,
though it has brought me to Ruin and Destruction in this World, it will be no
fit Season for you to Vindicate that for which I am called to suffer, be
silent, and leave it to God; I advise to all Prudence in this case: have your
own reserved thoughts, and let them concerning me, support and comfort you; if
there never happen a time for you to Glory in my Sufferings, it will be
hereafter; do you but walk with God (though through Prudence you must hold your
Tongue) and be not ashamed you had such a Husband; I thank God that gave it me,
whose Courage and Public Spirit for the Protestant Religion, the Civil
Liberties of his Country, even true English Liberties, has in this Ignominious
way, brought me to the Conclusion and End of my time; Mourn not, my Dear, as
one without Hope, let the World know you have something from me, something from
your self as a Christian, but ten thousand times more from God to comfort and
support you; see Christ by an Eye of Faith, infinitely more lovely and
beautiful than my self; let him be Married to your Soul; let him be the
chiefest of ten thousand, and more dear and precious to you; it is not long we
shall be separated, before we shall see one another in a Spiritual Enjoyment,
separated from all Fleshly Pleasures and Delights, yet infinitely more sweet
and satisfying to Immortal Spirits, as you and I used to see Streams from the
Fountaint and the largest Streams in the Ocean; so let us see one another in
God, the Ever-flowing and Overflowing Fountain of all Good, the fathomless and
boundless Ocean of Good; seek much the things which are above; live with your
Affections; set upon them; and have your Conversation in Heaven, whilst you are
upon Earth; I continue yet to Pray for you, as for my self, and shall continue
to do it until I dye; in my last Prayers you shall be Interested with my Dear
Babes, whom I hope God will take into Covenant with him, and number them among
his Adopted Ones, and of that Incorruptible Inheritance which is in Heaven; I
hope God will spare your Life to see them Educated, and guide and assist you
therein, and theirs to be a Blessing and Comfort to you; consider your
Condition is not single and alone, this Country affords a multitude of the
like sad and deplorable Instances; let this make you more to possess your Soul
with Patience and Humility, calmly and quietly to submit to the good Will of
God -- I have left a Paper behind me for you to Read, and our Friend can tell
with what difficulty I Writ it, therefore must have many Defects and
Imperfections, which must be overlooked and mended; preserve the two Bibles
for my Dear James and Betty: What shall I say more my Dearest? I must break off
with my Heart full of Love to thee; and Subscribe my self,

Thy most Dear and Affectionate Husband till Death, J. H.
October. 3d. 1684.
Mr. Josias Askew's Letter to his Father.
Honored Father,
I Not having an Opportunity to make my Gratitude known to you, for all your
Endeavors for the saving a poor, vain, perishing, and troublesome Life; and
seeing it is all in vain, I would desire you both to acquiesce in the Will of
God, and rejoice with me for this happy Day of my Departure from this State of
Pilgrimage, home to the Possession of those Heavenly Mansions, which my God and
Father has provided for me, in and thorough my Lord Jesus Christ: It is in him
alone I put my Trust and Confidence, and therefore can boldly say, Who is he
that Condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, and
is set down at the Right Hand of God, making Intercession for all those that
have a well-grounded Confidence in him. My time is but short, and by reason of
Company I am disturbed; therefore I conclude with my last Breath, beging of
God, that he would keep you constant in his Fear, in this day of great
Temptation, and at last receive you to his Glory, where we shall once more
Unite, in Praising; without Interruption or Distraction, World without End,
Amen. Until which time, the Grace of God the Father, the Love of God the Son,
the comfortable Refreshings of God the Holy Ghost, be with you, all yours, and
the whole Israel of God, both now and for ever: Which is the Hearty Prayer of
your Son,

Josias Askew.
Pray Remember me to all with Joy.
Another Letter to his Friend.
MADAM,
YOU have been a Partaker with me in my Troubles, I would also make you a
Partaker with me in my Joys; seeing my Wedding Day is come, the Day of the
Bridegroom is at Hand, and I am this Day to be stripped of my Rags of Corruption,
to be Clothed upon with the White Robe of his Righteousness and Purity, and to
be Married to my Husband, and to be given to the Embraces of my Lord Jesus
Christ, for ever and ever.

Learn not to repine at the Holy Determination of an Infinite Wise God, but
rest satisfied in his Will, knowing that he does all things for the best to
them that fear him; Weep not for me who am only changing this World of
Temptation, of Troubles and Affliction: it has pleased God to call me a little
before you, but you must soon follow after; keep therefore, the Fear of God
before your Eyes, and then you will have cause to rejoice, and not to mourn,
when at the time of Departure; you may have cause to say with me, I have run my
Race, I have finished my Course, I have kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up
for me a Crown of Glory which fades not away; which that you may be able to
say, is the Hearty Prayer, of

Your Friend and Servant, Josias Askew.

The Account his Friend gives of him.
TO prevent your further Trouble in suing for a Pardon, I think it convenient
to let you know, I do not question, but my Dear Cousin has had his Pardon
Sealed by the King of Kings, and is in Everlasting Blessedness, Singing
Hallelujahs, Salvation, Glory and Honor to him that sits upon the Throne, and
to the Lamb for ever and ever: For God did so carry him through to drink that
bitter Cup, with so much Courage and Cheerfulness to the last, as was to the
Admiration of all Spectators, notwithstanding the terrible Sight he saw at the
place of Suffering, and so vehemently, as he was tried by the Adversary; yet it
did not in the least dis-compose him or alter his Countenance, for he continued
with a smiling Countenance to the last, and was transported above Measure: I
want Words to express it; he was like one wrapped up in Heaven, with his Heart
there, and his Eyes fixed thereon. I could wish you had been there, it would
have driven away all cause of Sorrow from your Heart, and to see his
Deportment, and hear the Gracious Words that proceeded out of his Mouth: He
remembers his Duty to you both, and left Paul's Blessing with you, Grace,
Mercy, and Peace; his Love to his Dear Sister; he desires her not to be
troubled for him, for he has made his Peace with God, and was assured he
should go to Eternal Happiness; he would have Written more to you and to his
Sister, but that he had so short a time after Sentence, that he wanted
Opportunity; when he went out of Prison, he said, Gentlemen, Now I am going,
and it is the time I much longed for; I would not change with him that passed
Sentence upon me, for a World. I was with him to the last, and seeing his
Courage, did very much encourage me, though I never saw such a Sight with my
Eyes.

Next follows many Excellent Hymns made by several Worthy Persons that were
Prisoners for the sake of Christ.
Triumphing Songs with glorious Tongues,
Let Us offer unto him;
That loved so to undergo
The product of our Sin.
Leaving his Throne from Heaven came down,
Sinners for to Redeem
From Hell and Wrath and second death,
Christ underwent great pain.
His side was gored, his hands was bored
His feet was nailed down,
And all was for the Redemption
Of sinful wicked Man.
O how straightened, pressed and pained
Was Christ to be Baptized,
And in Affliction to be plunged,
His Body Sacrificed.
Let God be blessed for Jesus Christ
Who is our splendid King,
Hallelujahs sweet with spirit meet,
High praises to him sing.
For Blood, for Wounds* for Love, whose bounds
Extended unto all:
For scoffs and smites, for jeers, for flouts
Which upon Christ did fall.
Now Christ haste unto us again
Thy Scepter for to sway,
Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done.
Come Jesus come away.
With glorious bands and shining trance
Of Angels in the Sky,
Which forth shall sing Triumphing Songs
With sweet Hallelujah.
Set up thy standard, and prepare
War against Babylon:
For her destruction draws near.
As here we read her doom.
Lord blow the Trumpet, and awake
The Nations round about,
Stir up the spirit of the Meeds,
Which did old Babel rout.
For Babel must drink of that Cup
Which Sion deep did wound,
Jerusalem did first begin,
And so the Cup goes round*
But Babel must drink up the dregs
Of Wrath which do remain,
With which no mixture she shall have
To mitigate her pain.
For it is the vengeance of our God,
And of his Temple too,
The vials that fill up his Wrath,
The three last Trumpets woe.
When Jacob as a battle AX*
In great Jehovah's hand,
Shall break down all, those Mountains tall,
That in his way do stand.
O then let us Rejoice, because
The time appointed is,
That Babel shall be seen to fall,
And Sion shine in Bliss.
Our Lord draws near, as does appear
By Signs by him foretold;
Then Virgins come, meet your Bridegroom,
His Wondrous Works behold.
The Night grows dark, be still and hark
What is the Bridegrooms Voice;
That when the Cry, comes swiftly by,
It may your Hearts rejoice.
Your Light grows dim, arise and trim
Your Lamps from all their Soil;
And see your Light shines clear and bright,
Supplied with Gospel-Oyl.
Some Virgins now do Sleepy grow;
And don't their Vessels fill;
Nor fear a want, when Oil grows scant,
And none be found to sell.
And at Midnight, all in a Fright,
Oyl-shops they cannot find;
And none will spare, out of his share,
And so they are left behind.
Thus Foolish sleep, in dangers deep,
And think their Lord delays;
But his own Bride, has surely spide
Some of his Glorious Rays;
And will not sleep, unless she keep
Her Watch-lights burning still,
With Oil in store, laid up therefore,
Let him come when he will.
And though her Garments had some rents,
And spots not perfect white;
Yet they will be cleans'd, or quickly changed
For Rayments of Delight.
With her Bridegroom, she will find room
In Chambers of his Love;
When the Unwise, he will despise,
And them from him remove.
THE Earl of Argyle's LAST SPEECH, June the 30th. 1685.
JOB tells us, Man that is born of a Woman, is of few Days, and full of
Trouble; and I am a clear Instance of it. I shall not now say any thing of my
Sentence, or Escape about three Years and a half ago; nor of my Return, lest I
may thereby give Offense, or be tedious: Only being to end my days in your
Presence, I shall, as some of my last Words, assert the Truth of the matter of
Fact, and the Sincerity of my Intentions, and Professions that are Published.

That which I intend mainly now to say, is, To express my humble and (I thank
God) cheerful Submission to his Divine Will; and my willingness to Forgive all
men, even my Enemies; and I am heartily well satisfied there is no more Blood
spilt, and I shall wish the Stream thereof may stop at me: And that (if it
please God) to say, as to Zerubbabel, Zech. 4. 6. Not by might, nor by Power,
but by my spirit, says the Lord of Hosts.

I know Afflictions spring not out of the dust: God did wonderfully Deliver and
Provide for me, and has now by his special Providence brought me to this Place;
and I hope none will either insult, or be stumbled at it, seeing they ought
not; for God Almighty does all things well, for good and holy Ends, though we
do not always understand it. Love and Hatred is not known by what is before us,
Eccles. 9. 1. and 8. 11, 12. 13.

Afflictions are not only foretold, but promised to Christians; and are not
only tolerable, but desirable.

We ought to have a deep Reverence and Fear of God's displeasure; but withal, a
firm Hope and Dependence on him for a blessed Issue, in compliance with his
Will; for God chastens his own to Refine them, and not to ruin them, whatever
the World may think: Heb. 12. 3. to 12. Prove. 3. 11, 12. 2 Timothy 1. 8. 2 Timothy 2.
11. 12. Mat. 10* 18, to 40. Mat. 16. 24. to 28.

We are to imitate our Savior in his Sufferings, as 1 Pet. 2 23. and 1 Pet. 4.
16, to 20.

We are neither to despise our Afflictions, nor faint under them; both are
extremes.

We are not to suffer our Spirits to be exasperated against the Instruments of
our trouble; for the same Affliction may be an effect of their Passion, and yet
sent by God to punish us for Sin: Tho it is a Comfort when we may say to them,
with David, Psalm. 59. 3. Not for my Transgression, nor for my sin, O Lord.

Nor are we, by fraudulent Pusillanimous Compliances in wicked Courses, to
bring Sin upon our selves: Faint Hearts are ordinarily False Hearts; choosing
Sin rather than Sufferings, and a short Life with Eternal Death, before
Temporal Death and a Crown of Glory: Such seeking to Save a Little, Loses All;
and God readily hardens them to proceed to their own Destruction. How many,
like Hazael, 2 King. 8. 13. run to Excesses they never thought they were
capable of! Let Rulers and others read seriously, and weigh, Prove. 1. 10, to
20. 2 Chronicles. 28. 6, to 17. Prove. 24. 11, 12. and Prove. 28. 10. and avoid what
is bad, and follow what is good.

For me, I hope by God s strength to join with Job, Chap. 13. 15. and the
Psalmist, Psalm. 22. 4. and 167. and shall Pray, as Psalm. 74. 19, to 24. and
Psalm. 122. 6, to 9. and Luke 1. 74, 75. and shall Hope, as Psalm. 94. 14, 15.

I do freely forgive all that directly or indirectly have been the cause of my
being brought to this place, first or last; and I pray God Forgive them. I pray
God send Truth and Peace in these Three Kingdoms; and continue and increase the
glorious Light of the Gospel, and restrain the Spirit of Prophanity, Atheism,
Superstition, Popery, and Persecution; and Restore All that have back-slidden
from the Purity of their Life, or Principles; and Bless his whole People with
all blessings, Spiritual and Temporal, and put an end to their present Trials.

And I entreat all People to Forgive me wherein I have Offended, and to concur
with me to Pray, That the great, good, and merciful God, would sanctify my
present Lot, and for Jesus Christ his sake Pardon all my Sins, and receive me
to his Everlasting Glory.

It is suggested to me, that I have said nothing of the Royal Family; and it
remembers me, that before the Justices at my Trial about the Test, I said, that
at my Death I would Pray, That there should never want one of the Royal Family
to be a Defender of the True, Ancient, Apostolic, Catholic, Protestant Faith;
which I do now: And that GOD would enlighten and forgive all of them that are
either lukewarm, or have shrunk from the Profession of it. And in all Events,
I pray God may provide for the Security of his Church, that Antichrist, nor the
Gates of Hell may never prevail against it.

The HUMBLE PETITION OF THE WIDOWS AND FATHERLESS CHIDREN IN THE West of
England, (TO BE) Presented to this present Convention.
WE, to the Number of a Thousand and more, Widows and Fatherless Children, of
the Counties of Dorset, Somerset, and Devon, our dear Husbands and tender
Fathers having been so Tyrannously Butchered, and some Transported, our Estates
sold from us, and our Inheritance cut off by the severe and harsh Sentence of
George Lord Jefferies, now we understand in the Tower of London a Prisoner, who
has lately, we hear, endeavored to excuse himself from those Tyrannical and
Illegal Sentences, by laying it on Information by some Gentlemen, who are known
to us to be good Christians, true Protestants and Englishmen. We your poor
Petititioners, many hundreds of us, on our Knees have begged Mercy for our dear
Husbands and tender Parents, from his Cruel Hands, but his thirst for Blood was
so great, and his Barbarism so Cruel, that instead of granting Mercy for some,
which were made appear to be Innocent, and Petitioned for by the flower of the
Gentry of the said Counties, he immediately Executed; and so barbarously, that
a very good Gentlevvoman at Dorchester, begging on her Knees the Life of a
worthy Gentleman, to Marry him, and make him her Husband, this vile Wretch not
having common Civility with him, and laying aside that Honor and Respect due
to a Person of her worth, told her, Come, I know your meaning, some part of
your Petition I will grant, which shall be that after he is Hanged and
Quartered, you shall have that Member you best like when living, and so I will
give Orders to the Sheriff: These, with many hundred more Tyrannical Acts are
ready to be made appear in the said Counties, by honest and credible Persons,
and therefore your Petitioners desire, that the said George Jefferies, late
Lord Chancellor, the Vilest of Men, may be brought down to the Counties
aforesaid, where we the good Women in the West shall be glad to see him; and
give him another manner of Welcome than he had there three Years since.

And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere will now speedily be Published a Treatise Entitled, The Bloody Assizes:
or, A Complete History of the Life of GEORGE Lord JEFFERIES, from his Birth to
this present time, etc. Wherein (amongst other things) is given a true Account
of his unheard of Cruelties and barbarous Proceedings in his whole Western
Circuit; the manner of his coming to Dorchester, his Tyrannical Behavior
there, his Affronts to the Sheriffs and chief Gentlemen of Devon-shire,
Dorset-shire, Somersetshire, etc. His barbarous Practices at Exeter, Taunton,
and the City of Wells; the Trials and Condemnation of 947 Persons, with their
undaunted Courage at the Bar, and remarkable Circumstances that attended their
Executions: Faithfully Collected by several West Country Gentlemen, now in
London, who were both Eye and Earwitnesses. Which will be Sold by John Dunton
at the Black Raven in the Poultrey, over against the Compter.

The First and Second Collection of Dying Speeches, Letters, Prayers, etc. of
those who suffered in the West, sold by J. Dunton, at the Black Raven in the
Poultrey.

The Joy of Faith, er a Treatise opening the true Nature of Faith, by S. Lee,
sold by J. Dunton.


