ASTREA.

A ROMANCE, WRITTEN IN FRENCH, BY Messire Honor D'Urfe;

AND TRANSLATED BY A Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed by W. W. for H. Moseley, T. Dring, and H. Herringman, And are
to be sold at their shops in St Paul's Churchyard, Fleetstreet, and in the
Lower walk in the New Exchange. 1657.

TO THE READER.
OF all the Books that Mankind has conversed with, since it was first refined
by Letters, none has contributed so much to the civilization thereof, or gaind
that esteem and Authority with it, as those of POETRY; by which term I mean,
FICTION, in the largest extent. Under this, are comprehended the highest and
noblest productions of man's wit, ROMANCES; a kind of writing so full of
charm and insinuation, that even Religious worship, in the dis-illuminated
times of Paganism, was obliged to it for most of its Ceremonies, and the
strange influence it had over the multitude. For, what were the Ora^les, what
all ancient Mythologies, what Numa's pretended correspondence with his Nymph
Aegeria, but so many politic Ro^ances, cunningly advanced, to create in the
minds of the people a fear and veneration of some power above humane Laws,
whereby they were deterred from those things which were out of their reach and
cognizance? Hence was it that some stumbled on that Paradoxe, That mankind,
looked on generally, had made greater advantages of Fiction, than ever it had
done of Truth; the one, it seems, by reason of her nakedness, finding so much
the colder reception; the other, disguized in the dresses of Wit, and
Eloquence, the noblest entertainment that could be expected from reverence,
admiration, and Idolatry.

But, if Endeavors of this nature were so succesfull and advantageous to piety
and a civil life, in their infancy, while they were yet shrouded in Fables and
Oracular cheats and ambiguities, and lay level to the capacities of the
multitude, what may not those contribute, that are calculated to the meridian
of the most critical and most ingenious? What was before censured as
extravagance of imagination, is now reconciled to probability, and restrained
by judgment. What falsely ravished the eager apprehension into amazement at
impertinent and Quixoticall Attempts doe^ now but gently inflame the mind into
an aemulation of the perfections, and a sympathy for the weakeness and
sufferings it finds represented. Thus an excess of Austerity in some has
reduced many to a greater compliance with and submission to Nature; and the
elevation of the voice in Singing Masters above the note, does but direct the
Learner to reach the tone.

This, READER, is the design of the work thou now have in thy hands. Here
thou find'st a clear representation of the Noblest and most generous images of
life, and such an account of the passions and actions of Men, as few books of
this nature afford so plentiful; with such variety of excellent discourses,
and an extraordinary sententiousnesse, as deservedly celebrate this above any
Author of the kind. Here thou have a jealous and distrustful ASTREA; a
despairing, yet faithful CELADON; asickle and unconstant HYLAS; and such
intricate scenes of Courtship, Love, Jealousy, and the other passions, as
cannot but raise in ^ee a consideration of humane Affairs, suitable to the
several emergencies. But to close up the elogies may be given this work, with
the greatest that any of this kind ever received, I shall only add ^he
judgment of it, of the late famous Cardinal of RICHELIEU, That he was not to
be admitted into the Academy of Wit, who had not been before well read in
ASTREA.

J. D.

ASTREA.
The First part. Book I.
Near the Ancient City of Lions toward the West, lies that part of the
Country called Forests, which in it is little circumference comprehends more
varities then the rest of France: for being divided into Plains and Mountains
both of them are so fertile, and seated in such a temperate Air, that the
soil is capable of whatsoever the industrious Husbandman can expect or desire.
In the heart of the Country is a most Pleasan, plain circled about, as with a
strong wall, by its Neighbor hills, and watered with the River Loyre; which
from its (not far off) original, glides gently through the midst of it,
without any swelling pride. Many other Rivulets do in diverse places bestow
their crystal streams, the chief of which is Lignon, which, though
extravagant in its course, as well as delectable in its Scource, runs
Meander-like through the plain, near unto the losty mountains of Servieres
and Chalmasel, unto Feures, where the Loyre receiving it, and swallowing up its
name, carries it as tribute unto the Ocean.

Upon the banks of these delighting Rivers, are continually to be seen
abundance of shepherds, who though little beholding to fortune, yet by reason
of the aires natural sweetness, and the Soiles fertility do live in
abundance of contented happiness.

They would never have envied the golden contentedness of the first happy age,
had Love let them alone to enjoy that felicity of which the heavens were so
prodigal unto them: but slumbering upon the downy beds of ease, they became
subject unto Loves flattery, who presently turned his Authority into Tyranny.
Celadon was one of them who did most feelingly resent it, and who was so
captivated with the perfections of Astrea, that the very odium of their Parents
could not preserve him from losing himself in her. The truth is, that if ever
happiness could be found in the loss of ones self, it was by him, in losing
himself to gain the favor of the fair Astrea; who being assured of his
affection, did scorn ingratitude, and received him and his services with
reciprocal affection: so that if any changing be seen in either of them
afterward, it is probable that the heavens did allow it, to show, that nothing
is more constant then inconstancy, which is constant in alteration. For these
two having lived together most happily the space of three years, even then
when they least feared any dysasterous accident, they found themselves betrayed
unto the worst of loves misfortunes, by the perfidie of Semyres: so as Celadon
to disguise his affection from their Parents, who by reason of an inveterate
hatred amongst themselves, did strive to thwart their amorous designs, did
seem as if his addresses to that shepherdess were rather out of civil
course, then any courtship: This umbrage was handsome enough, if Semyres had
not made it his stalking horse to betray Astrea, which she since repayed by
many a sigh and Tear.

As Fortune was, one day, this amorous shepherd, rising betimes to bid his
thoughts good morrow, and leaving his flock to graze, he went to rest himself
upon the banks of the River Lignon, there expecting the appearance of his fair
shepherdess, who was not long behind him: for she out of too much fancy, had
scarcely closed her eye that night. The Sun no sooner begun to gild the top
of the mountains of I soures and M^rcillies then this shepherd espied a far
off a flock which he presently knew belonged unto Astrea; for Melampe, a dog
much in favor with his shepherdess, as soon as ever he saw him, came and
fauned upon him: besides, he observed the beloved Sheep of his Mistrisse;
though that morning she did not wear her dress of various colored Ribands,
which her Mistrisse was wont to deck her head with, in the fashion of a
garland: for that shepherdess being much displeased, she did not give her
self the leisure of dressing it, as usual. She followed her flock as if her
shoes were Lead; and, as might be judged by the garb, so^thing much troubled
her mind, so as being near her shepherd she did not so much as tur^e an eye
toward him, but set her self down upon the banks of the River. Celadon, not
taking any notice of this, believing she did not see him, but that she went to
the place where he was wont to wait for her, did drive his flock toward her:
she sat upon the stumpe of an old Tree, with a drooping head, supported by her
hand which leaned upon her kne^ and she sat in so sad a posture that if Celadon
had not been more then half blind, he mightplainely perceive that this sorrow
could not proceed from any thing but an opinion of a change in his affection,
for no other dysaster had power enough to cause such sad thoughts. But an
unexpected misfortune being far more hard to relish then an other, it seems
fate had a mind to surprise him unawares.

Thus being ignorant of his ill hap, after a choice of the fittest place for
the grazing of his flock near his dearest sheepherdess, he went to bid her
good morrow, being extremely joyed to see her: she returned answer with looks
and language so cold, as if a chill winter had frozen every syllable. The
shepherd, unaccustomed to such a sight, was infinitely astonished; and though
he could not imagine his dysaster so great as afterward he found it, yet the
very thought of offending her he loved, was enough to cost him his life. Had
the shepheardess deigned him a look, or had his zealous fancy permitted him to
consider what might be the cause of her coldness, certainly his apprehensions
had vanished. But Celadon must not be the Phoenix of happiness, as he was of
Love; nor will fortune afford him more favor then other men, in matter of
content. After a long and pensive ecstasy, he rowsed up himself, and turning
toward his shepheardess, he perceived that she looked upon him, but it was
with so sad an aspect, that she struck him soulless. They were both so near the
River, that Celadon might easily reach it with the end of his sheephooke; and
some showers had so swelled the water above its common mark that it disgorged
it self with a very impetuous stream, into the River Loure. The place where
they sat was a hill, a little raised above the common level, against which the
waves did beat in vain, the foundation of it being a Rock covered over with
some moss. From this place, the shepherd did beat the waves of water with his
sheephook, and those waves were not half so turbulent as his thoughts; he
summoned up every action of his life, nay not a thought escaped inquisition,
and all to find out wherein he had offended: but his innocence clearing up his
conscience, he was enboldned to ask her the reason of her anger. She not
observing his actions, or else observing them to his disadvantage, her heart
begun to be the more inflamed with choler; so as when he offered to speak, she
would not permit him to express himself without interruption, saying: Is it
not enough and too much (perfidious and injurious shepherd) to have deluded
her who least deserved it from you; but you must still persist in your
wickedness? how dare you be so impudently bold, as to look her in the face
whom you have so grossly offended? Can thou without a blush bring that
dissembling face into my presence? does not thy double soul tremble at its own
villainy, before me? Go go, and deceive some other; get thee gone traitor, and
employ thy perfidies in beguiling some that knows them not; think not any
longer to delude me, who am too too well accquainted with thy falsnesse. At
this the poor shepherd falls down upon his knees; looks pale and wanne, as
if blasted with a Thunderbolt. Is it your design only to try me, fair
shepherdess, (said he unto her) or else to kill me with despair? Nay, nay,
false man, replied she; I need not try thy infidelity, for I am too well
accquainted with it: Oh heavens, said the shepherd. I wish this fatal day had
never dawnd: It had been happy for us both, replied she, if neither of us had
ever seen the light, then had thy infidelity never troubled me. Go, go,
perfidious wretch, I charge thee to be gone, and never again look me in the
face, unless I command it. Celadon would have replied, had not his extafie of
love bedeafed him: And as she was going away, he was forced to pull her by the
gown, saying, I do not stay you dear shepherdess, to beg a Pardon for my
unknown fault; but only to show you that this is the last day of his life,
whom you seem so much to abhor: but she being all in a fury, and not so much
as looking upon him did violently break away, and left behind her a Riband,
upon which by accident his hand did lie; and also a Ring, which her Father had
given her, was tied in that Riband. The sad shepherd seeing her depart in such
a fury did stand awhile like a stock immovable; scarce knowing what he had in
his hand, though his eye was upon it. At last recollecting himself with a deer
sigh and taking notice of the Riband Witness, dear Riband, said he, that
rather then untie the least knot of my affection, I would lose a hundred lives;
when I am dead and my cruel fair one shall happily see thee on my arm,
assure her that never any was more faithful, then I; nor never any more
cruel, then she. Then tying it upon his arm, and kissing the Ring And thou,
right emblem of true affection, said he, let me enjoy thee to the last, as a
pledge of her promised affection to me. He had no sooner uttered these words,
but turning his eyes toward Astrea, he leaped into the River with crossed arms.

Lignon in that place was very deep and violent, and by reason of the Rock
which repulsed the water, there was a kind of whirlpit: so as the shepherd was
long before he sunk to the bottom, and longer in coming up to the top again.
And when he did appear, nothing could be seen, but first a leg, and then an
arm: at last being gulfed up by the turning of the waves, he was carried away
under the water. Now Astrea runs to the Water side, and seeing him whom she
could not choose but love by her means so near his death; she was so
affrighted, that in lieu of lending any help, she falls into a swound and that
so near the water, that when she returned to her self, at the first motion she
fell in, and was in so much danger, as all that some shepherds close by could
do was little enough to save her by pulling her out by her garments; which kept
her above the water, and gave them time to draw her unto the side: but life was
so far spent, as she perceived it not. They carried her unto the next
shepherds cabin, whereby accident Phillis was, and where they shifted her
clothes: she all this while was so astonished both at her own accident and at
that of Celadons, that she could not speak. Mean while, Celadon was hurried by
the fury of the waves a far off on the other side of the River, amongst some
little trees; but with very little sign of life.

As soon as Phillis heard of this accident unto Astrea she made all haste
possible and had not Lycidas met her, nothing else could have stopped her, yet
she told him briefly, the danger in which Astrea was; not mentioning a word
concerning Celadon, for she knew not any thing of his disaster: this Lycidas
was Celadons brother, and these two were tied faster together in amity then
consanguinitie: on the other side, Astrea and Phillis, being Cousens, did love
each other so well, as they deserved to be compared with the two brothers: As
Celadon had a Sympatheticall affection unto Astrea, so Lycidas had as strong an
inclination to serve Phillis, as Phillis had to favor Lycidas.

So it chanced, that as they came into the cottage, Astrea opened her eyes, but
you may imagine that they had lost much of their wonted luster, and looked
heavy and dull, and their sprightliness drowned in tears yet such tears, as,
flowing from an enflamed heart and lovely eyes moved abundance of love and
pity from all her beholders. When she espied her companion Phillis, she was
much moved; but much more when she saw Lycidas and though she was loath to let
the people about her know the cause of her disaster; yet she was forced to say,
hat his brother was drowned in helping her. Lycidas was so astonished at the
news, that he ran immediately to the fatal place with all the rest of the
shepherds, leaving Astrea and Phillis alone, who presently after, began to
follow them, but so sad a pace, that though they had much to say, yet they
could not speak one syllable. Mean time the shepherds came to the River
side, and looking on every side they could not find the least sign of what
they sought; for only those, who went the lowest down the River, chanced to
find his hat, which the waves had cast up upon some willows and reeds which
grew by the water side: this was all the news they could hear: As for
Celadon, he was carried by the water much lower and into a place where it was
unpossible for them to find him. for as I told you before, the waves had wafted
him over to the other side, and he stuck upon a thick rush of trees, where it
was very hard to see him.

When he was even betwixt life and death, there came to the place, three fair
Nymphs, with disheavelled hair waving and hanging upon their shoulders, under
a garland of several Pearls; their breasts were naked their sleeves turned up
to the elbow, and their arms bare, only covered with purest Lawne to the
Wrests, on which they wore rich bracelets of Oriental Pearls: each of them
wore a quiver full of arrows, and in their hands they carried bows of Ivorie:
their petticotes were tucked up so high as permitted their golden buskins to be
seen, as high as the knee. It seems they came unto that place upon some
design: for (said one of them) this is the very place, search well the side of
the River; See, see! how impetuously it swells it self above its common level:
observe that Tuft of trees, doubtless it is the very same which was represented
to us in the mirror. It Is true, (said the chief of them,) but all the rest is
nothing resemblant: but me thinks I see another odd place, more likely to find
that which we look for: its very probable (said the third, who had not yet
spoke) for the place is so exactly described, as I believe there is not one
tree, but you saw in the mirror. In such discourse as this, they came so near
the place where Celadon was, that nothing but a few leaves did interpose
between him and their sight. They having exactly survayed every thing, they
concluded it to be the place which was showed unto them, and therefore resolved
to sit down. The principal of these Nymphs as she was sitting down, espied
Celadon: and supposing him to be some shepherd asleep and beckning with one
hand unto her companions, she pointed to the place with the other; and treading
very gently for fear of waking him she stepped forward; but being nearer, she
believed him to be dead. For his feet did lie in the water, his right arm upon
his head, and the left carlesly hanging behind him; his neck awry as if his
head were too heavy; his mouth half open, and almost full of sand* his face
pale and dirtie, his eyes almost closed: and his hair which he wore very long,
so wet, that the water ran like a stream from it his countenance was the very
picture of death; his back so bended, that it seemed broke: and that made his
belly seem the more swelled. The Nymphs, seeing him in this deplorable
condition, were moved with much pity; and Leonida, as most officious and
pitiful, was the first which laid hand upon him to draw him out of the river.
The water, which he had swallowed came from him in such abundance, that the
Nymph finding some warmth yet in him, did believe him to be recoverable. Then
Galathia, who was the chief of them, turning toward the other Nymph, who
looked on but did not help; Come Sylvia, (said she unto her) why are you so
idle? come and help, if not to ease your companions, yet out of pity to this
poor shepherd. I am considering, Madam, (said she) that though he be very
much changed, yet me thinks I should know him. Then taking him by the other
arm, and looking upon him more precisely, Certainly (said she) I am not
mistaken: It Is he I mean; and believe it, he merits all our helps: for he is
not only of the first family in all the country, but his merits are so many, as
our best endeavors to save him will be well employed: All this while, the
water came from him in such abundance, that the shepherd being more empty,
began to breathe: but did not yet open his eyes nor come unto himself. Galathia
having an opinion that he was the man, of whom the Druid had spoken unto her,
she her self did help her companions: and commanded them to carry him unto her
Palace of Isoures, where he might have the best accommodations of help. And
accordingly with much ado, they carried him to the place, where the little
Merill wood with their chariot, into which they all did get. Leonida undertook
to be their guide; and, because they should not be seen by the guards of the
Castle, they went in at a back secret door. As soon as they were gone, Astrea
reviving from her swounding fit, did fall into the water, as I told you before:
Lycidas and they who went to search for Celadon, could hear no other tidings
of him, then, as formerly I told you: so as Lycidas, being but too well assured
of his brothers death, he went to Astrea to condole with her their common
disaster. She, sad soul, did nothing else but walk mourning along the River
side, until she was so weary that she was forced to sit down as full of anger
grief and amazement, as a little before, she was of inconsideration and
jealousy. She was sitting a lone by herself; for, Phillis seeing Lycidas
return, went out to hear some news, as the rest did. This Shepherd when he
came, being weary and desirous to know how this misfortune came to pass, he
did sit down by her; and taking her by the hand began to talk; Oh heavens,
fair shepherdess, (said he) what a fatal mischance is this, which has
happned unto us; I say, us, for as I have lost a dear brother so you have lost
one who was not himself without you. Whether Astreas mind was intent upon some
other thing, or whether this discourse was displeasant unto her, I know not,
but she returned no answer; At which Lycidas being angry thus said; Is it
possible Astrea, that the loss of this unfortunate Son (for so Astrea called
him) should so little perplex you, that you cannot afford him one tear? Had he
not loved you; or had you been ignorant of his affection, then to resent his
misfortune so slightly, had been excusable: but since he loved you infinitely
above himself and that you could not be ignorant of it; believe me, Astrea, it
grieves me to see you, as little concerned at it as if he were a mere stranger
unto you.

The shepherdess then looked sadly toward him, and after a little pause of
consideration, answered. Shephered, I am much grieved at the death of your
brother, not in consideration of any affection which he bore unto me, but in
respect of his many other excellent qualities, which might well move any to
grieve at his misfortune: for, as for the affection which you spoke of, it was
so common unto other shepheardesses my companions, as it was their parts to
lament him more then mine. Oh most ungrateful shepherdess, cried out Lycidas,
I shall think the gods unjust, if they do not punish you for your injustice:
you have small reason to think him unconstant, who, for all the anger of his
Parents and cruelty of your rigor, would not diminish the least spark of his
affection to you. This is ingratitude in the height, since all his actions and
services could not assure you of the thing, which none living ever doubted of,
but your self: This am I certain of, that he would sooner have disobeyed the
Supreme gods, then the least of your commands. Then did the shepherdess in
an angry manner answer, that this discourse was disadvantagious to his Brother;
for she had sufficient testimonies of his infidelity. You fill me full of
wonder (replied Lycidas,) but I beseech you how came you to the knowledge of
it? Shepherd, (answered Astrea) the story is too long and lamentable to be
told: satisfy your self with this that if you do not know it you are the only
one that is ignorant of it: for there is not a shepherd about the banks of
Lignon which cannot tell you, that Celadon had a hundred Mistrisses. And, to be
short, these ears of mine were no longer then yesterday witnesses of the
amorous discourse which he held with his Aminthe (for so he called her) and I
had hearkened longer unto it, had I not been displeased at his perfidie, or, to
tell you truly, had I not other business which was more advantageous unto me.
Lycidas at this, like a man distracted, cried out: oh now, I see the cause of
my brothers death; it was your jealousy, Astrea; your jealousy is the only
cause of this dire disaster. Poor Celadon! I now remember thy Prophetique
words, when thou saidest, thy feigned affection would cost thee thy life. Then
addressing himself unto her, Is it possible Astrea (said he) that you should
forget those commands, which you so often and pressingly, did lay upon him?
five or six times at the least, I can witness he was down upon his knees,
begging a revocation of them: You may remember when he returned from Italy it
was your first injunction to dissemble love unto another, which he entreated
you rather to bid him die then do. My dear Astrea said he, (I shall never
forget his words) though I must and will be perfectly obedient unto all your
commands, yet I cannot choose but throw my self at your feet, imploring only
so much favor as to bid me Die, rather then bid me serve any other then
Astrea, And you did answer, Nay, Shepherd, far be it from my thoughts to
command you to Die; but it is to try your affection, and principally to blind
the eyes and stop the mouths of all inquisitive spies, that I do enjoin this
dissimulation upon you. He, not being able to disobey you in any thing,
undertook the difficulty; and indeed difficulty I rightly phrase it. For he
never went unto the place, where he was to put his dissimulation into
practice, but he first laid himself down upon his bed, as if a trembling fit
of a fever came upon him. Not above two days since, I found him engraving
upon a tree, these ensuing verses, whose characters, if you have not quite
forgotten both him and his services, you will know, if you please to turn your
eyes toward yonder tree on the other side of the River, which contains these
lines:

So much surmount my self I may
Though I am all in flame
And burn in love both night and day,
Yet to deny the same;
But then to play the Hypocrite
And seem another slave,
Whilst I adore a star so bright;
A heart I cannot have.
Yet if, to do it or die, you Doom
Then this should be my choice
Just now to choose death's dismal Room
And in your Doom rejoice.
Then did Lycidas 'shew her a letter, which Celadon by way of Answer had
written unto him some seven or eight days before.

Celandons Answer unto Lycidas.
Brother,
ENquire no further what and how I do; but know, that I am still sick of my
former disease; to love and not dare to show it: Not to love, yet swear the
contrary, dear Brother, is the continual course or rather torment of thy
Celadon: They say two contraries, cannot subsist in one thing at one and the
same time. And yet, both true and false affection, is ordinary in all my
actions: but never wonder at it; for I am forced to the one by the perfections,
and to the other by the commands of my Astrea: If this kind of l^fe seem
strange unto thee, consider, that miracles are the common works of the gods,
and why should not my goddess do the same in me?

Farewell Live, and Love thy Celadon.


It was long before Astrea answered a word; for the discourse of Lycidas had
almost astonished her: but the sparks of jealousy which yet had some power in
her soul, caused her to take the letter, as doubting whether or no it was
Celadon which writ it And though she knew it well enough to be his hand, yet
according to the humor of many who will often argue against their own
opinions, she disputed it. At the same time, many shepherds came from the
quest of Celadon, but had found no other signs of him, then that of his Hat,
which was no small grief unto Astrea. She remembering a private retyring place
which love helped them to find out, and which she would not have found out, did
becken unto Phillis to take that away: but every one, began to lament, and
extol the poor shepherd, and not one but had some Noble act or other to
Trumpet, in his praise. But Astrea who was the most sensible was the least
talkative: she was constrained to be mute, and to show her sorrow the least,
knowing that it is the highest point of prudence, in love to conceal
affection, or at least never to let it appear unprofitably: but because the
constraint she was in, was great, and she not able to endure it, she came to
Phillis and entreated her not to follow her, to the end others might do the
like. So taking Celadons hat into her hand, she stole away alone, and followed
the first path she lightt upon. Every shepherd in the company knew of Celadons
affection to Astrea, though the perverseness of their Parents did discover it
more then his actions: but she did carry the matter with so much discretion,
that none knew of hers to him, except Semira, Lycidas and Phillis: And though
they knew very well that the loss of Celadon did much perplex her, yet they
did attribute it more unto the goodness of her nature then her love. However,
she continued on her way; and every step had its thought or rather grief: so
as, sometimes doubtful, sometimes assured of Celadons affection, she knew not
whether she should lay the blame upon him or herself when she thought upon
what Lycidas had said she judged him innocent: when the discourse he had with
the shepherdess Aminthe, came into her memory, she thought him culpable. In
this labirinth of thoughts, she went wandering through a wood, without any
election of path: but either by fortune, or by the direction of heaven, to
manifest the innocence of Celadon, she came to the place where Lycidas said he
had engraved some verses, upon a tree: which was so fresh that she quickly
found them out. Oh heavens, how soon she knew them to be Celadons, and how
readily she ran to read them! She sat down upon the ground, and beholding
Celadons hat and letter in her lap, she wrong her hands and looked fixedly
upon the relics of her dear shepherd: and seeing his hat to swell a little
in the place, where he was wont to put his letters, when he had a design to
convey a letter unto her, she unripped the lining with her fingers, and pulled
out a paper which Celadon the same day, had put there: this was a device
contrived betwixt them, when their parents had forbidden them any intercourse
of language: for, he seeming to throw his hat in jest unto her, they might
easily convey letters unto each other. With a trembling heart and hand, she
took this letter out, and after she had remooved from her eyes a thousand
pearly tears, she read these words.

Celadons Letter unto Astrea.
My dearest Astrea,
IF you did impose this constrained dissimulation upon, me with a design to
kill me with grief, alas, you might more easily have done it with one single
syllable, and have said, Die. If it was to punish me for my faults, you were
too gentle a Judge, in ordaining me a less punishment then death: If it was to
try what power you had over me, why did you not find out a more speedy way of
trial, then this which would be so long before you could be satisfied? I
cannot think it your intention to umbrage our design; since I not being able
to live long under such constraint, my death will be a deplorable testimony of
it. Oh pity me, my brightest Star, consider that I have endured torment
enough; and that it is now full time to be Celadon again, after so long and
lamentable a dissimulation of himself.


Oh how these words did wound her soul, when she called to memory, the command
she had laid upon him, and the resolution which they fixed upon, to dissemble
their affection. But see the strange enchantments of love; for though she
grieved extremely at the death of Celadon; yet she was not without some
consolation in the midst of her sorrows, to think that he was not perfidious,
though this consideration brought much force with it to torment her: so as
having no other remedy to fly unto but tears, as well to lament Celadon as
her own loss, she began with a river of tears, and afterward with a
thousand pitiful groans, and sad sighs: She called to mind the faithful
affection of that shepherd, and the despair wherein he was at her severe
answer: then again, thinking upon the happy times past, the pleasures and
contentments which he formerly afforded her, and now the loss both of him and
them, she extremely condemned her self of silly imprudence.

On the otherside, Lycidas being so extremely displeased at Astrea that he
could hardly with patience think upon her, he did rise up from Phillis, and
went away with eyes so full of tears and so sad a countenance, that his
shepherdess seeing him in that condition, did follow him, not fearing how
others might censure her for it: he went away with folded arms, his hat pulled
down but his soul much more down in sorrow: and pity obliging the rest of
the shepherds to participate of his sorrows, they followed also and lamented
with him. But these officious complements were only additions to his grief:
for in company, the soul dares not so freely disburthen it self of its load;
but when it is once discharged of its venime, then it is capable of
consolation. Being in this sad estate, they accidentally found a young shepherd
lying upon the graffe and two shepherdesses with him: the one of them holding
his head in her lap, and the other playing upon a L^te whilst he sighed out
these verses, with eyes up to heaven and face all tears.

Upon the death of Cleon.
That beauty, once a glorious Sun
Alas it Set and done.
Those eyes, once Angelike divine,
Again will never shine
She Is dead, who did all hearts revive
Unless in mine alive.
Perfection from the world is fled,
Since she the owner's dead.
What hopes amongst the living left
Since we of her bereaft?
It seems, dear Saint, your better fate
Death did anticipate,
And, lieu of Cradle, Coffin sent;
Since gone as soon as lent:
No, no, it is not you did die
But it is rather I:
For only you did animate
My soul and life create:
Both soul and heart, and what is mine
Eternally is thine;
Thus Love over death gets victory
Since still you live in me
Or else (God-like) lets Lovers live
Yet them no hearts does give.
A Sea of Tears from fluent eyes
To the, I Will sacrifise;
And when those mountains are grown dry
I Will come to thee, and die.
Lycidas and Phillis had a good mind to enquire the cause of this shepherds
grief, if their own would have permitted them but finding him to stand as
much in need of consolation as themselves, they would not add the miseries of
another unto their own. And therefore leaving the rest of the shepherds to
hearken further, they went on their way and none followed them.

Lycidas was no sooner gone but they heard another voice a far off, which seemed
to draw near them: and setting themselves to hearken, they were interrupted by
that shepherdess who held the head of a shepherd in her lap, and uttered
these complaints; Fie, fie, thou obdurate piece of cruelty, thou pitiless
shepherd; how long will thy heart be marble, and ears stopped to my prayers?
Why should one who is not, be preferred before one that is vowed thine? Tircis,
Tircis, thou Idolizer of the dead, and enemy of the living; look upon my poor
affection; Love those that are alive, and let the dead rest quiet; trouble not
their happy ashes with thy unprofitable tears; take heed, thou do not draw
vengance upon thy self, for thy cruelty and injustice. The shepherd, not so
much as turning toward her, coldly answered; I wish, fair shepherdess, that
I could give you satisfaction by my death: I would willingly die to rid both
you and my self from our torments: consider I beseech you Laonice, that you
have no reason to urge me to put my dear Cleon twice to death; Its enough, she
has once paid the debt due to Nature. If now she is dead, she should once
again revive in me, by force of my affection: would you have me remove her, by
entertaining a new love into my soul? No, no, shepherdess, all your arguments
are too weak to make me hearken unto any such counsel: that which you call
cruelty in me, I term fidelity; and that which you think worthy of
punishment, I conceive deserves exceeding commendations: I have already told
you, that the sacred memory of my Cleon shall live with me in my grave. I have
vowed it a thousand times both unto her and the immortal gods with whom she
is; and do you not think that they would punish Tircis, if he should break
all those solemn vows, and become unfaithful? Yes yes: the heavens shall
sooner rain Thunderbolts upon my head, then I will either offend against my
vows, or my dear Cleon. She would have replied, when the shepherd, which
they heard singing came near and interrupted her with these verses.

The Song of the inconstant Hylas
If ere my Mistrisse me disdain, then hang me if I ere complain;
I Will never be drowned in puling sorrow, but court a new one ere to morrow.
It is a toil, would tire a horse, to make a woman Love by force.
Those beauties which are over wise, and our addresses do despise,
Have at their hearts a fire more hot, although so close we see it not;
Whilst Lovers dote upon such dames, Rivals do warm them at their flames.
Its flat Idolatry, by Jove, to court a cruel beauties Love;
Will any man of wit adore Idols that have no help in store?
A constant lover is but gulled and by his Loyalty befoold;
That simple crew of faithful Lovers, you will find them always full of dolors:
Composed of sighs and cries and tears, they do both sleep and wake in fears.
So as a Lovers life is found, the worst that breathes upon the ground.
Such as do child-like Pule and cry, when they have lost some foppery,
Cannot be called by the Name of men, who any honor claim;
A Loving fool is still most fit for such a silly Amourite;
Such fables I have learnt to fly which nothing bring but misery.
I can be wise by others folly, and 'spite of Love, I can be Jollie,
I Value not a Rush, if all the Ladies me unconstant call.
At this last verse, this Shepherd was so near Tircis, that he perceived the
tears of Laonice: and, though strangers, yet having a superficial
acquaintance, Hilas knowing how it was between Laonice and Tircis, he
addressed himself thus unto him Disconsolate shepherd (for so every one did
call him by reason of his sadness) If I were like unto you. I should think my
self the most pitiful piece of misfortune that lives upon earth. Tircis
hearing this, thus answered. And I Hylas, were I like unto you, I should think
my self more unfortunate then I am. Should I like you, (replied Hylas) drop
tears for every Mistrisse that I have Lost, I should tear out my eyes before
I had done. Were you like unto me, (answered Tircis you would have but one to
drop any tears for. And were you like unto me (said Hilas) you would not drop
a tear for any. That's the reason (replied the sad shepherd) I do think you
miserable; for if love be the only price and reward of Love never any did love
you, because you never loved any. How do you know (answered Hilas) that I never
loved any? I know it, said Tircis, by your perpetual changing You and I do
differ in opinions (said he) for I ever thought that the more a workman is
exercised in his trade, the more perfect he is in it. It Is true, answered
Tircis, when he works by the rules of Art: but if otherwise, he is like unto
travelers out of their way, the more they go, the more they err, and further
from the right way. And as the rolling stone never gathers any moss, but
rather dirt; so your leight inconstancy may get some shame, but never any Love.
You must know, Hilas, that the wounds of Love are such as will never heal.
Heavens deliver me from any such (said Hilas). You have good reason for your
prayer, replied Tircis, For if every time you were wounded with a new beauty,
you should receive an incurable wound, I am afraid there would not be one sound
part in all your body. Moreover you never can relish any of those sweets and
felicities which Love bestows upon all true Lovers, and that miraculously,
like the rest of his actions: for they are cured by the same, which wounds,
like the sword of Telephus which both cuts and heales: and I am persuaded that
were you once permitted to know the secrets of that god, you would presently
renounce your inconstancy. Hilas at this smiled and said. There is very great
reason, Tircis, that you should put your self in the number of those whom Love
uses very well but as for my part, I do with all my heart quit my share in all
his sweets: you may keep to your self all his felicities and contentments
without any fear that ever I shall envy you. It Is now a whole month since
first we met, and I think we met every day; I do not remember that day, that
hour, nay nor that minute in which you were not entertaining your Love
forsooth, with that good company of tears: on the contrary, tell me that day,
that hour, or that minute in which you hea^d me bid Love welcome so much as
with one single sigh? There Is no man whose taste is not quite out of tune as
yours is, but will find more sweetness in the pleasantness of my life, then
in your doleful sighs and sobs. Then turning himself toward the
Shepherdess who complained so of Tircis; And you, fair but unwise
Shepherdess, take courage, and deliver your self from the Tyranny of this
unnatural Shepherd: cheer up and live Will you by your patience make your
self a complice with him in his crimes? do you not see, that he glories in
your tears? know you not, that your supplications do puff him up with so much
arrogance, as he thinks you to be highly obliged unto him if he does hearken
unto you with disdain? The Shepherdess with a deep sigh answered, It is an
easy matter, Hylas, for him that is sound to counsel the sick: but if you
were in my stead, you would know that all this advice is in vain: you might
find that sorrow would sooner drive my soul out of my body, then reason can
drive this passion out of my soul. For this my beloved Shepherd has such a
Sovereign power over me, that his authority can command what he pleases:
spare then all your sapient advisements Hylas: they will but fester my wounds
the more; for I am so wholly devoted unto Tircis, that my will is not my own
How! (said the Shepherd) your will not your own? to what purpose is it then
to Love and serve you? The same (answered the Shepherdess) that my Love and
services are unto this Shepherd. That is as much to say (answered Hilas) that
I should lose both all my time and my pains, and that if I should profess my
affection unto you, you would only make use of my words to express your
affection unto Tircis but since such is your humor, and since I have more
command over my self then you over yours, I will only kiss your hand and take
my leave: for I shall be ashamed to serve such a poor and pitiful Mistrisse.
Neither you nor I (answered she) shall receive any great loss by it. Were you
as sensible of your loss in losing me, said Hilas, as you show simplicity in
courting him, you would lament the loss of me, sooner then desire the
affection of Tircis: but if you care no more for losing me, then I do for
losing you, i will warrant you, neither of our sorrows shall ever hurt us. Then
walking merrily away he sung these verses.

A Song.
Love having wings will fly away as well as Time and soon decay;
Then let us be wise, and from us banish the thing which of it self will vanish.
Let Us cut Loves cords, and quench its fires, with all exorbitant desires.
That thing let us voluntary do which time at last will force us to:
Thus over the Giant Love shall we be victors, most triumphantly.
Had this Shepherd come into the country in a more merry season, doubtless
with more friends: but Celadons loss did sit so sadly upon the souls of all
that neighborhood, that none was in any mood of rallarie; and therefore they
left him: some returned to their cabins and others in farther quest of Celadon;
some on this side, and some beyond the River Loire; neither tuft nor tree
escaped their inquisitive search, yet all in vain: for no news could be heard
of him. Only Silvander did meet Polemas just at the place, where Galathea and
the other Nymphs had a little before taken him up. And because he Governed the
country under the Authority of the Nymph Amasis the Shepherd, who had often
seen him at Marcelles, did render him all possible honor; and acquainted him
with the loss of Celadon; at which Polemas was very sorry, being ever a Lover
of all Celadons family.

On the other side Lycidas, who was walking with Phillis, after a long silence,
at last he turned toward her; well, fair Shepherdess (said he unto her)
what do you think of your companion? she not yet knowing of Astreas Jealousy,
did answer him, that she could not be much blamed, if she upon such a sad
accident did shun all company; for Phillis thought that he complained because
she went away alone: Nay, nay, replied Lycidas, that is nothing; but I do
think her to be the most ungrateful woman in the world, and the least worthy
of any Love: for my brother never intended, nor could he Love any but only she:
she knew it well enough, cruel woman that she was: the testimonies he gave
her, were too evident to be doubted: he overcame all difficulties, he stopped not
at impossibilities: he valued not the anger of Parents, but endured her
rigours, her cruelties, and scorns, and all this so long, that I believe no
other but Celadon was able to do it. And yet for all this, (...) did most
unworthilie change her mind: her foolish pretenses of hatred and jealousy has
eternally exiled him: and being grown desperate, he did choose death rather then
such a piece of cruelty as she. Oh Heavens! Lycidas, (said Phillis in a great
amazement) what is this you say? Is it possible, Astrea should ever commit such a
crime? It is most certainly true (answered the Shepherd) she has partly told
me as much, and I do conjecture the rest by his discourse. She tryumphs in the
death of my brother, and her infidelity and ingratitude can palliate her
crime: but I do swear unto you by all that is sacred, never any Lover was
fuller of affection and fidelity then he: I care not whether or no she ever
know her error, unless to vex and grieve her; for now I am as professed an
enemy unto her, as ever my brother was faithful. Thus Lycidas and Phillis
discoursed, he being infinitely grieved for the death of his brother, and as
much offended against Astrea: and she, very sorry for Celadons death, angered at
the anger of Lycidas, and astonished at the Jealousy of her companion would
not apply any extreme remedies, at the first; but only some gentle
preparatives to mollify him. She would not by any means that the death of
Celadon should cost her Lycidas: and she considered that if any hatred was
between him and Astrea, she must of necessity break off with one of the two;
yet Love would not yield unto friendship. On the other side, Astrea was so
swelled in tears and suncke in sorrow: as having not tears enough to wash
away her error, nor words enough to express her grief, both her eyes and
mouth did leave their offices unto her imaginations so long as both eyes,
tongue, imagination, and all other faculties being tired out, she fell asleep.

Whilst things passed thus amongst the Shepherds and Shepheardesses, Celadon
was observed by the three Nymphs in the Palace of Isoures with all indulgent
care: but the hurt which the water had done him was so great, that for all
their remedies which they applied, he could not open his eyes nor give any
sign of life, but only by the beating of his heart, passing all the day and a
good part of the night, before he came to himself; And when he opened his
eyes, he was in a great amazement to find himself in that place: for he very
well remembered what he had done and how a rash despair had made him throw
himself into the water: but he knew not how he came thither. And after he had
stayed a long while in this confused thought, he asked whether he was alive or
dead. If I be alive (said he) how is it possible that the cruelty of Astrea
should not kill me? And if I be dead, why, cruel Love, do thou torment me in
the shades of death? is it not enough that thou have my life, but thou must
receive my old flames out of my dead ashes? And the great perplexity in which
Astrea had left him having now forsaken him, he called into his memory all his
former conceptions, and his mind being full of imagination both of his miseries
and also of his former happiness, he fell into such a sound sleep, that the
Nymphs had time enough to come and see him, and finding him fast asleep, they
opened the curtains and windows very gently, and did sit down by him, the
better to view and contemplate upon him. Galathea, after a whiles
confideration, did in a low voice for fear of wakeing him, say, oh how this
Shepherd is changed since yesterday? What a fresh complexion is upon a
sudden come into his face? seriously I do not repent of all the pains I have
taken in saving his life; for as you said, sweetheart (said she, and turned
toward Silvia) he is one of the principal in all the country: Madam, (answered
the Nymph) most certainly he is; for Alsippes is his Father, and Amarillis his
Mother. How? said Galathea, that Alsippe so famous, who to save his friend, did
break open the Prison of the Visigotts at Ussum? The very same, (said Silvia) I
have seen him several times at feasts, which are kept by the Towns about
Lignon. And because Alsippes seemed unto me most worthy of observation, I
looked long upon him: for the formalitie of his beard, and the gravitie of his
venerable age, did exact honor and observance from every one.

But as for Celadon I remember, that of all the Shepherds, there was only he
and Silvander, who had confidence enough to approach me; by Silvander I knew
which was Celadon, and by Celadon which Silvander: for both of them, had in
their Garbes and discourse something more generous, then the name of Shepherd
uses to own. Whilst Silvia spoke, Love, in mock age of the subtlety of
Climante and Polemas, who were the cause of Galatheas coming to the place where
she took up Celadon, did begin to kindle new flames in this Nymph; for all the
while that Silvia spoke, she had her eyes upon the Shepherd; and the applauds
which she gave him, did enter into her soul; and the more easily, because she
was prepared for it by the coming of Climante, who counterfetting himself to
be a Druide, had foretold her, that the man whom she should meet with, in the
place where she found Celadon, should be her husband, unless she would be the
most miserable woman in the world; the plot being, that Polemas should go to
that place at the hour, to the end that she might more willingly be induced to
marry him, which otherwise, the affection she bore unto Lindamor would not
permit. But Fortune and Love, are too hard for Prudence; and sent Celadon
thither by chance, as I have told you: so as Galathea, intending to fix Love
upon this Shepherd, did think him to be extreme Lovely: And seeing he did
not wake, she went out as gently as she could, to entertain her new thoughts.

There was near his chamber a back pair of stairs, which opened to a low
Gallerie, out of which, by a draw bridge one might go into a Garden full of
choice varieties, Fountains, Statues Walks, Arbors and all that Art could
invent; out of this Garden was a door into a Wilderness of several sorts of
Trees: in which was several Labirinthes, wherein one might wander to the loss
of ones self, yet by reason of the umbrage were very delightful: In one of
which was a Fountain called The truth of Love, a place in truth marvelously
pleasing: for by force of Enchantment, a Lover who looked in it might see her,
he loved: if he were Loved, he might see his Mistrisse by him if she Loved
another, that other would be presented and not himself: And because it did
discover all the deceipts of Lovers, it was called the Truth of Love. In
another, Labirinth was the Cavern of Damon and Fortune; and in another was the
denn of an old Mandrake, full of so many wonders and witchcrafts, that every
vanity appeared a fresh miracle. Moreover, in the other parts of the wood,
there was several other Grotts, so well counterfeited, and near the natural,
as the eye did often deceive the judgment. It was in this Garden, where the Nymph
did walk waiting for the waking of the Shepherd: And because her new desires
would not permit her to be silent, she feigned to forget something which she
commanded Silvia to go and seek: for she confided less in her green youth,
then in Leonidas whose age was arrived at more maturitie, though both these
Nymphs were her secret confidents. And being alone with Leonida, she thus said
unto her; what do think, Leonida, has not this Druide a strange knowledge of
things? Does not the gods freely communicate themselves unto him? for what is
future, he knows as well as the present: The truth is, answered the Nymph, he
did very directly show you in the Mirror, the very place where you found this
Shepherd, and also told you the very time; but his words were so ambiguous,
that I believe he hardly understood them himself. Why do you say so, answered
Galathea, since he has particularly told me every thing as perfectly as I my
self do not now kow them, better than he did before they happened? he only
told you, answered Leonida, that you should find in this place a thing of an
inestimable value, though formerly it had been disdayned: Nay, Leonida, said
she, he has told me more then that: particularly; Madam, said he, you have two
very contrary influences: the one the most unfortunate under the heavens; the
other the most happy that can be desired: And it is in your choice to take
which you will: And to the end you may not deceive your self, be pleased to
know, that you are and shall be coveted by many great and Noble personages,
where virtues and merits may easily moove you: but if you measure your
affection by their meritts, or their Love, and not by what I shall tell you:
from the supreme gods, I do Prognosticate, that you will be the most miserable
woman alive. And to the end you may not be mistaken in your choice, remember
that such a day you shall see at Marseilles a Knight in such a habit, who does
and will court you for marriage: which if you permit, then I do pronounce your
misery. And therefore I advise you to shun such a man and think upon him
rather as your sad fate, then as your servant: on the contrary, observe well
the place which is represented in this Mirror, for on such a day at such an
hour you shall there meet a man, in whose affection the heavens has placed all
your felicity: if you can so order it, that he do Love you, never believe the
gods again, if you become not more happy then you can desire: but be sure,
that the first of you two who shall meet, be the first that shall begin Love.
This, Leonida, is as clear as the Sun at noone, and I do already perceive that
his predictions are true. For I seeing this Shepherd first, I must tell you
truly, I find some sparks of affection toward him. Good heavens! Madam (said
Leonida unto her) do you intend to place your Love upon a Shepherd? do you not
remember who you are? I do so, Leonida, said she, and you must know that
Shepherds are men as well as Druides and Knights, and their Nobleness is as
great as others, both being sprung from one and the same original: so as if
this Shepherd be well borne, why should I not think him as worthy of me as any
other: The truth is Madam, said Leonda, disgrace it as you will, he is a
Shepherd: The truth is, said Galathea, he is a well accomplished man. But
Madam, answered Leonida, you who are so high a Nymph, Lady; after Amasis, of
all these goodly Countries: can your courage descend so low as to Love a man of
common rank? a Rustique a Shepherd, a man not worth a straw? Friend, replied
Galathea, remember that Enone became a Shepherdess for Paris his sake, and
when she lost him, She shed many a bitter tear. Madam, laid Leonida, Paris was
a Kings son; and the error of another, ought not to move you to the like. If
it be an error, answered she, the blame is in the gods who advise me unto it by
the Oracle of their Druides: but, my friend, Celadon is not so far off in
kindred from Paris: are they not both come from the same original? Did you not
hear what Silvia said of him and his Father? You must know they are not
shepherds out of any want, but because they would enjoy that sweet and
harmless kind of life. But dear Madam, added Leonida, can you thus forget the
affection and services of the generous Lindamour? I am not willing, said
Galathea that oblivion should be the recompense of his services: but I am
unwilling withal, that my affection unto him should be the utter ruin of all
my happiness. Oh Madam (said Leonida) I beseech you remember how full of
fidelity he has ever been. Oh my friend, said Galathea I beseech you consider
what it is to be eternally miserable. Certainly, said Leonida, an extreme
affection, a pure fidelity, the employment of a whole age and continual
services ought not to be so long entertained, but merited a better requital
then a change. For God sake Madam, consider what impostures all these Fortune
tellers are: they vent for truths the idle imaginations of their fond dreams:
they are flat liars, since of a hundred predictions hardly one happens truly,
they are so foolishly ignorant, since for all their business in others men's
matters they know not their own fortune: will you be persuaded by the
fantastical talk of this fellow, to make that man miserable who has bin so
much yours? Look but a little upon his Love; consider what hazards he has run
for you; how he fought with Polemas; what despair he was then in; what
torments you now prepare for him, and how he will certainly invent some way of
death to himself when he knows it. Galathea did shake her head, and thus
answered; Leonida, I must not now think upon either Lindamor or Polemas as
heretofore; but upon my own eternal either happiness or misery; the motives
you use are very good for your self, who will be concerned no further then to
a little pity: but for my self they are very dangerous, since the misery
does not menace me for a day but for ever. It Is true, were I in your place, and
you in mine, perhaps I should give the same advice: but certainly an eternal
misery is very terrible: As for the fabulous conjectures of those Divinres
which you speak of; I will for your sake believe, that perhaps they will not so
fall out, and perhaps they will but I beseech you tell me, do you think any
prudent person will for the satisfaction of another, conclude all his
happiness or all his misery upon a perhaps? But if you Love me, use no more of
this discourse: for if you do, I shall think you aim at the satisfaction of
Lindamure, more then mine. And as for him, never fear, but he will find out a
better way of care then death: reason and time will temper him how many
desparato's have you seen, whom a little time has not perfectly cured? These
two fair Nymphs thus discoursed, when they saw Silvia return, and therefore
they broke off this discourse; but Galathea said thus unto Leonida, consider
that not only my contentment, but all my felicitle is at the stake: Leonida
could not reply, beeause Silvia was so near as to hear their discourse. She
being come, Galathea understood that Celadon was awake, for listening at the
door, she heard him sigh and groan: It Is very true, that a little while after
their departure from his chamber, he did waken and the Sun shining very
splendently upon his bed, as he opened his eyes he was so dazzled that being
confused with so great a light, he knew not where he was: his last days pain
had much astonished him, but at that time he was without any pain; so as
remembering his fall into the River and the opinion which he had a little before
of his being dead, and now finding himself in such a glorious light, he knew
not what to think, unlesss that Love had ravished him into heaven in
recompense of his fidelity: and that which most induced him to this opinion,
was to see the chamber hung with such rich hangings, and admirable pictures, so
lively that his yet weak eye could not distinguish them from substances. On
the one side, he saw Saturn leaning upon her sith with her dangling long
tresses, her forehead wrinkled, her eyes sullen, her Eagle nose, her mouth
besmeared with blood and yet full with a morsel of her children, one of which
half eaten was an her left hand which by the prints of teeth did emblem
cruelty to the life. This little infant was reversed, sprawling with heels
upward and arms hanging downwards, all smeared with blood which trickled from
the wound which this hag had made with her teeth, whose long and dangling hair
did drop with blood in which it had been steeped her nervous and uglie arms
were grown over in many places with griesly hair, as well as her lean and
withered thighs: She trod upon heaps of bones some grown white with
antiquity, others green and half fleshy. All about him was nothing but pieces
of broken scepters crowns crashed into pieces, ruined edifices, so as only
some slight resemblance of what they had been remained. A little further off
was to be seen the picture of great Jupiter with an enflamed countenance, but
grave and full of Majesty, in his eyes, a mixture of benignity and terror:
with a Croune upon his head: in his left hand a Scepter, which he rested upon
his thigh where was to be seen the scarre which he got, when by the
imprudence of the Nymph Semele, to save little Bacchus, he was forced to open
that place, and carry the mark of it unto the end of his term. In the other
hand he held his three poynted Thunderbolt, so well represented, that it seemed
to fly from thence through the Air. His feet trampled upon a great Globe: and
near him was a great Eagle which carried in her crooked beak a Thunderbolt:
upon the back of this bird did ride the little G^mimede, clothed after the
mode of the Inhabitants on the mountain Ida; fat, plump, fair Golden and
curled Locks: with one hand he stroked the head of the bird; and with the
other he offered to take hold of Jupiters Thunderbolt but the bird with her
train did repulse his feeble arm. Close by, stood the Basin and Eure out of
which this little Skinker powered out Nectar unto his Master: and this little
officer, pouring it upon the hands of Jupiter: he let the Eure fall and looked
back as if ashamed of his act. At the feet of this God was a great Tun: and all
about him the Vows, Prayers, and Sacrifices of Mortals variously represented;
for the Sacrifices were figured by smoke intermingled with fire: and vows and
prayers were represented by such light Ideas, as the eye might know the meaning
of them This discourse would be too long, if I should relate every picture
particularly: for the chamber was full of them. Venus also in a Sea shell
amongst the rest, looked upon the wound which the Grecian gave her in the
Trojan war: and little Cupid looked upon her by the Lamp of the too curious
Psyche; And this so well represented, that the Shepherd could not discern it
from counterfeit. When he was thus deep in contemplation, the three Nymphs
came into his chamber, whose beauty and Majesty, did more plunge him into
admiration That which most helped on his conceit of being dead, was, his
fancying the three Nymphs to be the three Graces, especially seeing the little
Merill amongst them whose stature, beauty, plumpnesse, Golden Locks and Jolly
Looks seemed unto him, a Cupid. And though he was much confused in himself,
yet his courage which was always above the quality of a Shepherd did prompt
him unto so much confidence, as to ask them in what place he was. Unto which
Galathea answered Celadon you are in a place where the people of it do intend
your perfect cure; and we are those who finding you floting in the water, did
bring you hither, where you have full power to command whatsoever you please.
Then Silvia, stepped forward and said is it possible Celadon you should not
know me? Did you never see me in your Village? I hope fair Nymph (answered
Celadon) that the condition I am in, will excuse the frailty of my memory; Do
you not remember Silvia, (said she) and two of her companions, who went to see
your sports upon the day which you dedicated to the goddess Venus? And after
you had won the course, Silvia was she who gave you a Garland of Flowers which
you did presently put upon the head of the Shepherdess Astrea? I know not
whether these passages be vanished out of your memory; but I am sure when you
Crowned Astrea with my Garland, every one did wonder at it, by reason of the
emnitie which was between your two families; particularly between your father
Alcippes, and Alces the Father of Astrea: And when I enquired the occasion of
it, I could not learn any further, then that Amarillis being the Mistrisse of
those two Shepherds, they did Rivallike perpetually quarrel, until such time
as Amarillis married your Father: and then Alces and the prudent Hippolita
marrying together, they did both of them harbor an inveterate hatred against
them: so Celadon, you see I know you, and have given you good testimonies of
what I say. The Shepherd hearing this, did by degrees recollect into his
memory all she said, but he was so astonished that he knew not how to answer,
for knowing Silvia to be the Nymph of Amasis, and by reason of his Rural life,
having no acquaintance with her nor her companions, he could not now imagine
how he should come amongst them. At last he replied; all you say, fair Nymph,
is most true, and I remember that upon the Festival of Venus, three Nymphs
did bestow three Garlands: It was my fortune to win that of running: Lycidas
my Brother won, that of leaping, and gave his Garland unto Phillis; and
Silvander did winn that of singing, and presented it to the sage Belinda. But
truly, I cannot remember the names of those Nymphs the doners, only we
contented our selves with knowing that they were the Nymphs of Amasis and
Galathea: for we alas, are Country Inhabitants of fields and woods, and our
wits are not Calculated for any higher Meridian, and therefore made no further
inquity of you. Have you met with no further knowledge of us since that (said
Galathea?) The information that I had (answered the Shepherd) was from the
discourse which my Father made of his fortunes, in which I have often observed
him to mention Amasis, but I am not at all acquainted with any particulars
concerning her, though I have much desired it. Your desire, Shepherd, replied
Galathea, shall be satisfied, and I will tell you, both who Amasis is, and who
we are.

Know therefore, welcome Shepherd, that Anciently this Country now called
Forests, all floated with a deep Abyss of waters, and only the high
Mountains about it was uncovered except some hills in the midst of the
plain, as the Rock of Isoures and mount Verdon: so as all the Inhabitants did
live upon the tops of the Mountains. The Ancient families of this Country,
have their names engraved upon old ruins, upon the tops of the hills. But
about fourteen or fifteen ages since, a Roman who in ten years conquered all
the Gauls, did cut some of the Mountains, by which the water rann away and
drained our plains: which seemed so pleasant unto him as he would needs make
them habitable: and to that end caused all those who lived on the Mountains to
come and live in the plains and caused the first building there, to be called
after his own name Julius. And because the humid plains produced abundance of
Trees, some say the country was called Forests, and the people Forresters;
whereas before they were called the Segusians: but those were much deceived.
For the name of Forest did come from Forum, a little Town which the Romans
built and called Forum Segusianorum, as if they would have said, the place or
the marsh of the Segusians, which indeed was only the place where they kept
their Arms whilst they were putting their neighbor Countries into order.

This, Celadon, is the antiquity of this Province, as some do confidently
hold; but there are two opinions quite contrary. The Romans say that when our
plains were all covered with water, the chaste goddess Diana, thought the
place so pleasant that she dwelt there very much: for her Driades and
Amadriades, did live and hunt in those great woods and high hills, which
circled about this great Level of waters: and because there was no great store
of Fountains, she came hither often with her Naiades which also dwelt here:
but when the waters were let out, the Naiades were forced to follow, and go
with them into the wide Ocean. So as the Goddess losing half her Nymphs, and
not being able to take her full swinge of delight with so small a Train, she
made choice of some daughters of the Principal Druides and Knights, and joined
them unto the Nymphs which remained, unto whom also she gave the name of
Nymphs. But so it happened, that many amongst them, some being brought up under
fond and tender Mothers, others used to the courtship of servants; and not
being able to take the pains of hunting, nor lose the memory of their
affectionate servants, they would needs go back to their houses again and
Marry. At which the Goddess was so incensed that She forsook this profane
Country, and did fly from that vice which she so much abhorred. But not to
punish the virtues of some for the errors of others, before she departed she
did for ever most ignominiously banish out of the Country, all those who had
been faulty, and made choice of one, unto whom she gave the same Authority
which she had over all the Country, and willed that the Race of this one should
have all the Sovereign power for ever: And ever after she permitted them to
marry. Yet expressly forbidding that any man should ever succed her. Since this
time there has been no abuse amongst us, and our Laws have been since most
inviolably observed. But our Druides do tell a quite contrary tale: For they
say that our great Princess Galathea; daughter unto the King of Celtes, wife
of the great Hercules, and Mother of Galathea who gave name unto the Gauls,
that were before called Celtes, being infinitely in Love with her husband did
follow him whither soever his courage and virtue did invite him against the
Monsters and Giants: At that time, these mountains which separate us from
A^vergne, and those more on the left hand which are called Cemene and Gebene,
were a retreat unto some Giants, who were terrible unto all the Country.
Hercules being advertised thereof, went thither and because he did infinitely
love his dear Galathea, he left her in this Country, which was nearest to him,
and where she might take much pleasure, either in hunting or in the company of
the Country Ladies: and because she was Queen of all the Gauls, when Hercules
had vanquished the Giants, and necessity of affairs called him away; before
her departure, in eternal memory of the delight she took in that Country,
she ordained that which the Romans say the Goddess Diana did. But whether it
was Galathea or Diana, yet so it is, as if by a supernatural privilege, we
have ever since been maintained in our privileges, since none ever troubled
our tranquillity. Nay Alaricke King of the Visigots, when with Aquitaine he
had conquered all the Provinces on this side Loire, knowing our statutes, did
confirm the privileges, and without any usurpation, did leave us in our
ancient freedom. Perhaps you will think it strange I should so particularly
talk of things which transcend the capacity of my age; but you must know that
Pimander my Father was very inquisitive unto the Antiquities of this country;
so as the most knowing Druides did commonly make it their discourse with him,
and I gleaned such fragments from them as most delighted me. Thus I came to
know that Amasis my Mother was in a continued line descended from her whom the
Goddess Diana or Galathea did elect: she being sole Lady of all these
Countries, and having one Son called Clidaman; She brought up with us many
young maids and daughters of Druides and Knights, where being in so good a
school, they might learn all the virtues which their age and sex was capable
of. The Virgins go habited as you see us, in the same fashion which Diana or
Galathea was accustomed to wear, and which in memory of her we have
constantly kept. Now, Celadon, I have acquainted you with our condition; and I
am confident that before you part from us (for I would have you see us
altogether before you go) you will confess, that our assembly will not yield
unto any other, either in virtue or beauty.

Celadon now knowing who these Nymphs were, he knew also what reverence was
due unto them; and though his conversation had been only amongst his equal
Shepherds, yet his good education had taught him how to behave himself unto
his superiors. After he had rendered them all the honor which he thought
himself obliged unto, I cannot choose but wonder, said he, to find my self
amongst so many great Nymphs: and I who am but a simple silly shepherd, to
receive so many favors from them. Celadon (answered Galathea) virtue, in what
place soever it is will merit both Love and Honor as well when it is shrouded
under the cheap habit of a shepherd, as under the rich and glorious Purple of
a King; and for your particular, you are in no less consideration amongst us,
then the greatest of the Druides or Nobles of our Court; for since your merits
are as great, our favors shall be no less. And as for your wonder at finding
your self amongst us, know that it proceeds from the Providence of the Gods,
who have so ordained it (as at more leisure you may know) either because they
would not have so much virtue lost in the Forests; or, intending to make you
greater then you are, they will by you, make a person who loves you, happy:
live then, and be happy, for you need desire no more then your health. Madam
(answered the Shepherd who did not well understand this language) If I must
desire mine own health, it shall be only to render you service, in exchange of
so many favors which you are pleased to confer upon me: But for my part, I
must think of no other course but returning to the woods and Pastures;
otherwise the solemn vow which our Fathers have made unto the Gods, will
accuse us to be unworthy children of such Fathers. What vow is that, sad the
Nymph? The History of it would be too long replied Celadon, but in short this,
Madam; All those about the Rivers of Loire, Turan, Argent and all the rest of
the Rivers, have several years with one accord, assembled in that great
Plain which is near Mount Verdum, and considering the Inconveniences which
ambition and desire of rule, in that people called Romans, has brought upon
all their Neighbors, they do all by mutual consent swear to fly all ambition
for ever, and they and their children to live peaceably in the habit of
shepherds. And ever since it has been observed (so pleasing was this vow unto
the Gods) that whosoever broke this oath, did never prosper. And amongst us, my
Father is the most remarkable example: So as now seeing the will of heaven is
to have us live in rest, we have a new ratified this vow, with so many sacred
oaths, as he that breaks it shall be most detestable. I do profess, answered
the Nymph, I am very glad to hear this: for I never knew before, the reason
why so many good and ancient families have forsaken Towns and spend their
days in woods and solitary places. But, Celadon, if your condition will permit
you, I shall be very glad to hear you relate the fortune of your Father
Alsippes, and why he betook himself to that kind of life, which he had so
long laid aside; for I am most confident, it is most worthy of knowledge. Then
the shepherd, though not very well, yet constrained himself to obey her, and
began thus.

The History of Alcippes.
Madam, you command me to relate the most intricate story in the world; and in
which one may learn that whosoever contrives the hurt of another must prepare
himself for a great part of it. In obedience therefore to your commands I
shall briefly tell you, what I have gleaned from the ordinary discourse of him,
unto whom all the things happened: for, to make us more sensible of our
happiness in living at rest, my Father has often related unto us his strange
fortunes. Be pleased to know then, Madam that Alcippes, being educated by his
Father in the simplicity of a shepherd, had ever a Genius far different from
his education; and any thing that smelt of a Town pleased him much better then
a Field: So as when he was a little boy, his delight was in assembling other
boys together, and setting them into order; and do what the grave Signiors
could, he would still be teaching them how to arm themselves, and shoot in
bows. The Ancients of our village, who observed his actions did Prophecy
great troubles to ensue upon their country, and that Alcippes was of too
turbulent a spirit to be kept within the compass of a shepherd. When his age
became more virile he fell in Love with the shepherdess Amarillis, who was
then secretly corrted by another shepherd called Alces. And Alcippes having so
good a conceit of himself, that he thought any shepherdess would bid his
affection welcome whenever it was offered, he resolved not to use much
artifice, in declaring himself: so as meeting her at one of the Sacrifices
unto Pan. as she was returning home to her village he said unto her; I could
never have believed my self so weak, as not to resist the blows of an enemy,
who has wounded me and never thought upon it. She answered him, that he who
wounds against his will ought not to be called an enemy. But I do find it
otherwise, answered he, and therefore I may very well give this name unto you:
who I? replied she, I was never so, either in thought or act: for I ever set a
great value upon your merit. This is one of the wounds you give me, said he:
but I see you can carry Love in your eyes and in your mouth, but will not
harbor it in your heart: The shepherdess then finding her self surprised,
and that he did mean matter of Love, she answered: I do set such a value upon
your virtue Alcippes as I ought to do; but as for any Love, whereof you speak,
believe me I have none for any, either in my eyes or heart; especially for such
pittyfull spirits as can content themselves to live like Savages in woods. It
is not the election of love but my destiny which makes me yours, replied the
shepherd; and such a resemblance of humor there is betwixt us, that I have
borne a most deadly hatred unto a shepherds life, which you scorn so much,
even from my very cradle: I do protest that if changing my condition will
promote me into your favor I will immediately quit my flock and sheephooke, and
live amongst men, not amongst Salvages. You may change your condition, answered
Amarillis, but not me; for I am resolved to be still so much my self, as not
to give my affection unto another. If therefore you would have us live as
formerly we have done leave off this discourse of affection and Love, and talk
of such things as we were wont, else think it not strange that I banish you my
presence since it is impossible that Love and the Civilitie of Amarillis should
dwell together. Alsippe not expecting such an answer was so confounded that it
was a long while before he could answer but, being come to himself, he was
persuaded, that it was the bashfullnesse of her age and sex, not want of any
good will to him, made her give such an answer: And therefore he answered:
whatsoever you are pleased to be or say, I shall never be any thing but your
devoted servant. And if the command you have imposed upon me were not
incompatible with my affection, you may most confidently believe, that nothing
in the world can make me disobey. But I beseech you excuse and suffer me to
continue my design which is only a testimony of your merit: for whether you
will or no, I am resolved to prosecute it. The shepherdess then turning her
eye smilingly upon him, I know not Alsippe (said she unto him) whether this be
for some wager, or out of wilfulness, that you speak thus. It is both
(answered he) for I have laid a wager with my desires to overcome you, or to
die: and this resolution is changed into obstinate wilfulness, since nothing
can divert me from that oath which I have taker. I should have been very glad,
answered Amarillis, if you had made choice of some other mark for your
importunities: Nay, nay, said the shepherd, all this cannot make me alter my
design; Then think not much, replied Amarillis, if I be as firm in my
obstinacy, as you are in your importunity. The shepherd would have replied,
but he was interrupted by many shepherds coming toward them. So as Amarillis
for a conclusion said unto him in a low voice, you will do me a great
displeasure Alcippe, if your resolution should be known: I can be contented to
know your follies, but should, be much displeased if any other should know
them. Thus ended my Fathers first discourse with Amarillis, which did infinitely
angment his desire of serving her. As they went along the way they met Celion
and Belinda, who were observing two turtles, billing and making Love unto each
other, not caring a straw who saw them, which gave Alcippes an occasion to
remember the last commands of Amarillis, and to sing these verses; and because
his voice was very good, every one did lend a silent ear.

A Song upon the Constraints of honor.
Loook yonder on the open Loves of those two billing turtle Doves!
See how this happy little pair, in Love what libertines they are;
They kiss, and care not who does know it, but to the envious world do show it.
The Laws of honor so unjust, like fettred slaves observe we must.
This bugbeare Honor which affrights, fond Lovers in their free delights,
Will not allow them any bliss, unless they steal their happiness.
While these free Lovers of the Air, what eyes do see them, do not care.
But Love and kiss, and take a pride, in that which honor bids us hide:
Honor's a Tyrant then, and we are slaves, whilst turtle doves are free.
Since this time, Alcippes was so transported with Love that he knew no Limits:
And Amarillis on the contrary, showed her self all Ice unto him: and one day
when he was desired to sing he made this his subject, thus put into verse.

Upon the Coldness of Amarillis.
Her heart is Ice, her eyes all flame, mine all contrary to the same;
I Am Ice without, within all fire, my hearts inflamed with hot desire:
Love, I beseech thee, change design, and thaw her heart, or else freeze mine.
At this very time, as I told you before, Alces was a professed servant unto
Amarillis: and being a shepherd of very excellent qualities, also held to be
exceeding wise, the Father of Amarillis inclined more unto him then unto
Alcippes, because of his turbulent spirit: On the contrary, the shepherdess
loved my Father better, because their humors were more suitable: which her
Father knowing, and being unwilling to use any violence or absolute authority
over her, he conceived, that time and absence might work an alteration in her;
and therefore resolved to send her awhile unto Artemis, sister of Alces, who
dwelt alone by the River of Allier. When Amarillis understood her Fathers mind,
she resolved to acquaint Alcippes with her good will unto him, before she went:
and to that end, writ these lines.

The Letter of Amarillis unto Alcippe.
Alcippe,
YOur resolutenesse has surpassed mine: and mine also far surmounted my self,
as to accquaint you that tomorrow, I am gone; And if you will meet me today,
where we parted yesterday, I will there bid you adieu.

AMARILLIS


It would be too tedious Madam, to tell you all the particular passages betwixt
them: let it suffice, to tell you in short, that they met at the place
appointed: and there it was, where my Father received the first assurance of
the Love of Amarillis: there she persuaded him, to quit a shepherds life, as
unworthy of a noble spirit, promising him to be most constant to her resolution
of loving him. After they were parted, Alcippes engraved these verses upon a
Tree in the wood.

Alcippes, upon the Constancy of his Affection.
When Rocks remove, and Rivers backwards run; when Marble melts; and
Glowewormes dim the Sun;
And when Impossibilities are done; then may my heart my Amarillis shun.
When it is known what is Eternity; when Gnats over Eagles getts the
victory;
When Fire does freeze, and the vast Ocean's dry; then may my Love to Amarillis
die.
When Swans and Snow are Metamorphos'd black; when Stars do fall; and the
two Poles do crack;
When loving Turtles do their Mates for sake; Then may my Love to Amarillis
slake.
When in the Orient, Sun and Stars do set; when mortals, in a bag the wind
do get;
When Steel the attracting Loadstone will not meet; then Amarillis may I thee
forget.
When Ships do sail full against the blasting wind; when Light is
darkness, Angels are unkind;
When Heavens dissolve; and Time an end does find; then Amarillis, thou art
out of mind.
When she was gone; and when he began to resent the horror of absence, he went
to the same place where he bad adieu unto his shepherdess, and sighed out
these verses several times.

In absence of Amarillis.
Fair Amarillis and the Sun, do hold exact comparison;
And both alike dispenses light, by presence; and by absence, Night.
What glorious Summer is it here when she is present in our Sphere?
How like to winter looks the day; when she her Rays does not display?
When she is not present, I Am undon, as Earth in absence of the Sun;
With Owls, and Bats, and Birds of night; I sit, and sigh away delight;
And am society for none, but such a sad companion.
Since absence was my dismal doom; my heart, alas, was not at home:
My eyes two Fountains are, which vie with Lignon which should first be dry.
All faculties do droop and mourn, till Amarillis do return.
But when the day shall dawne that she, within our Hemisphere shall be;
Then VVinter's gone, and Summer's come; I Will bid my heart a welcome home:
I Will wipe all tears from swelled eyes, my Batts and Owls, I will despise;
And with the joviall birds in spring, to her an Antheme I will sing.
But he, not being able to abide in that place where he was wont to see her, he
resolved (whatsoever came on it) to be gone; and as soon as he sought for an
occasion, he found it to his hearts desire. A little before, the Mother of
Amasis died: and Preparations were in hand to entertain her in the great City
of Marselles as their new Lady, with abundance of Triumph. This solemnity, did
draw thither out of curlositie, most of the Country: and amongst the rest, my
Father obtained leave to be one: from hence did spring much of his misery. He
was in the prime of his age; fair, beyond any in the Country; his hair flaxen
which naturally curled in rings, and which he wore very long; in brief, Madam
he was such a one as I believe Love did choose out for a mark of revenge; and
thus it was. There was a certain Lady which had seen him and loved him in such
a secret disguise that we could never know her name. When he came first to
Marselles, he came as a shepherd, but in a very handsome mode; and to the end he
should not run into any extravagancyes, as he did in his own Hamlet his Father
sent two shepherds with him as guardians, the principal of which was called
Cleantes, a man whose humor was suitable unto my Fathers, insomuch as he
affected him exceedingly. This Cleantes had a Son called Clindor equal in age
with my Father, and had a natural inclination to Love Alcippe.

Alcippe, in retaliation of this affection, did also Love him above any other;
which was so pleasing unto Cleantes, that he could not deny my Father any thing
and therefore, after they had observed how other Gallants were habited: how
they were armed; and how they fought at Barriers, both of them beseeched
Cleantes for such allowance as might put them into the equipage of appearing
amongst those Knights and Gallants. Have you so much courage (said Cleantes
unto them) as to equal your selves with them? Why not? (answered Alcippes) have
I not arms and thighs as well as they? Though you have, (said Cleantes) yet
you have not learned the Garb, and civil deportment of Towns. It Is true
(answered he) but such ceremonies are not so difficult as to blast the hopes of
quickly learning them. You have not yet the use of your arms (said Cleantes)
nor know how to fence, or fight as they do: It Is no matter replied Alcippes, we
have courage enough to supply that defect. Why would you leave off a country
life? Said Cleantes; what should men do in woods (Answered Alcippes) and what
good can men learn amongst beasts? It will vex you, said Alcippe, to be
slighted by the Ladies, who will slight and scorn you, and upbraid you with
the name of shepherds. If to be a Shepherd be ignominious, (said Alcippe) let
us own that profession no longer; and if it be not, then the disdain will not
hurt us: for if they do, I will endeavor by my actions to get honor and
esteem amongst them. At last Cleantes seeing their resolutions to change their
lives; well children (said he) since you are thus resolved, let me tell you
that though you pass under the notion of shepherds, yet your extraction is
from the best branch in the Country, and the noblest Knights in all France,
have no better a pedigree then you have, though your Ancienters upon some
certain considerations, made choice of such a retired kind of life. Never fear,
therefore, the finding a good reception amongst these Cavaliers, since the very
best amongst them is of your own blood. These words, did kindle the sparks of
their desire unto a flame; and made them more forward to put their resolutions
into execution; never reflecting upon the future, nor thinking what
inconveniency that kind of life might bring them; nor dorring at the
displeasure of Alcippes Father. Cleantes provides them all necessaries; they
did quickly insinuate themselves into acquaintance, and get love amongst the
best; Alcippes was grown so expert in arms; that he was accounted one of the
best Knights of his time.

During this feast, which lasted two months, a certain Lady as I told you
before, had seen my Father, and was so much taken with him that she devised
this Stratagem to bring her ends about. Upon a day when my Father was in the
Temple; an old woman came and set her self close by him: and seeming as if she
were at her prayers, she said two or three times, Alcippes, Alcippes, but never
looked toward him. He hearing himself named, did think to ask her what she
would have with him, but seeing her eyes turned another way; he thought she had
spoken to some other. She perceiving that he heard her, continued, Alcippes, it
is to you I speak, though I did not look upon you; if you will enjoy a better
fortune, then ever any Knight in our Court did, meet me in the twilight at the
Piazza near the Palace, and there I will accquaint you further. Alcippe
hearing this, answered her with a regardlesse look, that he would be there: and
he failed not. For as soon as night came, he went to the place appointed, where
he tarried not long for the old woman, who mufled up in a taffatle hood, took
him aside and said unto him, Young man thou art the happiest man alive in the
affection of the fairest Lady, and greatest beauty in all this Court, whom
(upon such conditions as I shall require) if thou will, thou shall enjoy, and
receive fulness of delight. Young Alcippe hearing this fair offer, asked who
the Lady was? First, said she, you must promise never to enquire her name, but
to keep your happy fortune extremely secret; the next condition is, that you
let me blind your eyes, when I conduct you to her. Alcippe told her, that as
for enquiring her name, and keeping secresy, he would most willingly consent;
but as for his being blinded, he would never suffer it. What do thou fear
man, (said she): I fear not any thing, answered he, but I would have mine eyes
at liberty. Fond young man (said the old woman) what a novice yet thou art?
Can thou find a heart to slight such a fair opportunity upon such easy
conditions? Come come, never dorr at it, nor doubt any danger: where is the
courage that thy presence promises? can any imaginary peril affright thee
from a most certain happiness? Then seeing him un willing; Cursed be thy
mother (said she) who brought thee forth: thou have thy countenance and thy
courage more from her, then thy father: Young Alcippes could not hear the
language of this angry old woman without laughing: and afterward bethinking
himself what enemies he had, he resolved to go along with her, provided she
would let him wear his sword; and so he suffered her to hood wink him, and
conduct him whether she would. I should be too long and tedious, Madam, should
I relate every particular of this night: but after many turnings and windings,
and perhaps several times one way, he was brought into a chamber, where
blindfold, he was undressed by this old woman, and got into bed: A little after
came the Lady who sent for him, and went to bed unto him, where after the light
was taken away she did unmuffle his eyes: but, do what he could, he could not
draw one syllable from her. So as he rose the next morning, and knew not who
his bedfellow was, only he imagined her to be young and fair: and an hour
before day she who brought him thither; came to conduct him back again with the
same ceremonies: And it was agreed between them, that whenever he was to come
again; he should find a little stone in a corner of the Piazza the same morning.

Whilst these things thus passed, Alcippes Father dyed: so as he was sole
Master of himself; and had not the commands of Amarillis restrained him,
perhaps he might have retired himself into a Country life again. For all the
favors of this unknown Lady could not drive her out of his mind. The great
gifts which he often received from her, could not do it: nor could the favors
of Pimander and Amasis, which he had obtained, have retained him from the
woods. But, it being hard for a young spirit to keep any thing secret long,
Clindor his dear friend seeing him spend after a vast rate, he asked him how he
was able to maintain so great an expense? At first he was something shie; but
afterward, told him his adventure of this unknown Lady; and how all the art he
had, could not discover who she was Clindor advised him the next time he went
to cut off a piece of the fringe at the foot of the bed and the next morning to
go unto all the houses which he could suspect, and try if he could find any
such bed; which he did; and by this trick my Father came to the knowledge of
her who was so favorable unto him. Yet he ever kept it so secret, that neither
Clindor, or any of his children could ever know it. But the first time he went
to her after this, when he was ready to rise in the morning he conjured her to
conceal her self no longer, for he knew she was such a one. She, hearing her
self named, was ready to speak: yet she kept silence, until the old woman
came: then when Alcippes was gone, she terrified her with a thousand meanaces,
supposing that she had discovered her unto him; so as the poor old band came
trembling to my Father and told him that he had deceived her. Then he in a
smiling manner told her his device which he had used, and that it was the
invention of Clindor. She, extremely glad of this discovery, after a thousand
denialls of it, went to tell this Lady of it. And when she knew that Clindor
was the inventor of this artifice, she turned her anger against him, and easily
pardoned Alcippe, whom indeed she could not hate: yet from that day she never
sent for him again. And since nothing is so sweet as revenge unto an offended
spirit, this woman was never at rest till she had sprung a quarrel between
Clindor and one that was Cozen unto Pimander, whom Clindor killed; and though
he was pursued, yet by the help of Alcippes, he got into Anvergne and saved
himself: But Amasis transacted so with Alerick King of the Visigots who was
then at Thoulouse, as he did imprison him at Usson with command unto his
officers that they should remit him into the hands of Pimander, who intended
his death. Alcippe left no stone unturned to obtain his pardon but all in
vain. Wherefore foreseeing the inevitable ruin of his friend he resolved at
what rate soever, either to save him or die with him. He was then at Usson, as
I told you before, a place so strong, as it seemed mere folly to attempt the
getting him out: however not being able to live without Clindor, he resolved to
be beforehand with those who were to go thither from Pimander: so as going away
in a discontent, he get a dozen friends, and came to the gates of the Castle,
clad like Country fellows, having under their jackets short swords, and
baskets on their arms, as if they came to sell something. I have since heard
him say, that there was three Forts all one within another. These resolute
Peasants came to the outmost of them, where they found very few of the Visigots
upon the Guard: for most of them were gone into the Town, to provide
necessaries for the Garrison. Being come so near, they offered their
commodities to sell at so cheap a rate, that almost all within came to buy
them. Then my Father, spying his opportunity got him who guarded the gate by
the neck, killed him; and at that very instant every one of his commpanions
killed his man* and entering in, kept the rest out at the swords point: then
running to the Prisons they found Clindor and so many others, as being armed
they thought able to maintain the Garrison. To abridge my discourse, I will
only tell you Madam, that though upon the Alarm the gates of the Town were
shut, yet they forced them and got out without the loss of one man, though the
Governor who was killed there, did make a very brave resistance. Thus was
Clindor saved, and Alerick being accquainted, that this enterprise was acted by
my Father he was so incensed against him, as he sent to Amasis to demand
justice upon him and she unwilling to lose his friendship, sent presently to
sease upon my Father: but his friends gave him such timely notice of it, that
he got out of the Country, and joined himself with a Nation who a little after
entered France and in hostile manner came as far as the Rosne and Arar, and
some part of the Allobroges; and being desirous to enlarge their territories
they made a fierce war upon the Visigots the Ostrogots and the Romans: amongst
these was my Father entertained, and being known for a man of valor, was
presently honored with several Commands. But within a few years, Gondioch
King of this Nation dying, Gordebert his Son succeeded him in the Throne of
Bourgundie: and being desirous to settle his affairs in the beginning he
contracted peace with his neighbors, marrying his Son Sigismond unto one of
the Daughters of Theodorick King of the Ostrogots: and to hold fair with
Alerick who was implacably offended against Alcippes, he promised to entertain
him no longer. So as he departed thence, and closed with another people, who
from the Reihn^ did sease upon part of France in spite of the Gauls and
Romans. But Madam, the discourse would be much too tedious should I
particularise every passage of this voyage; for from thence he was forced to
London unto King Arthur, who as I have heard did at that time institute the
order of Knights of the Round Table: afterward being hunted out by Alerick, he
passed the Seas, and went to Bizantium where the Emperor gave him the command
of his Galleys. But the Love to ones own country being above all others, my
Father though in great favor with so many Emperors, yet had greater desire to
breathe in his own native air: and Fortune did present the means unto him
when he least expected it. Alerick died: and Tyherre his Son succeeded him, who
having many Brothers, had enough to do in maintaining his own, without thinking
upon his Fathers enemies. And therefore, being desirous to carry fair withal
in the beginning of his Reign, he published a general Act of Oblivion, which
pardoned all offenses committed in his Kingdom. This was a good step to
Alcippes return, if Pimander had once forgot the injury which he received:
yet as the Visigots were isntrumental in his banishment, so Fortune would have
them as forward in his repeal^ (...) little before, (as I told you) Arthur,
King of great Britain, had instituted the Knights of the Round Table: an
order consisting of a certain number of young virtuous men, who were obliged to
go and seek adventures, to punish the wicked, to relieve the oppressed, and to
defend the honor of Ladies. Then the Visigots of Spain which then dwelt in
Pampoluna, in imitation of this Order, did choose out a number of Knights, who
went into many Countries and showed their valor. And at that time, there came
one of these Visigots, after a long wandering through many Countries, unto
Marselles; where having made his accustomed challenge, he vanquished many of
Pimanders Knights whose heads he all cut off, and as ensigns of his valor,
sent them unto a Lady in Spain whom he courted as his Mistress Amongst he rest
Amarillis lost an Uncle, who, like my Father not relishing a Shepherds life,
had betaken himself to arms. As soon as Amarillis heard of this sad Accident,
she imparted the news by letter unto my Father; not with any design of his
coming to her but only to make him a partner in her loss. Love, which ever
prompts a noble soul unto a thousand generous designs, would not permit my
Father to know of Amarillis loss, and sit still: but he resolved immediately
upon revenge. Therefore with the Emperors leave he came disguised into Cleantes
house, who understanding his resolution, did endeavor to dissuade him, but
Loves arguments were of more validity then his. One morning when Pimander was
going to the Temple, Alcippes armed Cap a pe presented himself before him; and
though his helmet was up, yet his beard was so grown since his departure, that
he was not knowable. As soon as Pimander understood his business, he sent an
Herald to acquaint the Visigot with it: To be short, my Father overcame him;
and presented his sword unto Pimander, who was exceedingly glad that this
cruel Visigot was vanquished. Then, not making himself known unto any, except
Amarillis, who saw him in the house of Cleantes, he returned unto Bizantium,
where he found his accustomed entertainment. Mean while Cleantes desiring
nothing more then to see him in Forests at liberty, did discover him unto
Pimander, who was extremely desirous to know the name of that man who fought
with the stranger. Pimander at first was amazed; but afterward being moved by
the virtue of this man, he asked whether it was possible he should be still
alive? To whom Cleantes made answer, relating all his long voyages and services
of so many Kings: Oh, said Pimander, this man's virtue merits reward and not
banishment: let him return, and assure him that his deserts shall find from me
a full reward. I freely pardon him all that ever he did against me. Thus my
Father, after he had been seven years in Greece, returned into his Country,
and was much honored both by Pimander and Amasis, who conferred upon him one
of the greatest offices about their persons. Abundance of any thing cloys and
faded desires have no force in them. As soon as my Father, had tasted the
favors of Fortune in a full measure, his taste was glutted and he despised
them. Some good Angel, intending to draw him out of that Gulf, in which he
had so often been so nigh a shipwreck, did inspire him with such considerations
as these Come Alcippe, would he say unto himself, I must take thee under
examination; what do thou intend to do? Would thou enjoy happiness
before thou dyest? If thou would; be confident, it is not to be found any
where but in Tranquillity: if in tranquillity, then it must be far from
business: if far from business, then far from the ambition of a Court: have
thou not had sufficient trial of its inconstancy? Consider well with thy
self; ambition is a desire to command over many: and that many has every one
of them the same design as well as thee: they propose unto themselves the very
same ways thou do; and ambition is so narrow a passage, that only one can
keep it: so as thou must defend thy self against a thousand, who will assault
thee by a thousand stratagems, or else thou must die; if thou do defend thy
self, what tranquillity, what rest can thou expect? Thou must stand day and
night upon thy Guard, both against friends and enemies: if thou do yield,
there is no creature so miserable as a crest-falne Courtier, out of favor.
Consider these things Alcippes; thy Father and Ancestors were full as wise as
thou art; they well considered these things, and would never trust themselves
upon the mutability of Fortune: Return, return therefore to thy native soil,
cast off thy Purple, and assume thy first habit; turn thy spear into a spade,
and thy sword into a sheephook there thou shall meet with that tranquillity,
which thou have sought for, so many years, and could never find it, and which
can never be found any where else. These, Madam, were the considerations which
brought my Father unto his first Profession. Wherein he enjoyed the height of
happiness: for he was so much beloved and honored by all his neighbors, that
they held him for their Oracle; yet this was not the end: For he was no sooner
at home, but Love began to open his first wound: and Amarillis did cost him
more misery, then all the rest of his misfortunes. Then did he revive that
Device which he bore in all his travells which was in French Pen de Gray,
meaning thereby Peine I'ay; in English, The misery I endure. From this Love of
his did grow an inveterate hatred. For Alces, Astreas Father, was also
infinitely in Love with Amarillis; and Amaril is, during my Fathers exile, did,
by the command of her Parents, permit it: on the other side Alcippe, though he
had cast off his habit of Chivalrie, yet he retained his courage; and not being
able to admit of any Rival, did often fall foul with Alces, who also had
courage enough; And it was the thought of everyone, that if the Parents of
Amarillis had not consented to give her unto Alcippes, one of them two had died
for it. But though this marriage stopped all quarrels, yet there still
remains such roots of hatred, as will never be quite eradicated so as still
there is no familiarity between Alces and Alcippes: Thus much fair Nymph (said
he unto Silvia) perhaps you have heard in our Town, when you were there for I
am Son unto Alcippes and Amarillis; and Astrea is Daughter unto Alces and
Hippolyta.

Thus Celadon ended his discourse, and doubtless not without much pain: for
speaking was troublesome to him: and this was the reason he did so abreylate
his relation. But Galathea was unimaginably satisfied, when she heard of what
Parents this Shepherd was descended, whom she so much Loved.

As long as day lasted, these fair Nymphs so entertained Celadon, that had
not Astreas change infinitely displeased him, he had found no great cause to be
weary of them: for they were very fair, and also full of discretion: Yet as the
case was with him, he could not choose but desire to be alone and foreseeing
that would not be till night, which would force them away, he wished for it
every minute. When he was most alone, he thought himself best accompanied: for
night being come, and the Nymphs retired to their chambers, his own thoughts
came to accompany him with such cruel Memorandums, as made him incapable of
any other companions dismal despair did look him in the face; for if against
the unjust sentence of his Mistress, he did oppose his innocence, then the
sudden execution of it did appear in the eyes of his fancy. And as he was
falling from one thought into another his hand fell a cidentally upon the
Riband tied to his arm, in which was Astreas Ring: Oh what horrid memorialls
came then into his mind? Then did he fancy the fury which her soul expressed
both by words and actions, when she pronounced the sentence of his banishment.
Then after a long and sad contemplation upon this last dysaster, he began to
think upon the change of his Fortune; how happy he had been, and how she
favored him. Then begun he to think what she had done for him how for his sake
she had slighted many well qualified shepherds how little she valued the
displeasure of her Father, or anger of her Mother, when they opposed against
her affection: then began he to consider, that Fortune is as fickle in matters
of Love as in any thing else: and how few of all her favors remained with him,
which was only a Bracelet of her hair tied about his arm; and a Picture which
he wore at his breast, whose Case he kissed many a time: as for the Ring which
he wore about the other arm he esteemed that, rather as forced then of any
benevolence. Then upon a sudden, he remembered the Letters which she had writ
unto him in the happy days of his being in favor and which he always
carried about with him in a little bagg. Oh what rapture was he in when he
first thought upon them! for he feared lest the Nymphs when they pulled off
his clothes should have seen them. In this doubt he called out aloud for the
little Merril: for he always waited in a Lobby close by. The little boy,
hearing him call so hastily two or three times, came to see what his pleasure
was. My little officer (says Celadon) do thou know what is become of my
clothes? for they contain something which would much perplex me to lose: Your
clothes Sir, said he, are not far from hence, but there is nothing in them, for
I searched them. Oh Meril (said the Shepherd) thou art much mistaken, for
there was something which I valued above my life; then turning toward the
other side of the bed he began to make exceeding sad complaints a long while
together. Meril hearing him, was on the one side very sorry to hear him lament
as he did; and on the other side was in great doubt whether he should tell him
all he knew: at last not being able to be longer a witness of his sorrows; he
told him that he needed not to trouble himself so much for he was sure the
Nymph Galathea loved him too well to keep from him any thing which he so much
valued: At this, Celadon turned toward him, and asked whether that Nymph had
them; I believe it is the same (said he) at least, I found a little bundle of
papers, and as I was bringing them unto you, she met me and took them from me.
Oh Heavens said the Shepherd, things are worse and worse, then turning on the
otherside, he would speak no more. Mean time Galathea did read the Letters for
it was true, she did take them from Merill; and as those in Love are always
full of curiosity, so she read them but she had strictly charged him to say
nothing, because she intended to restore them, as unknown that she had seen
them. Silvia held the candle whilst Galathea unloosed the string which tied
them together: we shall see (said Silvia,) whether this Shepherd be such a
dull fellow as he would seem to be and whether or no he be in Love: then
Galathea took out the papers gently for fear of tearing them: and the first
she laid her hand upon, was this.

Astrea's Letter unto Celadon.
Celadon,
What Is this you do attempt? Into what a confusion are you about to bring your
self? Take my advice, who counsel you as a friend, and leave off this your
design of serving me it is too full of inconveniency believe it; what content
Celadon can you hope for? I shall be extremely intolerable: you may with as much
ease attempt an impossibility; you must wait, and suffer, and be patient, and
have neither eyes or Love for any but me: for never think, I will share
affection with any other, nor accept of halfe-love. I am full of suspicions,
extremely Jealous; I am exceeding hard to be won, and very easily lost;
quickly offended, but abominably hard to be pleased: my will must be destiny it
self; my opinions must pass for reasons, and my commands must be inviolable
Laws. Shepherd, be wise, and keep out of this dangerous Labyrinth. Cease from
a design which may prove soruinous. I know my self better then you do: never
think to alter my natural Genius; I shall certainly break rather then bend,
and if you will not believe what now I say, do not hereafter complain against
me.


Never credit me, (said Galathea) if this Shepherd be not in Love. It cannot
be doubted (said Silvia) being so well accomplished. Then Galathea gave her
another Letter which had been wet, to hold unto the fire; meanewhile, she took
another Letter which contained these words.

Astrea's Letter unto Celadon.
Celadon,
YOu will not believe that I Love you, and yet you desire I should beleev you
Love me If I do not Love you, what will my credence in your affection profit
you? perhaps you think, that belief will oblige me to it; but alas Celadon,
that consideration is too weak, if your merits and services were not more
considerable: but this is the state of your condition: I would not only have
you know, that I think you Love me; but I would have you know also that I do
Love you: and amongst many other, this is an infallible argument of it, that I
have valued my Love to you, above my obedience to my Parents. If you consider
how great my duty is to them, you may by it value my Love to you, since it is
above all duties: Adieu; be not any longer incredulous.


As soon as this Letter was read Silvia brought the other, and Galathea told
her with a sad heart, that Celadon was in Love, and which was worse, that he
was extremely loved which grieved her to the very soul: for now she saw that
she was to force a Fort, which a victorious enemy was possessor of. For by
these Letters she found, that the humor of this Shepherdess was not to be
half a Mistress, but would have an absolute command over such as she daigned to
accept as her servants and her opinion of this was much fortified, when she
read the other Letter which had been wet it was thus penned.

Astrea's Letter unto Celadon.
Celadon,
LYcidas told Phillis, that yesterday you were in a very bad humor. Am I the
cause of it? or you? If it be I, it is without occasion: for did I ever desire
any more then to Love, and be loved by you? And have you not sworn a thousand
times, that you would never desire any more to complete your happiness? If
your self be the cause of it, then you do me wrong, to dispose of that which
is mine, without my knowledge; for whatsoever is yours, is by donation mine:
accquaint me how the matter is, and I will consider, whether or no I can allow
of these humors; in the mean while, I forbid them.


How imperiously does this Shepherdess carry it, said Galathea? She does not
injure him, (said Silvia) since she told him as much at the first. And truly if
it be she, whom I suppose it is, She is one of the fairest and most admirably
qualified persons, that ever mine eyes beheld: her name is Astrea: and that
which induces me to believe it is she, is this word Phillis: for those two
Shepherdesses are intimate companions. And though, as I told you, her beauty be
beyond al comparisons, yet it is the least amiable quality in her for she is so
full of several perfections, as her beauty is the least considerable. This
discourse was but a wider opening of Galatheas wound, since still greater
difficulties appeared in the accomplishment of her design. And being unwilling
to impart any more unto Silvia, she tied up the papers and went to bed not
without a crowd of various thoughts, which sleep by degrees did compose. As
soon as the day dawned, little Merill went out of the Shepherds chamber, who had
done nothing but lament all the night long: and Galathea having commanded him
to have a very strict observance over all the actions of Celadon, and to make a
report unto her, he went out to accquaint her with his observations: Galathea
was awake, and talking aloud with Leonida, little Merill knocked at the door,
and came in. Madam, said he, not a wink of sleep have I got all this night: for
poor Celadon is even at deaths door for want of those papers you took from me
yesterday: and seeing him in such lamentable despair, I could not choose but
comfort him a little, by telling him that you had them How? Replied the Nymph,
knows he that I have them? Yes Madam, said Merill, and he told me that he
would ask you for them, for he has a great esteem of them: had you heard as I
did, how he lamented the loss of them, it would have forced your heart to
pity him. Good Merill, said the Nymph, tell me what he said? Madam, replied
he, after he had enquired whether I saw his papers, and I told him that you had
them, ^he turned to the other side, as if distracted, and said, Now are all
things at the very worst; and after a while silence, thinking me in bed and a
sleep, I heard him sigh and say aloud. Oh Astrea, Astrea, must banishment be
the recompense of all my faithful services? If thy affection be changed, why
do thou blame me to excuse thy self? If I have been faulty, why is not my
fault made known unto me? Is there no Justice in Heaven, nor pity in thy
heart? If therebe, why do I find no favor from either? that I might either die,
or obey Astreas comwand. Oh most cruel command; if I should die, would it not
argue rather deficiency of Love, then excess of courage? Then he paused a
while and afterward began again But whither would my flattering and truycerous
hopes transport me? Dare ye once again appear unto me? what shadow of any hope
can possibly be, after so much time spent, after so many services performed so
much affection expressed; so many disdaines endured, and many impossibilities
vanquished. Must absence be the pitiful reward of all these? No, no, hope
rather for a favor from a grave than from her. After much such like discourse,
he was silent a long while; then turning himself in bed, I heard him begin his
lamentations, which continued until day: and all were complaints against one
Astrea, whom he accused of change, and cruelty. Galathea knew so much of
Celadons estate, by Astreas Letters, and by Merills report, that it had been
better for her, if she had been more ignorant; yet flattering her self; she
imagined that Astrea's scorn might happily make the way more easy to
accomplish her desires: But those are Novists in the School of Love who know
not, that Love never dies in a noble and generous heart: and that the root of
it, is never quite pulled up. Yet in this hope she writ a note, and put it
amongst the Letters of Astrea; afterward, giving the bundle to Merill, Here
Merill said fly, carry this bundle unto Celadon and tell him, that I wish I
could as well render him all the contentments which he wants. If he be well and
desires to see me, tell him I am not well this morning. She said this, to the
end, he might have the more leisure to peruse his papers, and to read that
which she had writ. Merill he went away; and Leonida being in another bed she
did not see the bundle, nor hear the message which Galathea sent; but as soon
as he was gone, she called her into the same bed: then began thus to talk: You
know Leonida, what discourse we had yesterday concerning this Shepherd; since
that, I have met with more intelligence then I could have wished; you heard
what Merill said, and what Silvia reported concerning Astreas perfections; so
as since the Fort is taken, I foresee a double difficulty in getting it
again: yet I find that this happy Shepherdess has much offended him, and a
generous heart cannot brook a disdain with out a resent. Madam, answered
Leonida, I could wish with all my heart, you could extinguish all these kind of
thoughts: for if you continue in them, you will wrong your self exceedingly:
do you think it possible to carry it always secretly what a blame will it be
unto your honor, if it should be known? The whole course of your actions will
be measured by it; what would you think of another that should lead such a
life? You will answer me perhaps, that you do no ill: Oh Madam, it is not enough
for a person of your quality to be free from crime, but they must be also free
from scandal. Were he a man worthy of you, I should with some patience allow
of it; but Celadon though he be the chief of the Country, yet he is a
Shepherd, and not known for any more; and this vain opinion of happy or
unhappy can it so far bewitch you, and so degenerate your spirit as to equal
sheep-keepers, clownes and halfe-savages with your self. For Heavens sake.
Madam, consider these things, and be your self, Leonida had continued on, if
Galathea in a great rage had not interrupted her: I told you before, said she,
that I will not allow any more of such moral doctrine: I am resolved. When I ask
your advice, ehen give it: mean time, no more of this discourse, unless you
will incur my displeasure. Upon this, she turned away to the other side of
the bed in such a fury, that Leonida knew she had much displeased her. Nothing
comes nearer the quick, then to object honor against Love; but the reasons of
Love will be predominate. A little after Galathea turned about, and told her,
that she did not, till now, ever think her so arrogant as to be her Governesse:
Madam, answered she, such thoughts were never mine, I know my duty better then
so: but since you take that ill, which I spoke, out of my affection to you, I
shall hereafter never give you any occasion to be angry with me, for that
cause. I wonder, replied Galathea, that your opinion should be void of all
reason can it ever be known that Celadon is here? Only these are acquainted
with it; we three, Meril, and my Nurse his Mother: as for Merill he never goes
out and besides he is very discreet: as for my Nurse her fidelity is
sufficiently known; and besides, the design of all the whole business has
its rise from her: for she reporting what the Druide foretold me, she who Loves
me, as if her own child, did advise me to slight the advice. I beseech you
Madam, said Leonida, what is your design? To carry it so, answered she, that
this Shepherd may love me, and till then not to let him go from hence: and if
I but get him once to love me, I will leave all the rest to the conduct of
fortune. Madam, said Leonida, Heavens swell all your desires with full content:
but I bseeech you, give me leave to tell you only this once, that you will
extremely stain your honor. It will be an age before his grounded affection
to Astrea, will be rooted out: whose beauty and virtue has no second. But
Leonida, (answered Galathea) Astrea slights him, she is offended at him, and
she has banished him: can you believe his spirit so pusillanimous as to endure
all this? Oh Madam, replied Leonida, extinguish such vain hopes: if he have no
courage at all, then he will never resent these things: and if he have a noble
spirit then let me tell you, that a generous minded man will never give over an
enterprise, because he finds it full of difficulties: for example, remember
your coorse entertainment of Lindamor, how cruelly you have treated him, yet
how little all those disdaines and cruelties do startle him. But admit that
Celadon who is a shepherd and whose courage cannot come in compare with
Lindamors, admit I say that he should fall off from Astrea; what hopes of any
good can you conceive from thence? Do you think a man that is once deceived will
ever be deceived a second time by the same subject? No no Madam, he that is
once burnt will not come near the same fire again: perhaps (and herein is your
most advantageous hopes) that time will cure him of his wound, and till then he
will never subject himself to be wounded again by another: how long that may
be, Heavens know: mean time is it possible to keep the knowledge of it so long
from the Guards in the Court? Either they will see him; for you cannot always
keep him mued up in your chamber, or else Meril, as discreet as he is, yet he
is but a child and may blab it out Leonida, said she, I charge you to spare
your pains upon this subject: I am resolved: and if you will have me think you
love me, advance my design as much as you can: and leave the rest to my care.
If Celadon be recovered, you may carry him this morning into the Garden: for I
find my self a little indisposed, and shall scarce rise out of bed till
toward night: Leonida was very sorry that no argument would prevail and
returned no answer: only this, that she would contribute her best endeavors
for her satisfaction.

Whilst these two were thus discoursing, Merill did his office and delivered
the message: finding the shepherd awake, he bad him good morrow from the Nymph,
and presented the papers unto him. Oh how ready he was to rise up and receive
them? He caused the window and curtains to be opened in all haste: he opened
the bundle after several ceremonious kisses. Oh my dear papers, said he, how
have these strange hands used you? then he sorted them and laid them in order
according to the time they were written, and finding another paper amongst
them, he opened it, and read these words.

Celadon, I would have you know that Galathea Loves you: and that Heaven has
permitted Astreas disdain, because they would not have a shepherdess any
longer enjoy that which a Nymph desires: acknowledge your happiness and do not
slight it.

The Shepherd was all wonder; but seeing that little Merill kept an observant
eye over all his actions, he would not suffer his wonder to be seen but tying
up all the papers together, and laying them in his bed, he asked, who gave them
unto him? I took them out of my Ladies closet, (said he) and had I not been
very desirous to ease you of that pain in which I saw you were, I should
hardly have dared to have brought them: for my Lady is not very well. Who is
with her (asked Celadon): the two Nymphs you saw yesterday (said he) the one
is Leonida the Niece of Adamas; the other Silvia the Daughter of the glorious
Deanta; and deservedly his Daughter she is; for she is owner of the most
stately Mine, that e're eye beheld.

Thus Celadon came to the first notice of Galathea's affection to him. And he
foresaw that it would prove an addition of misery unto him: therefore he
prepared himself for it. Now seeing half the day was already spent: and
finding himself very well, he would not any longer be a prisoner to his bed;
conceiving that the sooner he stirred abroad, the sooner he might take his
leave of the fair Nymphs Rising therefore with that resolution, as he was
going out to walk, he met Leonida and Silvia, whom Galathea had sent to bear
him company; for she her self would not rise, nor be seen, being ashamed of
the Letter she had written. They went into the Garden; and because Caladon
would conceal his sorrows, he constrained himself into as blithe an humor as
he could; and seemed full of curiosity to know every thing he saw. Fair
Nymphs (said he unto them) are we not near the place where the Fountain of
verity in Love is? I do much desire, if it may be, we may see our selves in it.
It Is very near (answered the Nymph) in yonder wood, but it is impossible to be
seen for which you may thank that Lady who is the cause of it (said she, and
pointed unto Silvia) I know no reason why you should accuse me (answered she):
for, ought the sword be blamed if an imprudent man lay his hand upon it, and
cut himself? It Is very true (said Leonida) but the person who wounds with it,
is to be blamed, and believe it your beauty is such as cannot be looked upon,
without homicide: Be it what it will, (answered Silvia with a little blush) it
has cords strong enough, never to let him go whom once it has captivated. She
said this, as twitting her with the infidelity of Agis, who once Loved her,
and either out of jealousy or some two months absence, was quite changed:
also upbraiding her with Polemas, who was stolen from her by another beauty
which Leonida understood very well and thus replied; I must confess Sister,
that my cords are easily untyed and the easier because I would never take so
much pains as to tie them faster. Celadon hearkened unto their pretty quarrels
with much delight, and to the end, they should not end too soon, he said unto
Silvia: fair Nymph, since it seems you are the cause why this admirable
Fountain cannot be seen, I beseech you oblige us so far, as to tell us, how it
came to pass. Celadon, answered the Nymph and smiled, you have business
enough at home, and need not meddle much in that of others: but if your Love
will allow of so much curiosity, Leonida if you request her may perhaps tell
you the end, as she did undesired, the beginning. Sister answered Leonida,
since you permit me, to tell the story, I Love you so well, as I will not let
your victories be unknown, especially those which you so much desire should be
known. But because I will not tire this shepherd I will be as brief as
possible I can. Not for that reason, I beseech you (said the shepherd) but if
you will, because she may have time enough to do the like office for you. Never
doubt that (replied Silvia) but according as she uses me, I shall know how to
repay her: Thus from their own mouths, Celadon was acquainted with all the
particulars of their lives: and to the end, he might the better hear as they
walked, they placed him in the mindst: and thus Leonida began.

The History of Silvia.
WHosoever says that Love is sufficient to procure Love again, never had any
experience either in the eyes or the courage of this Nymph for if they had,
they would have known that as water runs from the fountain, so the Love of
such as Love her, run away and never troubles her. If when you have heard the
discourse I intend to make, you do not acknowledge as much, I will freely give
you leave to tax my judgment.

Amasis the mother of Galathea, has a Son called Clidaman, owner of as many
excellent qualities, as any person of his age and rank is capable of for he is
exquisite at any thing which relates either to Arms or Ladies. About three
years ago, to give some testimony of his gentle disposition, and by the
permision of Amasis, he gave a servant unto all the Nymphs and this not by
election, but lot: for having put the names of all the Nymphs into one basin;
and the names of all the young Caveliers into another, then in an open
assembly, the basin in which the Nymphs were, was presented to the young
Gallants: and the basin in which the young Gallants were, was presented unto
the Nymphs. Then by the sound of several trumpets; the young Clidaman did draw
his lot and it chanced to be Silvia afterward the young Nymph did draw her
lot, and it chanced to be Clidaman. Great were the applaudes which every one
gave but the behavior of Clidaman was most extolled who as soon as he had
received his lot, went and kneeling down before this Nymph, did kiss her fair
hand She out of modesty would not have suffered it without the command of
Amasis, who said, it was the least homage she could receive. After her all the
rest took their chances: to some it happned according to their desires, and to
others, not. Galatheas fortune fell upon a brave Gallant called Lindamor, who
then was newly returned from the army: mine fell upon one, whose name was
Agis, the most perfidious and unconstant wethercock that ever was Some of these
who took their fortunes did only in appearance like their chances: others did
with their hearts ratify what fortune had done: and those who were most
pleased with their chances, were such as before that, had conceived some seeds
of affection. Amongst the rest, young Ligdamon was one, whose lot light upon
Silera; a Nymph truly very amiable, but not to him, who had already disposed of
his heart. And certainly it was happy for him that he was then absent for he
would never have performed that feigned homage which Amasis would have
commanded, and that perhaps would have brought him into disgrace. For you must
know, that he was brought up amongst us, and was so fair and handsome in all
his actions, as every one esteemed him; especially Silvia, they being both of
an age. At first their ordinary conversation begot a Love like unto that
between Brothers and Sisters: such a Love as their age was capable of; but as
Ligdamon grew in years, so he did in affection, so as at fourteen or fifteen
years of age, his will began to change it self into desires; and his desires, by
degrees, became passions. Yet he carried the matter so discreetly, that Silvia
her self had never known it, if she had not forced him unto it. Afterward
when he knew his disease, and confidered what small hopes there was of his cure,
then the mirth and pleasantness which was wont to be in his looks and all his
actions, was turned into sadness, and from sadness into such lumpish
melancholy, that every one took notice of the alteration. Silvia was not the
last of those who asked him the reason; but she could draw nothing from him but
heartlesse answers. At last when she saw his dullness continued, one day when
she was complaining against the coldness of his affection, and obliging him to
conceal nothing from her, she perceived, that he could not so well constrain
himself, but that a sad sigh came out in lieu of an answer. This moved her to
believe, that perhaps Love was the cause of his ill. Did not poor Ligdamon
carry the matter very discretly all the while in all his actions, since she
could never imagine her self to be the cause. Perhaps the Nymphs humor not
liking the business, was partly the cause; however his prudence was great that
could conceal such ardent affection. Now Silvia begins to urge him more then
she did before, and told him, that if Love was the cause she would contribute
all her assistance, and do all the good offices, he could desire. The more he
denied it, the more desirous was she to know it; at last, not being able to
hold any longer, he confessed that it was Love: but said that he had sworn
never to tell with whom. It Is most high presumption, said he to love her; but
being compelled to it by such an unresistable beauty, I am the more excusable:
yet should I name her, what excuse could I find for my rashness? The same
excuse that your friendship to me has, said Silvia. Then Madam; replied
Ligdamor, that, and your command together, shall plead my excuse: do but look
in that glass, and you will see what you desire to know. Upon this he took up
a little glass which she wore, and held it before her eyes. You may imagine
how she was surprised at this: and she has since swore unto me, that she
verily believed it to be Galathea whom he adored. Whilst he stood amazed in
contemplation of her, she stood amazed at her own simplicity: she was very
angry with him, but more with her self, that she should be so simple as to
force this manifesto of Love from him. Yet all her haughty spirit would not
permit her to condemn Ligdamor. but she did rise up upon a sudden, and without
a word went away full of rage, that any mortal durst presume to Love her.
Proud beauty, that thinks none worthy of thee! Faithful Ligdamor stays still,
but without soul, like an immovable statue. At last recollecting himself, he
got to his lodging as well as he could, out of which he stirred not a long
time: for Silvias cold entertainment of his affection, did so pierce his heart,
that he fell sick; and when none hoped for any life, he writ this Letter unto
her.

Lygdamors Letter to Silvia.
Madam,
THe loss of my life, had not been sufficient, to discover unto you the
rashness of your servant without your express command. If you conceive that
it was my duty to die and he silent, then you must consider that your fairest
eyes ought to have less power over me: for if at the very first summons, their
beauty forced me to surrender up my soul, what power is able to resist, when
they do peremptori ie command? Yet, if I have offended in offering my heart
unto your beauty; a thing of so poor a value, unto a Deity of so much merit, I
will in satisfaction of the fault, sacrifice my life unto you, and never so
much as grieve for the loss of it, since it displeased you.


This Letter was brought unto Silvia when she was alone in her chamber; but I
came in immediately after, and indeed, happily for poor Ligdamor. For observe
the humor of this Nymph; she conceived such a hatred against him ever since he
discovered his affection to her, as their former friendship is not only out of
mind: but she hates him: and is so careless of him, that when she hears any,
lamenting and desparing of his recovery, she is no more moved, then if she had
never seen him. I who particularly took notice of it, did not know what to
think unless that her youth might make her forget absent persons; but at this
time, when I saw her refuse the Letter which came from him, then I knew there
was some fallings out between them. Therefore I took up the Letter which she
refused, and which the boy who brought it, had by his Masters command left upon
the table; Silvia, less subtle then she might have been, ran after me and
desired me not to read it. I am resolved to see it (said I) though for no other
reason. but because you forbid it. Then she began to blush, and said, dear
sister, do not read it, I beseech you oblige me, and let it alone; I conjure
you to it by our friendship: what can the business be, (answered I) which you
thus conceal from me? Believe it, Silvia, if you use any dissimulations to
hide your matters from me, it will fill me so full of curiosity, as to
discover you. Why sister, (said she) may I not hope well in your discretion? No
more, said I, then I can in the sincerity of your affection.

After a long wrangling about this Letter, I made her swear to tell me all
upon condition of secrecy. Then she told me, what I have told you concerning
Ligdamor: and at this very hour, (said she) he troubles me with his Letters:
but what have I to do with his complaints, or rather dissimulations? Nay,
answered I, they are not dissimulations, but truths; Suppose they be, said
she, what have I to do with his follies? You are obliged, answered I, to help
such miserable men, as you have thrown down a precipice. What help can I
bring, said she? must I not live in the world? Why, is he where I am? Would you
have me run away when he comes in presence? Let him keep at home, and I shall
never trouble him. All these excuses, answered I, are of no validity; for
doubtless you are an accessory, if not a principal, in his misery: had you
fewer perfections; were you less amiable; did you not a use so much care in
your dress, believe it, he had never been brought to this extremity. Very
good, said she and laughed: you are very pleasant in charging me with these
faults: what would you have me to be, if you would not have me to be what I am?
Do you not know; Silvia, answered I that whosoever sharpens a sword in a mad
man's hand is culpable of all the harm he does? That beauty which the heavens
has bestowed upon you so liberally, has had a sharp edge set upon by you, so
as no eye can look upon it without a wound; may not you be justly taxed with
all the murders which your cruelty commits? Silvia you ought not to be so fair
and full of perfections, unless you study to make your self as good as you
are fair, and get as much sweetness into your soul, as heavens have put into
your face: but alas you are so far from healing, that you are full of nothing
but rigor and cruelty.

The reason why I was so passionate in defense of Ligdamor, was besides a
relation of kindred, never any knew him but loved him, and I had heard, unto
what a pitiful condition he was brought. Then after much discourse to this
purpose, I opened the Letter and read it aloud, that she might hear it. But it
had no more operation upon her, than upon a stone, which I much wondered at, and
perceived that I must use some violent remedies, which did induce me to tell
her, that whatsoever came on it, I would not have Ligdamor perish. Well Sister,
said she, since you are so pitiful, I may cure him. It is not upon me,
answered I, that his cure depends, but you; but I assure you, if you continue
toward him as formerly you have, I shall spite you with a very notable
displeasure. For Amisis shall know it and I will tell it to every one I meet.
In short, I Love Ligdamor, and will not see him dye, if I can hinder it. You
say very well, Leonida, (said she in a fret) these are the good offices I ever
expected from your friendship. My friendship, said she, shall be as much to you
as him, and shall be for you against him if he were in the wrong. Here we made
a long pause, and spoke not a word. At last I asked her what her resolution
was? What you will, said she, so you will not publish the follies of Ligdamor;
for though I cannot be charged with any crime yet I should be sorry, the
business should be divulged Oh Silvia, cried I out this is an excellent
humor; you are afraid it should be known, that a man Loves you but you are not
afraid to murder a man. Come, come look a little better on Ligdamor give him
as much hope, as may make him recover, then afterward use him as you please,
so you let him live* Write two lines of a little comfort to him. I had much
ado to obfaine this favor from her, yet I still did threaten to tell all, if
she did not; but after a long debate, she writ thus unto him.

Silvia's Answer unto Ligdamor.
Ligdamor,
IF there be any thing in you which can please me, it is your life most, and
your death least; the acknowledgment of your fault, has given me full
satisfaction; and I desire no other revenge for your presumption then the
pains you have endured. Beware for the time to come Adien, and Live.


And I writ these words at the bottom of her Letter, to the end he might hope
the more, having so good a second.

Leonida's Postcript in Silvia's Answer.
LEonida did put the pen into the hand of this Nymph: Love would have it so:
your justice did invite, me to it; her duty did exact it; but her obstinacy
made a strong resistance; this is the first favor I ever obtained for your
live to enjoy it, and hope well in the interim.


This Letter came very opportunely: for when he had hardly so much strength as
to read it, he found a command from Silvia, to live: and when he was resolved
never to use any more remedies, yet in obedience to this Nymph, he ordered
himself so, as in a short time he mended. But for all that, this fair piece of
cruelty was still as cold as ice toward him, when he was recovered: the most
favorable answer he ever could obtain from her was, I Love you not: neither
do I hate you: let this satisfy you, that of all those who serve me, you
displease me the least. When either he or I made any addresses to her, she gave
us such cruel language as is unimaginable by any but she, and insupportable to
any but Ligdamor.

But to abbreviate this discourse; Ligdamor loved her and courted her ever
since without any other appearance of hope, but what I have told you; till
Clidaman by Lot bebecame her servant: And had he not known by me, that Clidaman
fared no better then he in her affection, I know not what would have become of
him. But though this did a little comfort him, yet the grandeur of his rival
infused some fits of jealousy I remember, when once I told him, that he need
not fear Clidaman, he returned me this answer, Fair Nymph, said he, I will
ingeniously tell you, from whence my jealousy proceeds; and judge you whether
or no I am in the right. I have had such long experience of Silvia, as I must
needs know, that fidelity of affection nor extremity of Love will never move
her: so as doubtless such motives will never move her: yet as I have learned
from the reverend Adamas your Uncle, every one is subject unto some fatal
stroke, which they cannot avoid when they are once touched by it: what can I
imagine will subject this fair one, except it be grandeur and power? Therefore
I do fear, it is the fortune and not the merits of Clidaman will win her: his
grandeur and not his affection will carry her. But certainly, in this he was in
the wrong, for neither the Love of Ligdamor, nor the grandeur of Clidaman,
could ever move the least spark of goodwill in Silvia. I believe. Love reserves
her for an example unto others, intending to punish so much disdain by some
unaccustomed way. At this time, there chanced a very notable testimony of her
beauty; or at least, the power she had to make her self loved. Upon that
Festival, which every year was celebrated the sixth day of the Moon in July
on which Amasis was wont to offer a solemn sacrifice, as well by reason of the
feast, as because it was the birth day of Galathea, in the midst of the
sacrifice there came into the Temple, a number of men in the morning; amongst
them was one so full of noble Majesty as it was easy to imagine that he was
Master to the rest. He was so sad and melancholy, as it was evident something
did much afflict his soul. His habit was deep black trayling upon the ground,
which did eclipse the handsomeness of his proportion: his head was bare; his
hair fair and curling, as bright as Sun beams, which attracted the eyes of
every one upon him. He came up as far as the lowest step of the Throne, where
Amasis did sit; and after an humble reverence, he retired again waiting until
the sacrifice was ended: and whether to his good or bad fortune I know not, he
seated himself directly opposite unto Silvia. He no sooner cast his eyes upon
her but he knew her though he had never seen her before: but for more suerty,
he asked one of his servants who knew us all, who answered only with a deep
sigh: Afterward as long as the ceromony lasted, he never took his eyes off
her. At last the sacrifice being ended, Amasis returned to her Palace, where
when audience was permitted, him he spoke thus.

MADAM, Though the mourning you see in my habit, be much blacker in my soul;
yet it cannot equal the cause; but though my loss be extreme, yet I do not
think I am the only loser; for you Madam, from amongst your faithful
servants, are lessed of one, who perhaps was not the least affectionate nor the
most unprofitable in your service. This consideration gave me some hopes, of
obtaining a revenge of his death against the homicide: but as soon as ever I
entered into the Temple, I lost all my hopes, thinking that if the desire of
revenge did die in me, who am a Brother to the injured, it would sooner die in
you Madam, who have less relation to him. Yet because I see the arms of my
Brothers murderer already prepared against me, I shall as briefly as possible,
tell you the Fortune of him whom I mourn for.

Though Madam I never had the honor to be known unto you yet I am confident,
that at the name of my Brother, who never lived but in your service, you will
list me in the catalogue of your most devoted servants. His name was
Aristander, both of us Sons unto the great Clemir, who in your service did so
often visit Tiber, Reine, and Danube: I being the younger by nine years, as
soon as he saw me capable of bearing arms, he sent me into the Army of the
great Merovea, the delight of men, the most pleasing Prince, that ever came in
Gaul. I cannot well tell you why he rather sent me to Merovea, then to Thierry
King of the Visigots or to the King of the Burgundians. Yet I conceave his
reason was because I should not serve a Prince so near your Dominions, whom
Fortune might make your enemy. My fate was this; that Childerick his Son, a
warlike Prince and of great hopes, seeing me suitable with him in age, did most
particularly favor me with his affection, more then any other: when I came
first to him, it was then when the great and prudent Aetius did treat an
agreement with Merovea and the Frankes (for so he called all those who followed
him) to resist that fatal scourge of Heaven, Attilla King of the Hunnes, who
having gathered together in the deserts of Asia an uncredible number of men,
even five hundred thousand combatants, he descended like a Torrent, most
furiously ravaging all Countries through which he marched and though this
Aetius, the Lieutenant General of Valentinian in Gaul, came with an intention
of making war upon Merovea, who during the Government of Castinus had seized
upon part of Gaul; yet he thought it better to make him, the Visigots, and
Burgundians also his friends, rather then hazard a defeat by Attillas, who
having already passed Germany, was upon the banks of Rheyne where he stayed not
a long time, before he advanced into Gaul, and beseiged the Town of Orleans,
till the coming of Thierry King of the Visigotts, made him raise Seige, and
take another way. But being met with by Merovea and Aetius with their
confederates in the Cathalaunique fields, he was defeated, more by the valor
of the Franks and prudence of Merovea, then any other force. After Aetius was
slain, perhaps by his Masters command, upon some discontent, Merovea was
received at Paris, Orleans, and the neighboring Towns, as their Lord and
King: and all the people ever since, have borne him so much affection, as they
called themselves Franks, as more pleasing unto him: and their Country in lieu
of Gaul, took the name of France. Whilst I was employed in the arms of
France, the Gauls, the Romans, the Burgundians, the Visigotts and the Hunnes,
my Brother was employed in the Arms of Love; Arms the more dangerous because
all wounds light upon the heart: such was his disaster, that being brought up
with Clidema, he saw the fair Silvia: and in seeing her he saw his death also,
for he never was himself since. I never knew the cause of this; for being with
Childericke, I enjoyed all imaginable content, as being very gracious which my
Master, loved amongst all my equals, and generally honored of all, out of a
good opinion which they conceived of me in the present affairs; which got me
more credit and authority over them, then perhaps my age did merit: but
hearing of my Brothers languishing condition, I could not stay any longer with
Childericke; but taking my leave of him, and promising to return ere long, I
hasted to the place where my affection invited me: as soon as I came there,
many did run to tell my Brother that Guyamant was come: for so I am called:
when he heard it, his Love to me did give him so much feeble strength as to
rise up in his bed, and to embrace me with abundance of affection. It is to no
purpose, to trouble you Madam, and grieve my self, with a relation of all
particulars that passed betwixt us; only this, within two or three days after,
my Brother was in such extremity that he had hardly strength enough to breathe:
all he had was only sighs and groans, and nothing understood to come from him
but the name of Silvia. I being extremely perplexed at my Brothers sad
condition, was such an enemy unto this unknown Silvia, as I could not choose but
curse her: which my brother hearing, and his affection to her being above his
malady; he forced himself to say thus: unless Brother you will become my
enemy, cease these imprecations, I beseech you, which ttouble me more then all
my misery besides. What will they profit you further then to testify, that you
hate what I do Love? I know my death will grieve you; but since all men are
designed to the same, why rather do you not with me thank the fates who have
chosen so good a death for me, and the fairest murderer that ever any had? The
abundance of my affection, and the abundance of Silvias virtues, are the arms
which her beauty made use of, to bring me unto my grave: Can you curse her,
whose happiness I prefer before my own soul's? he would have said more but his
strength failed him: I answered him thus. Brother, she who thus will ravish you
from us, is the most unjust person that ever was: If she be fair, the gods
themselves are guilty of injustice in making her so, for they should have
changed either her face or her heart. Aristander hearing this, assumed more
strength and replied: for Heavens sake Guyamant, give over your blasphemy, and
believe that Silvias heart is suitable to her face. As the one is all beauty, so
the other is all virtue: if I die for Loving her, never wonder at it. As no eye
is able to gaze upon the Sun, so my soul is dazzled at the rays of so many Suns
as shine in this beauty: it is impossible to gaze upon so many Divinities and
live. Then said I unto him, Is it possible Brother; that one single Divinity
should be the cause of your death? Brother, answered he, I am in such extremity
as I am not able to answer your demand; but Brother (continued he, and took me
by the hand) I conjure you, by all that is sacred, to promise me one thing:
carry this kiss from me to Silvia, and then he kissed my hand: and when you
see that Nymph, tell her I bequeath you unto her: at this word he expired, and
lay cold in my arms.

My resentments of this loss is unimaginable by any but my self: but without
more condoling this disaster, let me tell you Madam, that as soon as my sorrow
would permit me, I came to render unto you the homage which is due, and to
demand Justice for the death of Aristander: also to present unto her, what he
left her by his last will in writing. But as soon as I presented my self
before you and would have accused the murderer, I found my Brothers words to be
true, and do not only excuse his death, but desire and require the same.

Here Madam, by your permission, will I make my address Then making an humble
reverence unto Amasis, he chose out Silvia, and kneeling unto her thus said:
Fair murderer, if but one poor tear of pity do but drop into that fair bosom
at the news of his death whom you conquered, your victory will be noble, and
entire; but if you think so little water too much for those flames which you
kindled in him, then at least receive a zealous kiss which he has sent you, or
rather his soul changed into this kiss, which he presents unto you. Upon this
he kissed her hand, and did rise up: then thus continued. Amongst the papers
where Aristander had left his last will we found this; and because it was
sealed and directed unto you, I have brought it with a protestation which by
his testament he commanded me to make unto you before you open it, that if it
be not your pleasure, to grant the request which he makes, then he beseeched
you not to read it, to the end in his death, as in his life, he may not resent
your cruelty: then he presented unto her a Letter, which Silvia had refused but
for the command of Amasis. I have hitherto, said Guyamant, fullfilled the last
will of Aristander: it remains that I prosecute against the murderer: but as
heretofore I have been obedient to my Brothers commands, so Love now commands
me to sacrifice my own liberty upon the same Altar which yet reekes with my
Brothers blood, who when he lived told me, that all eyes which ever looked upon
you did owe their hearts unto you as a just tribute; and that those men were
unworthy to live, which did not live in your service. Silvia a little ashamed
at this encounter, stood mute a long while and gave no answer: so that Amasis
took the Letter, and telling Guyamant that Silvia should return him an answer,
she took her aside, and breaking open the seal, she read these words.

Aristanders Letters unto Silvia.
THough my affection could never render my service pleasing unto you, nor my
service my affection: yet I hope, this affection will make you pity my death,
or else my death will assure you of my affections fidelity: And that, as never
any adored one of more perfection, so never any loved and adored with more
passion. The last testimony of it that ere I shall render unto you, shall be
the gift of that which, next your self, was most dear unto me, and that is my
Brother: for I am sure he is yours, since I have enjoined him to see you;
knowing very well by experience, that it is impossible to see and not to love
you. But fair Murderer, I beseech you, let him not inherit my fortune, but use
him kindly. He who writes this, is your dying servant, who having more Love to
you in his heart, then it is able to contain and live, will rather die then
diminish it.


Amasis calling Silvia to her, asked her what kind of strange cruelties she had
used toward Aristander, which had brought him to this extremity? The Nymph
with a blush answered, that she knew not wherein she had done him any wrong. I
would have you, said she, entertain Guyamant in his room. Then calling both
before her, she asked him whether he would follow his Brothers inclination: He
answered, yes with all his heart. Then said Amasis, I shell entreat this Nymph,
to admit you to his place and to use you, better then she did him. Guyamant,
after a very humble reverence unto Amasis, offered to kiss the hand of Silvia,
in sign of servitude: but she so slighted the declaration of his affection,
that unless Amasis had commanded her, she would never have looked upon him.

When every one began to retire, Clidaman returned from hunting, and was told
of this new servant unto his Mistress. Against which he made such loud
complaints, that Amasis and Guyamant did hear them: and since he could not
imagine how this should come about, she told him the whole business. When she
had done Clidaman complained more then before that she should suffer a thing so
much to his disadvantage, and told her that she revoked the decree of Fate
which his lot had given him, and which none should ever ravish from him and
live. This language proceeded from a heart full of affection, and was uttered
with a bundance of vehemence, for he did Love Silvia extremely. Guyamant, who
besides the edge which his new Love had put upon him, had so good an opinion of
himself as not to yield unto any', returned an answer, addressing his speech
unto Amasis. Madam, said he, it seems some would not have me to be a servant
unto the fair Silvia: but such are ignorant what Love is, otherwise they would
never think, that your ordinances, or the ordinances of all the gods together,
have power enough to divert the course of affection: And therefore I do openly
declare, that if any shall offer to forbid me that which is already permitted
me, I shall disobey and rebel: It is neither duty nor any other consideration
can make me change. Then turning toward Clidaman: as for you, Sir, I know what
respects I owe you, but withal, I know what power Love has over me: as the
destinies did give Silvia unto you, so her beauty did give me unto her: Judge
you whether of these gifts ought to be most pleasing unto her. Clidaman would
have replied, but Amasis interiupted him. Son, said she, you have no reason
to complain, unless our ordinances were altered: you were commanded to serve
Silvia, but others were not forbidden to do the same. Smells are most
odoriferous, when stirred; and a Lover having Rivals has more testimonie's of
his merit. Thus Amasis, ordained that both of them should serve her. And thus
is Silvia well stored of servants, for Guyamant dressed up his affection in the
best trim, and Clidaman in envy of him, did study how to outvie him in
courtship. Ligdamon, he served her with so much discretion and respect, that,
least others should take notice of his affection, he durst seldom come near
her: and in my opinion his courtship was much more pleasing then any of the
rest; but once, believe it, he was almost past all his patience. It happened that
Amasis had a bodkin in her hand, which was made in the fashion of a sword, and
which Silvia was wont to wear in her hair; and Clidaman being near her, she
gave it unto him to carry unto his Mistress: but he kept it all the day,
purposely to vex Guyamant, never so much as dreaming upon Ligdamon: but see how
one may wound one for another: the poison which was prepared for Guyamant, did
so nearly reach the heart of Ligdamon, that not being able to dissemble he
retired to his lodging, where after he had a while venomed himself by his own
thoughts, he took pen and writ these verses.

Upon the Sword of Silvia, in the hands of Clidaman.
Love like a Traitor does me treat, and with a murdering sword,
Has given me a sad defeat in her whom I adored.
But justly too, I needs must say, for being never able,
My do^^ of services to pay, which were innumerable.
He takes a sword and does me strike, and all my hopes does smother,
And cunningly he uses me, more like a Soldier then a Lover.
At the lower end of these verses, he added these words.

I cannot choose, fair Leonida, but resemble Silvia to the Sun; which
indifferently does shine upon the most vile things as well as upon the most
Noble.

He himself brought me this coppie: I read it; but though I studied, yet for my
life I could not understand it: nordraw any thing from it, unless that Silvia
had given him a great blow with a sword, but he left me and went away the most
lost and undone man alive. Thus you see what a cunning cutter Love is, who with
such trifling Arms, can make such deep wounds. He vexed me to see him in this
condition, and to enquire further of things I went unto Silvia; but she
protested that she knew not what they meant. At last after a reading of these
verses two or three times, she lifted up her hand to her head, and finding her
bodkin not there, she begun to laugh and say her bodkin was lost, that some or
other had found it, and that Ligdamon knew of it: She had no sooner said so,
but Clidaman came into the Hall with this murdering sword in his hand. I
entreated her to let him have it no longer: I will first try his discretion,
said she, afterward, I will use all the power I have with him. She was as good
as her word, for as soon as he came, she said unto him. This sword is mine. He
answered, so Madam is he that has it. I would have it, said she. I wish with
all my soul said he, you would have all that's yours. Will you not restore it
(said the Nymph) how can I will any thing, replied ^e, since I have no will at
all? What have you done with that which you had (said she)? You Madam have
ravished it from me (said he) and at this very minute it is changed into yours.
Since it is so (said she) that your will is mine, you must restore the bodkin,
because my will is so. Since I would the some that you would (said he) it must
of necessity follow that I would have it also. Silvia smiled a little, but at
last she said, I would have you give it me. I also, said he, would have you
give it me. Then the Nymph put out her hand and took it. I will never deny you
(said he) though you would have me and all. Thus Silvia received her sword, and
I writ this Note unto Ligdamon.

Leonida's Letter unto Ligdamon.
Ligdamon,
THat which you thought to be a favor conferred upon your Rival, was only
ravished, and when the owner know of it, she took it from him again. Judge
you, how things are; the favors which your Rival has, proceed from
ignorance, and his disfavours from deliberation.


Thus was Ligdamon cured, not by the same hand, but by the same sword which
wounded him. In the mean time, Guyamants affection grew to this height, as it
was little short of Aristanders. On the other side, Ligdamon, under the color
of Complement, did suffer a most passion at Love, to plant it self in his
soul. After that both of them had vyed which should most please Silvia, and
found that she did equally favor and frown upon them both, they resolved one
day to try which of them was most in favor, and to that end, they both came to
Silvia, from whom they both received such cold answers, that the controversy
could not be decided. Then by the counsel of a Druide who was grieved to
seetwosuch men, unprofitably lose that time which might better be spent in
defense of their countries, they went unto the Fountain of the verity of Love.
You know, what the property of that water is, and how it discovers the most
secret thoughts of Lovers: for he who looks into it, shall there see his
Mistress, and if she Love him he shall see himself by her: but if she Love
another, then that other shall appear. Clidaman was the first which presented
himself before this Fountain: he kneeled down upon the ground; kissed the
side of the Fountain; and after he had implored the Angel of the place to be
favorable unto him, he leaned a little over: immediately Silvia was seen, so
admirably fair, that the transported Lover could not choose but stoop to kiss
her hand: but his contentment was soon cooled when he saw no body by her. He
retired with a perplexed mind, and after a discontented pause, he beckned unto
Guyamant to come and try his fortune. He, having with all requisite ceremonies
prayed unto the Dietie of the place, did cast his eye upon the Fountain, but he
fared no better then Clidaman; for Silvia alone appeared, and with her fair
eyes seemed to burn the water. Both of them much amazed at the matter, they
went to a Druide who was highly versed in Magique and asked the cause. He
answered, that the reason was because Silvia loved neither of them, nor any
else, as being capable of burning others but not of burning, herself. They who
could not believe themselves to be so much out of favor, as they looked
severally before, so now they would return and look in the water both
together: and though both of them leand over on several sides, yet the Nymph
appeared alone. The Druide saw them retire, and smiled, telling them that they
might certainly believe themselves not loved for said he, you must know that as
all other waters do represent the body, this represents the spirits. Now the
spirit, which is only the will, the memory, and the judgment, when it loves,
is transformed into the thing loved. And therefore when you present your self
here, it receives the figure of your spirit, and not of your body, and your
spirit being changed into Silvia, it represents Silvia, and not you. If Silvia
loved you, she would have been changed as well into you, as you into her, and
so representing your spirit you should see Silvia, and seeing Silvia changed by
Love, as I told you, you should see your selves also. Clidaman listened very
attentively unto this discourse, and considering that the conclusion was an
assurance of that which he most feared, he drew his sword and struck two or
three times as hard as he could upon the Marble of the Fountain. His sword
broke in two, and left no impression, or signs of his blows but still striving
to break the stone, like an angry dog, which bites the stone which is thrown
at him, the Druide told him that he lost his labor, for the enchantment of the
place would never end by force, but by extremity of love but if he would make
it useless, he could inform him of a way. Clidaman had brought up for rarity
in great Iron Cages, two Lions, and two Unicornes, which he often baited with
several sorts of Animals: These the Druide begged for guards of the Fountain,
and so enchanted them, a^, though they ran at liberty, yet they would never
go from the entrance into the grate, nor will they ever offer any hurt, unless
to such as will attempt upon the Fountain; but such as will be so adventurous,
they assault with extreme fury; for, the Lions are so great and terrible, their
Claws so long and sharp, they are so nimble and active, and so unimated unto
this defense, as is incredible. Again, the Unicomes have Horns so sharp and
strong, as they will pierce the hardest Rock, and do thrust with such force and
nimblenesse as none can escape them. As Soon as this guard was placed, Clidaman
and Guyamant went to travel, and departed so secretly, that neither Amasis nor
Silvia knew of it, until they were gotten a great way from them. They went
into Merovea and Childerick; for, finding themselves equally treated by Love,
they would try whether Arms also would be equally favorable unto them. Thus,
courteous shepherd, have we lost the benefit of this Fountain, which did so
well discover all Juglers in love, as if all had been like Ligdamon, it had
never been lost. When I heard that Clidaman and Guyamans intended to go
thither, I advised him to make a third, assuring my self, that he would find
most favor; but, he made me this answer, Fair Leonida, said he, such as are in
doubt of their good or bad Fate, may sometimes hatard the enquitie; but, it
were most gross folly for such, as have not the least spark of any hope, to
search for that, which they would most unwillingly find. For my part, I am in
no doubt whether Silvia do love me or no; alas, I am too well assured of it:
And when I desire to know more, I will never make inquiry of any, but her eyes
and actions. However, his love was still the same, and Heavens knows, how
cruelly this rigorous piece of Cruelty it self has ever used him: the time's
to come, when ever she looked upon him without disdam and severitie. For my
part, I wondered at his patience, for all her actions toward him, are rather
injuries then severities.

One day when he met her walking with me, I entreated him to sing; and having
an excellent voice, he sung these lines.

A Song upon Desire.
WHat pain is this that I endure,
Which does resemble fires,
And will not let me find a cure?
Oh! it is most hot desires,
Which to Superlatives aspires.
These hot desires did first proceed
From hope, I should obtain:
But now, alas, my hopes are dead;
Yet, still desires remain,
And swells my widdowed soul with pain.
But why should fond desires strive,
And beat the Air in vain,
Since now there is no hopes alive,
Their ends e're to obtain?
The reason for it is most plain.
For since from virtue you proceed,
Which recompense does scorn,
Though hope be quite decayed and dead;
Yet you are not for lorn,
But live, and love, and sigh, and mourn.
He had no sooner ended, but Silvia replied, and said, Ligdamon, since I am not
the cause of your misery, why should you lay any blame upon me? I see you do
accuse your own vain desires, and indeed, it is they only which torment you.
The passionate Ligdamon answered, That it was true indeed; it was desire which
tormented him; but, it was not that which ought to be blamed: it was that which
caused it, which was the virtues and perfections of Silvia. If desires, replied
she, be not irregular and extravagant, they will not torment; but if they be so
unruly, as to transport beyond reason, then they must needs be but Bastards and
not the legitimate children of virtue, and are so unlike such a mother, that
they do nothing resemble her. All extreme desires, Madam, (answered Ligdamon)
are not against reason and virtue; for all excellencies and goodness, may with
reason be extremely desired; Beauty, amongst other excellencies, may, with
reason, be extremely and passionately loved: for, it cannot be said to be
against reason, but above it. This is a very nice distinction, (replied this
cruel fair one) and I will never allow of any thing, either against or above
reason. Then, to take away the opportunity of reply, she went away unto one of
her Companions which followed. Upon a time, when Amasis returned from Mount
Brison, where the finenesse of the Gardens, and solitude together, had stayed
her longer then she intended, night did surprise us in our return to Marcelles;
and the night being very cold, I went unto him, purposely to make him talk
before his Mistress, and asked him, if he were not very sensible of the chill
evening? To which he answered, that neither heat nor cold could do him much
hurt: And asking him why, and what antidote he had against it? he answered,
that to the one he opposed his burning desires, and to the other his cold
hopes. If it be so, replied I, how comes it to pass I should so often hear you
say, that sometimes you burn with heat, and sometimes freeze with cold? Ah!
fair Nymph, answered he with a deep sigh, my disease is not out wardly, but all
within, and that so deep, that there is not a corner of my soul, but sadly
resents it. And you must know, that in any other person, heat and cold are
inconsistent together: But I have in my heart a flaming fire, and also chill
ice, and I only, the gods do know, do feel the torments of it.

Silvia all this while was silent, and used none of her accustomed cruelties;
but at last, seeing him turn toward me, and sigh, she also turned, and in a
merry manner, and disdainful, thus she said: Oh! what a happy man is Ligdamon,
that can command both heat and cold when he pleases? or, at least, neither of
them ever troubles him; for, if the coldness of his hopes do freeze, his hot
desires can cause a thaw; and, if his hot desires do burn him, he can freeze
them up with a few cold hopes. It is but necessary, fair Silvia, (said
Ligdamon) that I should use these remedies to keep me alive; otherwise, I
should live but a little; but alas, the Gods do know they are but poor
comforts. Nay, nay replied the Nymph, you can make your disease just as you
would have it, either hot or cold. Truly Madam, answered Ligdamon, to scorch
and freez both at once, is none of the least miracles which proceed from you;
but, the greater wonder is, that my heat should proceed out of your ice, and
your ice proceed out of my heat. Nay Ligdamon replied the Nymph, the greatest
wonder of all is, that a man, who has the reputation of rational, should have
such idle imaginations, and think such impossibilities, as whosoever should
credit them, may be taxed with want of as much judgment, as you of wit or
truth. I do confess, Madam, said he, that my imagination does conceive many
impossibilities; but, the cause of it is, either my too much affection, or your
too much cruelty, or both. And as this is not one of your I ast effects, so
this, wherewith you upbraid me, is not one of my least torments. I believe,
answered she, that your torments and my effects lie most in your tongue. It Is
very hard, Madam, for the tongue to express well, that which is not well
resented, answered Ligdamon. It Is very hard, replied the Nymph, to understand
all the vain Ideas of an idle and a brainsick fancy. If truth, said Ligdamon,
did not accompany this imagination, then should I stand less in need of your
compassion. No, no, answered the Nymph, men do build their trophies too much
over the compassion of us women. Had it not been better said, Madam, answered
he, That women do build their Trophies too much over our ruins? I never saw
any yet so ruined, replied Silvia, but like you, they will quickly recover.

The more of this Nymphs cruelties, and Ligdamon's patiences, I do relate, the
faster they come into my memory. When Clidaman, as I told you before, was to
travel, Amasis would have the greatest part of the young Gallantry in this
Country, to go along with him under the conduct of Lindamour: amongst the rest
Ligdamon, being a most accomplished Caveliere, he was not omitted: But this
cruel Mistrisse would not so much as daigne him an Adien; but feigned her self
sick. Yet he would by some meants or other first let her know of it, and
thereup on writ these verses unto me.

Upon a Departure.
Since Love will have me live and die
Within his scorching flames; then why
Should I thus fatally depart
From her that solely has my heart?
I answered him.
The reason of it is, fond Boy,
That thou may find a fuller joy:
Do thou not know the Phoenix came
From Ashes, when he dyed in flame?
He had thought himself very happy in this answer: but this cruel one,
finding me writing this, and being unwilling to do him any good or suffer
another; she snatched away the paper by force out of my hand, telling me, that
these flatteries wherewith I fed Ligdamon, did make him so full of folly; and
that he had more reason to complain against me then her: Then she writ thus
unto him.

Silvia's answer.
The Phoenix from the Ashes came,
But first he died in the flame;
If Presence ineffectnall prove
Absence will never conquer Love:
Ice will not thaw by cold, when heat
No conquest over it cold get.
You may imagine with how much contentment he departed; it was a kind of
happiness to him, that he had been so long beforehand accustomed to such blows:
and that he remembered this Maxim, that the disfavours of a Mistress, must often
pass for favors: I well remember that upon this discourse he thought himself
the happiest lover in the world, imagining that the disfavours of Silvia, were
arguments that she held him in her memory, that she took him to be her
servant; and that since she did not treat all the rest of her servants in the
like measure, it was to be thought that this was the coin in which she paid
such as she esteemed hers; and therefore he ought to cherish it, since it had
her stamp upon it, and upon this subject he sent me these Lines.

A Sonnet.
My Sovereign beauty does intend to try,
The height and depth of my fidelity
By things impossible and far above
Performances of any human Love:
And well; since she will ha'te so, I Am content.
For so she will see the bottomless extent
Of my affection; which is like a Well
That with unfathomable waters swell:
The more she strives to pumpe and draw me dry,
The more she will see my Loves eternity,
The Fountainwhence I draw affection
Is her fair self and her perfection.
Then try me, fairest, to eternity,
The more you will find I Love, the more you try.
Leonida had continued her discourse, had she not seen Galathea coming, who
after she had been by her self alone a long while, and not being able any
longer to be out of her shepherds sight, she dressed her self to as much
advantage as her glass could advise her, and so came without any other company
but the little Merill: she was very fair, and worthy to be beloved of any whose
heart was not forestalled by another affection. At this very time, Celadons
stomach began to be very ill, so as they were all constrained to retire, and
the shepherd went to bed, which he kept a long time, as being neither very
sick, nor very well.

Galathea, who in good earnest was in love, as long as Celadon's sickness
lasted, she scareely stirred from his bed; and when she was constrained to go
away, either to rest her self, or do any other business, she left Leonida with
him, and charged her to take all occasions, of letting the shepherd know her
good will toward him; thinking by this means to infuse such hopes in him, as
his quality might perhaps forbid him: And certainly Leonida did not fail her;
for, though she wished with all her heart, that Lindamor might thrive in his
desires; yet, since the hopes of her advancement depended wholly upon Galathea,
her design was wholly to please and comply with her. But Love, which often
uses to make himself merry at the prudence of Lovers, and is pleased to
thwart their intentions, did make Leonida, by the conversation of this
shepherd, to stand more in need of one to speak for her, then she to speak for
another. The shepherd quickly perceived it: But his affection to Astrea, for
all her harshnesse, would not permit him to suffer this growing affection with
patience. This was the reason that he resolved to take his leave of Galathea,
as soon as he began to be a little better.

But as soon as ever he mentioned any such offer: How Celadon? (said she unto
him) has your entertainment by me been so bad, that you would be gone before
you be recovered? And when he answered, That it was, because he was troublesome
to her, and because of some business of her own, also to assure his Parents
and friends of his health; and therefore he desired to return home unto his own
Village; Then she interrupted him, saying, No, no, Celadon, never fear any
troubling of me; and as for your business and friends, it is no matter; me
thinks your greatest business should be, to satisfy your obligations unto me;
and it will be high ingratitude in you, not to spend each minute of that life
which you hold of me, in my service; besides, you must not for the time to
come, cast your eyes upon so low a thing as your life past: You must leave your
Village and your Flocks to such as want those merits which you have; and for
the future, look upon me, who can and will recompense you, to the height, if
your actions do not take away my good will unto you.

Though the shepherd seemed, as if he did not understand the meaning of this
language, yet he did; and therefore he avoided talking with her in private as
much as possibly he could; and he did so much disgust this kind of life, that
being one day almost out of all patience, when Leonida heard him sigh, she
asked him the reason, since he was in a place, where nothing was more studied
then his contentment? Fair Nymph, answered he, amongst all the miserable
wretches of Fortune, I may profess my self the most coorsly treated; for
others may grieve, and enjoy so much comfort as to complain, but this is denied
me, for my misery is shadowed with a Mask of happiness; and therefore, in lieu
of pity, I am rather blamed and taxed for a man of shallow judgment: But if
you and Galathea knew, what bitter wormwood I do meet (...) in this place
(happy truly unto all but me) I am confident you would bestow some pity upon
my life. What is it you would have, said she, that will comfort you? Nothing,
(...) he, unless you will get me leave to depart. Would you have me solicit
Galathea for it, (said she)? I beseech you do it, (said he) and I conjure you
to it by that which you most love. That then must be your self, (said the
Nymph, and blushed). And so she went out of the Chamber to seek Galathea, whom
she found alone in the Garden, and who already began to suspect, that Leonida
was in love with him, conceiving that she had not made any progress in the
charge which she gave her, though she seldom or never stirred from him: Also
knowing very well, how charming the shepheard's beauty was, she imagined, that
he might as well wound two as one; yet, being constrained to carry fair with
her, she continued her usual affability; and seeing her come toward her, she
enquired of her how the shepherd did: As they were walking together, Galathea
turned her self toward Leonida, and said, Well Leonida, tell me, was there
ever such a piece of insensibilitie as Celadon, since neither my behavior, nor
your persuasions, will work with him? I cannot tell what to think of him. For
my part answered Leonida, I rather think him of a mean spirit, and wants
judgment than one that wants apprehension, he wants courage to pretend so high:
Your perfections and favors cannot raise his thoughts so high, but the
poorness of his merits and quality does more deject him; and no wonder, Vines
will bear Grapes, and Oaks Acornes, every thing will produce according to its
nature. Can you imagine, that the courage of a Country Clown can produce any
designs, but such as proceed from a base and Pesantique spirit? I do believe
(answered Galathea) that the great difference between our qualities may beget a
great respect in him; but, I cannot think him so dully ignorant, as not to
understand unto what end I treat him so kindly: the greater fear is, that he is
already so far engaged to Astrea, that he cannot retire. Assure your self,
Madam, replied Leonda, it is nothing but a sottish ignorance in him: I do
believe as you do, that he loves Astreat but if he had any Judgment, he would
slight her for you, who beyond all degrees of comparison does merit more then
she. And yet he is so sencelesly simple that whenever I speak of you, he
answers me with his sorrows for being so far from Astrea, and thinks his
being here, no better then a torment. This very morning hearing him sigh, I
asked him the reason, and he made me such an answer as would have moved stones
to pity him: and the conclusion of all was, that I would be a Mediator unto
you for his departure. Come come Leonida, (replied Galathea, even red again
with anger, and unable to dissemble her jealousy) confess the truth: has he
not moved you? Yes Madam (answered she) he has moved me to pity him and me
thinks, since he has such an extreme desire to go you ought not to keep him by
force for Love is never whipped into a heart. I do not mean a matter of pity
(replied Galathea) but it is no matter; perhaps when he is well recovered, he
shall feel the effects of that anger which he has infused into me, as soon
as those effects of Love which he has infused into you: mean time let me tell
you, he shall not go from hence, when he, but when I will: as for you Leonida,
(continued she) content you that I say no more only be gone I care not for your
company now you know my mind. Thus Leonida was put to silence, and forced to go
away, taking this affront so to heart, that she resolved to go unto Adamas her
Uncle, and never have any more to do with Galatheas secrets. Galathea, at the
same time called for Silvia who was walking alone in another Alley. Unto whom,
contrary to her design, she imparted that which she had so closely concealed
from her* and complained against Leonida. But Silvia, though young yet full of
discretion, did endeavor to excuse Leonida all she could; apprehending very
wisely, that if her companion should be angry, and things come to be known,
they would prove very scandalous unto her Mistrisse. And therefore after many
other passages she said thus unto her. You know Madam that you never opened any
thing of this business unto me; and yet I can tell you so many particulars, as
you shall see I was not altogether so ignorant as I seemed. But such is my
humor, that I never could endure to meddle in matters, unto which I am not
called. But perceiving my companion so assiduous about Celadon, I suspected
that Love might be the cause, more then her compassion upon his malady; and
because it was a business which nearly concerned us all, I resolved before I
spoke any more of it, to be a little better assured, and therefore began to
observe her actions more narrowly then I was accustomed; so as I got behind the
shepherds bed whilst he was a sleep, and presently Leonida entered, who making a
little noise, did waken him: then after much common discourse, she began to
talk of his affection unto the shepherdess Astrea, and of hers to him: but
believe me shepherd (said she) Astreas Love is nothing in comparison of
Galatheas unto you. To me? (said he) Yes to you (replied Leonida) you need not
wonder so at it, for you know how often I have told you so though all the
language I have, cannot set forth the magnitude of it. Fair Nymph, (answered
the shepherd) I neither can merit nor believe, so great an honor unto me. For
what can her design be upon poor me, who am a silly shepherd and will both
live and die so? Your birth (replied my companion) must needs be noble, since
you are owner of so many excellent qualities and perfections. Oh Leonida
(answered the shepherd then) I cannot choose but think you Jeere me: can you
think me so ignorant as not to know who Galathea is, and who I am 'Certainly,
fair Nymph I know, better then so how to measure the meanness of my quality
with the grandeur of her merits: with the measure of duty: Oh shepherd
(answered Leonida) do you think that Love uses the same measures that men do?
No no, measures are used by such as use to buy and sellt gifts are never
measured, and Love being nothing else but a mere gift, is never conferred by
measures: never make any question of this truth; but not to fail in your duty,
pay unto her as much Love and affection as she bestows upon you. I do profess
Madam, that till now, I thought Leonida had spoken for her self, and her
discourse astonished me: but seeing with how much discretion your actions are
managed, I did much commend the power you have over them; knowing, that it is a
thing of greater difficulty to command ones self, then another. Sweet heart,
(answered Galathea) did you but know, how I stand in need of Celadon's amity,
you would commend and advise me unto this design: For, do you remember the
Druide who told us our Fortunes? Yes, Madam, answered she, my memory is not so
bad, as to forget a thing of so late an age. Then you remember (continued
Galathea) how many truths he did foretell, both unto you and Leonida; and how
he assured me, that if I married any other then Celadon, I should be the most
miserable person upon earth: Now since our own experience may well make us
credit what he foretells, why should I slight a business which so nearly
concerties me? And therefore I take it very ill from Leonida, that she should
offer to supplant me. Madam, answered Silvia, I would advise you not to vex her
too much, lest she should be provoked to make a discovery of the business.
Friend, answered Galathea (and embraced her) I do apprehend your advice to be
both faithful and good, and therefore promise you, to carry my self toward
Leonida according to your counsel. Whilst they were thus discoursing, Leonida
went to Celadon, unto whom she related word for word, all the discourse betwixt
Galathea and her; and told him, that though the place where he was, seemed to
be a place of freedom, yet, the truth was, it was no better then a Prison:
Which news did so pierce him to the heart, that he fell into a Feavour, and in
such a violent degree, that Galathea coming to see him, and finding him so much
impaired, she began to doubt his life, especially the next day, when he
swounded two or three times in their arms: And though these Nymphs did
continually watch with him without any rest, but interrupted slumbers, yet was
he but very ill attended, there being in that place no manner of Medicines for
one that was sick, nor durst they send abroad for any, lest the matter should
come to a discovery; so as the Shepherd did run a hazard of his life, insomuch
as one evening the Nymphs gave him for dead: But at last he returned to
himself, and after an excessive bleeding, he took a little rest; and therefore
the Nymphs left him alone with Merill: And being retired, Silvia much
affrighted at this accident, addressed her self unto Galathea, and said,
Madam, we shall all be brought into strange confusion, unless you take some
order; in what a case would you be in, if this Shepherd should die in your
hands, for want of help? Alas, answered she, I have considered all this, ever
since his disease increased; but what remedy is there? We are here destitute
of all necessaries for him, and as for getting them from other places, for my
life I dare not, for fear of discovery. Leonida, whose affection made her speak
more resolutely then Silvia, said thus unto her; Madam, those fears are very
good, so far as they do not concern the life of a man. Suppose this shepherd
should die, can any imagine his death can be kept without discovery? the
Heavens themselves, as a punishment, will at last lay all open. But, take every
thing at the worst, and suppose it were known that this shepherd were here,
cannot you cover your act with a mask of compassion? If you will be pleased to
trust me with the whole business, I will manage it so, as none shall ever know
it: For Madam, I have an Uncle in this Country, Adamas, the chief of the
Druides, as you know very well: No secret in Nature, or virtue in any Plant, is
hid from him; he is a man full of wisdom and discretion, and I know, he has a
particular inclination to do you service; if you will employ him in the
business, I am confident, that all things will succeed according to your wish.
Silvia apprehending this to be the best expedient and conceiving that by the
means of the grave Adamas, Galathea might perhaps be diverted from her thoughts
of this shepherd; she advised her unto it as the safest course: Unto which
Galathea, for want of another, consented. Then Madam (said Leonida) to the end
I may keep within the compass of your commands, I beseech you tell me what is
your pleasure I should say, or conceal, from Adamas? Silvia seeing Galathea
stand mute, answered, That the only way to move him unto secresy, was, to seem
as if he were wholly trusted in the business; for nothing will sooner make a
secret come out, then mistrust: so as I conceive the way to charm Adamas unto
privacy, is, to acquaint him before he comes with every thing, that he may
discover when he is here. I am so much besides my self, said Galathea, that I
know not what to say, and therefore I refer the whole business unto your
discretions. Thus Leonida departed, with intention, though the night was very
dark at first, not to stop, until she came at her Uncles, whose house was on
the side of Marcelles Mountain, toward the Vestalls and Druides of Laigneau;
but her journey proved longer then she expected, for when she came at the break
of day unto the house of Adamas, she found that he was gone to Feurs, and would
not return, until three days, thence; and therefore after half an hours
rest, she went away; yet, so weary, that had she not been very zealous of her
shepheard's cure, she would have stayed until the return of Adamas: but, after
she had gone a mile of her way, she spied afar off in the same way a Nymph all
alone, whom a little after she knew to be Silvia: This encounter put her into a
sad perplexity, fearing that Silvia brought the news of Celadon's death; but
it proved quite the contrary, for she brought news, that since her departure
he had rested very well, and that the Fever had left him; therefore Galathea
had sent her, to give a stop unto her proceedings, and to tell her, that since
the shepherd was in so good a condition, there was no need of bringing Adamas,
or discovering the business unto him. It is easily imagined, how glad Lemida
was of this news; and after her thanks to Heaven, she said thus unto her
Companion, Sister, I understand, that Galathea has acquainted you with her
design upon this shepherd, and therefore in all freedom of language I will
tell you, that this kind of life does infinitely displease me, and that I
think it dishonorable both for her and us: for she is so passionately
humorous, that upon every distaste this shepherd shall give her, she will be
half distracted; and builds so much upon the predictions of the Druide, as she
thinks all her happiness depends upon loving him: Also, as all Lovers do, she
thinks him so lovely, as she believes every one does the like, as if all did
look upon him with the same eyes she does and that is my grief, for she is
grown so jealous of me, that she cannot endure I should come near him. Now
Sister, if this kind of life come once to be known, as questionless it will;
since nothing is so secret, but at last is discovered, judge you how the world
will censure us: I, for my part, have used all possible arguments to divert
from it, but all in vain. The scope of all this my discourse is, that I do
think very fit to find out some good remedy, and that I can conceive no
better expedient, then the interposition and mediation of my Uncle, who by his
prudence and good counsel, may happily do some good upon her. Sister, answered
Silvia I do extremely like your advice and that you may have more time to bring
Adamas unto her, I will return, and tell her, that I have been at the house of
Adamas; but found neither him nor you. It Is very well, replied Leonida, and it
will not be amiss, if we go and rest our selves under some hedge, that it may
seem as if you had been longer seeking me: Also, to tell you truly, I am so
tired that if I will get to my journeyes end, I must sleep a little. Come then
(said Silvia) and believe, it is a good work for your self, if you can get
Celadon from amongst us; for I do foresee by Galathea's humor, that his stay
here in a little time may cause you a great deal of displeasure. And so looking
about for a convenient place, where they might pass away part of the day, they
spied a place on the other side of Lignon, which seemed to be very fit for that
purpose; so as passing over at the Bridge of Botereux, and leaving Bonlieu, the
house of the Vestalls and Druides, on the left hand, and walking down the
River, they came to a handsome thicket of wood, where they both slept together.
As they were thus reposing themselves, Astrea, Diana, and Phillis did
accidentally drive their flocks unto the same place; and never seeing the
Nymphs, they sat down by them. And as that friendship which reseth out of
adversity, is often more firm, then that of prosperity; so Diana had
contracted a most firm league with Astrea and Phillis, since the disaster of
Celadon; and such a correspondency was grown between them, that they were every
day together. And certainly Astrea stood in need of all consolation, for almost
at one and the same time, she lost Alces her Father Hippolita her Mother;
Hippolita died of a fright, when she heard that Astrea was fallen into the
water: and Alces dyed for grief, at the loss of his deer Wife: But, these
losses were a kind of comfort unto her; for under the umbrage of mourning for
her Father and Mother, she could lament the loss of Celadon. Now as I told you
before, Diana, the Daughter of prudent Belinda, to perform the rites of
neighborhood, did go often unto Astrea, and found her humors so pleasing, and
she hers, and Phillis both, that they vowed eternal friendship, and never
since could separate. This was the first day Astrea came out of her Chamber
since her sad disasters; and she was no sooner set down, but she espied Semires
coming toward her. This shepherd had been long in love with Astrea, and
knowing that she loved Celadon, he caused this sedition betwixt them,
conceiving, that if he could once get rid of Celadon, then he should with ease
step into his steed: And now he came unto her, in hopes to advance his design,
but he was much mistaken: for Astrea having smelt out his subtletie, she
conceived such an inveterate hatred against him, that as soon as she saw him,
she put her hand before her eyes, as unwilling to look upon such a base
impostor, and desired Phillis to go and tell him from her, that she could not
endure his company: These words were pronounced with so much vehemence, as her
companions plainly perceived her great animositie against him, which made
Phillis more hasty in running toward this shepherd. When he heard this
message, he was so Planet-struck, as he seemed absolutely immovable: At last
being conscious, and stung with the bitter sense of his own error, he said
unto her, Discreet Phillis, I must needs ingenuously confess, that the heavens
are most just, in punishing a heart with more grief, then it is able to
endure; I cannot choose but sadly say, that the chastisement cannot equal the
offense, since I have destroyed the most perfect league of friendship that ever
was. But, to the end the gods may stop their vengeance, I beseech you tell that
fair shepherdess, I most cordially beg a pardon, both from her, and the ashes
of Celadon; and assure her, that the extreme affection which I bore unto her,
was the only cause of my fault: But, I will go, and all my life long lament I
have offended her, and those fair eyes which are so justly incensed against me.
After these words he went away, so dismally dejected, that his repentance moved
some pity in the heart of Phillis; who being returned to her companions,
related all his answer unto them. Alas, alas, dear Sister, said Astrea, what
sad cause have I to fly from this fatal villain? for it is he, he only, that
is the cause of all my misery. How Sister (said she) Semires the cause? has he
had such power over you? If I durst relate his villainy, and my own simplicity
(said Astrea) I should tell you, that he has used the most cunning artifice,
that ever any subtle wit could invent. Diana believing, that it was by reason
of her, that she would not speak more clearly unto Phillis, since their
familiarity was not above seven or eight days old, she turned toward the sad
Astrea, and said, Fair Shepherdess, you will give me occasion to think you do
not love me, if you use less freedom toward me then toward Phillis; for,
though I have not been so long happy in your acquaintance as she has, yet, you
may be as confident of my affection as of hers. Phillis then answered, I assure
my self, that Astrea does speak as freely before you, as to her own self, for
she cannot be half a friend; and since amity is vowed betwixt your, I believe
she will open the very closset of her heart unto you. Most certainly I will
(said Astrea) but the reason why I would speak no more of that sad business,
was only, because I would not too much vex a wound, with too much rubbing upon
it. If that be all, replied Diana, I should think, that free imparting a misery
unto a friend, is half the cure; and if I durst use so much free boldness, as
to desire it, nothing would give me greater satisfaction, then to know the
History of your life; which in requital, I will repay with a relation of my
own, whenever you shall command it. Since it is your desire, replied Astrea,
I shall make you a sharer in my miserable story; but with much brevitie,
unless it were fuller of good fortune then it is: So all three sitting round,
she thus began.

The History of Astrea and Phillis.
THose who are of opinion, that loves and hates do hereditarilie descend from
Father to Son, did they but know what has been Celadons Fortune and mine,
doubtless would confess themselves mistaken. For, Fair Diana, perhaps you
have heard of the implacable emnitie that was between Alces and Hippolyta, my
Father and Mother; and Alcippes and Amarillis, the Father and Mother of
Celadon, and how their hatred accompanied them to their graves, which have
caused abundance of trouble amongst the shepherds of this Country, insomuch as
I believe, few or none about the fatal River of Lignon are ignorant of it: and
yet Love, to show the greatness of his power, did unite two of these
enemy-families, so firmly, that nothing could dissolve the knots of their
affection but only death. For Celadon no sooner arrived at the age of fourteen
or fifteen years, and I at twelve or thirteen, but at an assembly in the
Temple of Venus which is upon the top of a high Mountain, near the Castle of
Mount Brison, this young shepherd saw me; and as he since has told me he had
long before an extreme desire of it, by some reports he had heard of me: but
the jarres which were amongst our Parents was the impediment which hindered him:
and I must ingeniously confess that I think his desire of it, was no greater
then mine. For I know not why, but when I heard speak of him, my heart did
beat; unless it was a presage of those troubles which afterward befell me by
reason of him, When he first saw me, I cannot tell what causes of Love he found
in me, but so it is, that since that time he resolved to Love and serve me: and
it seems, that at the first enterview we were both stricken with the darts of
Love, for as soon as ever they told me that he was the Son of Alcippes, I
perceived a kind of chang in me, which was not ordinary; then all his actions
beg in to please me, and seemed much more agreeable unto me then any other
young shepherd whatsoever; and because he durst not yet approach me, also
because speaking with me was forbidden him, his looks and eyes by their turning
to and fro did utter such language unto me as I knew he desired to say more.
And indeed at a Braul which was held at the foot of a Mountain under a plump of
ancient Elmes which cast a pleasant shadow, he carried it so cunningly, that
without any heed of me, and seeming as if it were out of a merry carelessenesse
he got me by the hand. For my part, I seemed as if I took no notice of it, but
carried my self to him as to all the rest, but he in taking my hand, did
stoop with his head as if he would kiss his hand but I perceived his mouth
upon mine; this did cause some color to come into my face: but I feigning to
take no notice, did turn away my head, as if I only minded the braule which we
danced: this caused him to stay a while silent, not knowing I believe, how he
should begin to speak: at last being unwilling to lose such an opportunity as
this which he had long longed for, he came very near me and whispering Corilas
(who took me out to dance) in the ear, yet so loud (but seeming to whisper)
that I did plainly hear what he said, Oh Corilas (said he) I wish with all my
soul that the quarrels between this shepherdesses Father and Mine, might be
decided by her and me. To which Corilas answered very loud, Nay never wish
that, Celadon, for perhaps it is the most dangerous wish, that ever you made.
Let the hazard be what it will (answered Celadon very land) I Will not go from
what I have said, though I were to give my heart, as a pledge. And because I
seemed to take no notice of their discourses, he addressed himself unto me and
thus said: And you fair shepherdess, what opinion have you of this offer? I
do not know, answered I, what you speak of. He told me, replied Corilas, that
to draw a great good from a great evil, he wishes that the inveterate hatred of
your Fathers, were changed into love amongst their Children. How, (answered I,
seeming not to know him) are you Alcippes Son? Yes, (answered he) and more then
that; I am your most devoted servant. Me thinks, said I, that it had been more
proper for you to have applied your discourse unto some other, who may be more
agreeable to you then I: I have heard say, replied Celadon, that the gods do
use to punish the sins of the Fathers upon their Children; but this is not the
use amongst men, unless your beauty, which is divine, will assume the same
privileges with the gods: and if you do, then like them, you must give pardon
when it is asked: how now shepherd (said Corilas) what? Do you begin your
combat with crying mercy? In such a combat as this answered he, to be
vanquished is a kind of victory: and for my part, I am most willing to be so,
provided she will be pleased to take the spoil. I think, they had continued
their discourse longer, had the Brawle, longer lasted: but at last we parted,
and every one returned to his place.

Not long after the shepherds used several exercises, as wrestling, running,
leaping, and throwing the bar; and a Garland to be given unto him, who got
the better in the several activities. Celadon, as being too young was admitted
only unto that of running, and did win the Garland, composed of diverse flowers,
which was put upon his head by all the assembly with high commendations, that
being so young as he was, he should overcome so many other nimble shepherds.
He, not valuing himself did take it from his head, and put it upon mine,
saying, This, fair one, is in confirmation of what I said before. I was so
surprised at this that I could not return any answer: and had it not been for
Artemis, your Mother Phillis, I had given it unto him again; not but that
coming from his hand, it was very acceptable unto me; but it was because I
feared Alces and Hippolyta would be angry with me. But Artemis who desired
rather, to extinguish then inflame these old grudges, did command me to receive
it, and thank him. Which accordingly I did, but in such a hollow manner as made
every one think I did it only upon my Aunts command. All that day was thus
spent, and the next day also; in both which, the young shepherd lost no
opportunities of manifesting his affection. And it was the custom upon the
third day, in the honor of Venus, to represent the judgment which Paris gave
of the three goddesses. Celadon resolved to put himself amongst the Maids in
the habit of a shepherdess. You know that upon the third day after the
banquett, he Grand Druide has a custom to throw a Golden Apple amongst the
Maids, upon which are written the names of the three shepheardesses which seem
unto him to be the fairest of all the company, with this Motto, Let this be
given to the fairest of the three. Afterward the person that by lot was to
represent Paris, does enter into the Temple of Venus with the three
shepheardesses; where the doors being shut, judgment is given upon the beauty
of these three seeing them all naked, except for a linen cover which reaches
from the middle to the knee, and because some abuse had formerly been by some
shepherds who used to mix themselves amongst the shepheardesses, it was
ordained by public Edict, that he who should commit the like crime, should
without remission be stoned by the Maids at the gates of the Temple: but so it
was, that this young Boy, never considering the extreme danger of it, did this
day dress himself in the habit of a shepherdess, and putting himself into
our company was taken for a maid. Then as if fortune was resolved to favor
him, my name, and Malthea, and Stella, were written upon the Apple, and when
they came to draw the name that was to represent Paris, I heard Orithea named,
which was the name that Celadon took upon him. Heavens knows whether his soul
was not infinitely joyed to see his design thrive so well. At the last, we were
conducted into the Temple, where the Judge being set upon his Throne, the doors
shut, and we three only within with him, we began, according to the Law, to
undresse our selves; and because each apart did go and speak unto the Judge,
and offer, as heretofore the three Goddesses did unto Paris; Stella was the
quickest to undresse her self, and did first present her self whom the Judge
did a while contemplate, and after a full hearing what she would say for her
self, he caused her to retire, and give place unto Malthea, who was forwarder
in undressing her self then I was; for I being much ashamed to show my self
so naked, I trifled out the time as much as I could. Celadon, unto whom time
seemed too long, and after he had slightly looked upon Malthea, seeing I did
not come, he called me; so, since constrained I went: But, Oh Heavens! how much
ashamed am I to think upon it? My hair was disheveled, and almost covered me,
over which, all the ornament I had, was the Garland which the day before he had
given me. When the rest were retired, and he saw me in this then dress before
him, I observed, that he changed color two or three times; but I could not yet
so much as suspect the cause. For my part, shame had so dyed my cheeks with a
fresh color, that he has since vowed unto me, he never saw me fairer, and
could have been well contented to have spent the whole day in this
contemplation; but fearing to be discovered, he was constrained to abridge his
delight: And seeing I said nothing unto him (for shame had tied up my tongue)
Why fair Star (said he unto me) do you think your cause so good, that as the
rest have done, you need not plead it before your judge? No Orithia, answered
I, I will submit unto Stella and Malthea, both as well in beauty, as in
Rhetoric; so as had not customobli^ged me to come, I should never have
appeared before you, in any hopes to win the prise. But if you do carry it from
them both, answered the shepherd, what remuneration may I expect from you? I
shall then think (said I unto him,) that, I have more then I do deserve What?
(said he) is this all the offer that you make? I know not what to offer (said
I, unto him) that deserves a reception; and therefore you must first ask. Then
swear unto me, (said the shepherd) that you will give me what I shall ask,
and my judgment shall be in your advantage. After I had promised that I would,
he asked a lock of my hair, for a Bracelet which I gave him; and after he had
lapt it up in a paper he said unto me; now Astrea, I will keep this hair as a
testimony of this oath which you have taken, to the end that if ever you break
it, I may offer it unto the Goddess Venus and beg revenge. That is but
superfluous, answered I, since I am fully resolved never to fail in it. Then
with a smiling countenance he said unto me, the gods be praised, my fairest
Astrea, that my design has so happily prospered; for know, that the thing
which you have promised is, to Love me better then any in the world, and to
receive me as your most fathfull and vowed Servant, who am Celadon, and not
Orithea, as you imagine: the very same Celadon, that in spite of all old
emnities betwixt our Parents, is so infinitely devoted yours, as he will rather
die at the door of the Temple, then not give a testimony of his affection unto
you. Imagine, wise Diana, in what a perplexity I was now in: Love did forbid
me from taking revenge; yet shame did animate me against Love: at last after a
confused dispute with my self, I could not possibly consent to make him die,
because his offense proceeded only from his excess of loving me: but now
knowing him to be a shepherd, I could not any longer stay in his sight: but
without returning any answer, I ran to my companions, whom I found to be almost
dressed; and not well knowing what I did, I dressed my self as soon as possibly
I could: But to be short; when we were al ready, the disguised Orithea stood at
the threshold of the door, and having all three about him: I do ordain, said
he, that the prise of beauty be given unto Astrea; in testimony whereof I do
present unto her the golden apple: let none ever doubt of my judgment, for I
have veiwed and examined her, and finds her to be full of all perfection. Upon
these words, he presented the apple unto me, which I received with a troubled
mind: but more, when he said unto me in a low voice, take this apple as a
pledge of my affection, which, like it, is pure, and endless: To whom I
answered be contented, rash youth, that I receive it only to save thy life,
which otherwise, coming from thy hand, I would refuse. He could not reply for
fear of being heard and known. And because it was the custom, that she who
received the Ball, should by way of thanks, kiss the Judge, I was constrained
to kiss him. But, I assure you, I was at this ceremony almost ready to
discover him. Then the grand Druide caused me to be carried in a chair, through
all the crowd with loud applauds and acclamations, so as every one did wonder
why I did not enjoy this honor with more alacrity for truly I was so
confounded betwixt Love and Anger, that I hardly knew what I did. As for
Celadon, as soon as the ceremonies were done, he thrust himself amongst the
rest of the shepherds and by little and little without any notice taken, got
out of the crowd and putting off his borrowed habit, he assumed his own, in
which he came presently unto us with such confident looks, as none could ever
suspect him: For my part when I saw him again, my heart was so full of shame
and anger, that it would scarcely let my eyes look upon him: but he who did
take a seeming regardlesse notice of it, did find an occasion to accost me, and
in a loud voice said: The Judge who conferred the prise upon you, has showed
himself a very right Judge of beauty, and yet, though your cause did merit his
sentence, you are in some sort obliged unto him. I think shepherd, answered I
in a low voice, that he is more obliged to me then I to him: for he gave me an
apple only, which in some degree, I deserve and is my due; but I gave him his
life, which for his impudent rashness he deserved to lose. This is no more
then was before resolved (answered Celadon) for he does not value his life
further then to prostrate it at your feet. Were it not more in regard of my
self then him, replied I, I should have punished his impudence: but, Celadon,
no more; let us leave this discourse: and, know that the reason why I did not
cause you to be punished according to your merits is, only because I would not
bring my self upon the stage, and not for want of any will to see you
chastised. If that be the only reason, said he, I beseech you tell me what
death you will have me die: And you shall see that I have as much courage to
obey you, as I have Love to offend you.

This discourse would be very long and tedious, if I should include every
particular. But so it was, he gave me so many testimonies of his affection,
that I could not possibly doubt it: but still seeming to be all anger, I said
thus unto him Shepherd, consider the emnity that is betwixt our Fathers, and
believe that mine to thee shall be the same, if thou do still thus trouble me
with thy follies, which for this time, thy youth and my own honor moves me to
pardon. I mentioned a pardon, because I would infuse a little courage unto him:
for the very truth is, his beauty, and courage, and affection, did please me;
but to the end he should not reply, I turned from him and went to Stella, who
was near me. He all astonished at this answer, went out of the company so sadly
dejected as in a few days after he was grown not knowable, and kept himself so
private that, he frequented no places but the most retired and wild parts of
our woods. Of which, I being advertised by some of my companoins, who did in a
close manner tell me that I was the only cause; I began to resent his
condition, and resolved to find out some way or other to give him a little
comfort; and because, as I told you, he shunned all manner of company, I was
constrained to drive my flock toward that place which he most frequented: and
after two or three times being there in vain, at last after a long search for
him, me thought I heard his voice amongst some trees, and I was not mistaken.
For going nearer; I found him lying all along upon the ground, his eyes sweld
with tears, and hands held up to heaven which seemed to be immovable. This
object moved me to so much pity, that I was resolved to give him a cordial
for his pain. And therefore, after a whiles consideration, and not willing he
should think I sought for him, I retired a little way from him, where seeming
to take no notice I began to sing, so loud that my voice reached both his ears
and his heart. As soon as ever he heard me, I saw him leap up and turning his
eyes toward the place where I was, he stood like a statue still in a ravishing
admiration. Which I observing, to give him so much boldness as to approach
nearer, I seemed as if I slept, yet held mine eyes half open to see what he
would do. And indeed, he did as I did imagine he would: for drawing nearer me
with a soft and gentle tread, he kneeled down as near me as he could; and after
a long stay in this posture I still seeming to be fast asleep, he stooped down
and kissed me. Then seeing that he had taken courage enough; I opened mine eyes
as if he had wakened me. And rising up as if in a raging anger, thus said unto
him. Uncivil shepherd, how durst you be so bold as thus to interrupt my sleep?
He, with a trembling heart, and kneeling still, said thus unto me; It is your
self fair shepherdess, that did constrain me, and if I have sinned, then,
bright Star, you must dim your Luster, and punish your own perfections, which
are the cause. This is always your excuse for your presumption (said I unto
him) but shepherd believe it, if you continue in this course of offending me,
I will not endure it. If you call it an offense, to love and adore you
(answered he) proceed to sentence immediately, and doom me to what death you
please: for I do make a most solemn vow, that I will so offend you as long as
my life is in me. It is neither the rigor of your cruelties, nor the emnity of
our Parents, no, nor all the impediments in the whole universe conspired
together shall ever divert me from this resolution. But, Fair Diana I must
abbreviate these pleasing discourses, as being not suitable unto my present
disasters, And will only tell you, that being overcome I said thus unto him;
shepherd what good can you hope for, when those who have the dispose of you,
does disapprove of your beginning? How? Said he, dispose of me? Has Alcippe
more power over my will then I have my self. You may dispense with your own will
(answered I) but never with that obedience which is due unto a Father, without
a most horrid crime. The obedience which I owe unto him (said he) must be
confined unto possibilities and it is no fault to fail, where power wants to
perform: but admit, I must obey in all things, since of two evils, the greater
is to be avoided. I will rather fail in my duty to him who is but a man, then
in my duty to your fair self, who is all Divine. Our discourse lasted so long,
and so prevalent he was in it, that I was forced to admit him my servant: and
both of us being too young to shadow our designs with any artifice, Alcippe
did soon find us out; and being loath this amity should grow up to any higher
pitch, he resolved to send him upon so long a voyage with good old Cleantes, as
that absence might wear out this young impression of Love, But the separation
did as little good as all the rest of his artifices which he used: for Celadon,
though yet a Boy, did so fix his resolution to overcome all difficulties, that
though any other would have taken them for torments, yet he looked upon them
only as proofs of himself, and called them the touchstones of his fidelity.
And because he knew that his voyage would last long, he entreated me leave to
bid him adieu. This leave I granted; but, Fair Diana, had you heard how
passionatly he begged me to Love him* and the vows he made never to change,
doubtless you would have concluded nothing more impossible, then that this
affection should ever decay. At last since his time of stay was but short, he
thus said unto me. My Astrea (for so he phrased me always in private) I shall
leave with you my Brother Lycidas, from whom I will never conceal any of my
thoughts he knows how I have vowed my self unto your service, I beseech you
promise me, (if it be your pleasure I should depart with any joy) that you will
receive as from me all the services which he shall do you and by his presence
renew the memory of absent Celadon. And truly he had good reason to make this
request unto me. For Lycidas during his absence, was so diligent to observe his
Brothers commands, that many thought that he succeeded his Brother, in the
affection which he bore unto me: this was the reason why Alcippes after he had
kept him three years out of this Country, did call him home, in a confidence
that so long a time had worn away that light impression of Love, which had a
little entered into his green heart; and that he being now grown more wise,
would weane Lycidas also from my affection. But his return was an extreme
assurance of his fidelity absence could not extinguish the ardency ot his
Love; no nor all the so much admired Roman beauties, could ever startle him.
He entreated me by his Brother, that I would give him leave to come unto me: Oh
Heavens, how gladly did he come when I gave him license? I think I have his
Letters about me, for alas, I have kept them better then him: then pulling a
little bundle out of her pocket, like unto that which Celadon used to carry, or
in imitation of him and in which she very charily preserved those which came
from him, she took the first, for she kept them in order as they came unto her,
then after she had wiped away her pearly tears, she read these words.

Celadons Letter unto Astrea.
Fair Astrea,
MY patience has vanquished my exile, and heavens grant also that it may
vanquish all hindrances of our happiness: I departed with so much sorrow, and
return with so much joy; That, not dying neither in going nor coming, it
manifests that one cannot die with too much delight, nor of too much sadness.
Permit me I beseech you to wait upon you, that I may relate my fortunes unto
her, who is my only happiness.


Fair Diana, it is impossible to remember all the discourse we then had unless
I should open those wounds again, which are more dolorous to me then death.
During Celadons absence, Artemis my Aunt and Mother of Phillis, did come upon a
visit unto us, and brought with her this Fair shepherdess, Phillis: And
because our manner of living, seemed more pleasant unto her then the shepherds
of Allier she was pleased to stay with us, which, believe it, was no small
contentment unto me: for her humors were very pleasing unto me, and I have
passed over many tedious hours with her. When Celadon returned his judgment was
so good, and he liked her so well, as I may truly say he was the cause of the
great League, which ever since has been twixt her and me. At this time he
arrived at the age of seaventeen or eighteen, and I at fifteen or sixteen, and
began to manage matters with more prudence: so as, to disguise our loves, I did
entreat him, or rather indeed constrain him, to be very familiar with all
shepheardesses which could pretend unto any shadow of Beauty; to the end his
applications unto me might be taken rather as common, then particular. I say, I
constreyned him unto it, for he did several times upon his knees beg for a
revocation of this command; and alas, he had good reason so to do, for he did
too well foresee, that from hence would proceed the cause of his death. Excuse
me, wise Diana, if a few due tears interrupt my discourse, since I have so
much sad cause for them, as it were impiety to stop them: Then after she had
dried her eyes, she began her discourse again.

And because that Phillis was most commonly with me, it was unto her that he
first made his addresses unto, according to my command. I could scarsly forbear
my smiles, especially when Phillis believed him to be in good earnest, and
treated him as it is the custom to treat such as begin the like addresses. I
remember that when he was once very sharply treated, he sang this Song which he
composed upon this subject.

A Song.
CLose by a River clear, whose banks were clad
With Mossie cussions, and a channel had;
Which like a Serpent wreathed, and did glide
A long a lovely plain with swelling pride,
Did sit a Shepherd, chanting it in verse,
And with his Pipe did these sad Lines rehearse.
Cease, Fair one, Cease; cease once your cruelty,
Let me enjoy one day before I die.
The torments I endure for loving you
Are greater far, then is for hatred due;
If gods be good, and infinitely kind
Then Love and Hate a difference will find.
Is It possible a pure and perfect Love
Should never, never any pity move?
Are animals insensible as stones,
Which never moved are with sighs and groans?
Those amorous glances of your winning eyes,
Have often encouraged up my hopes to rise,
And since they swell with promises so fair
If they do violate, they perjured are;
Often have they told me, that your stony heart
Would melt; and from severitie depart:
Each charming part of your fair face did say,
In their false Language, they would never betray.
But how? Does shepheardesses eyes out vie,
The glistering Court in all its falsitie?
Can they who live and only haunt the fields
Use any art, but what plain nature yields?
Has rural beauties found a subtle art
Though not their faces, yet to paint the heart?
Are these the Doctrines that your School affords
Only to flatter, and to give good words?
No no, my Fair one, these are fallacies
And far unsuitable with your fair eyes;
Learn to be kind, and banish cruelty;
This comes nearest to a Dietie;
Beauty that bringes not sweetness with it, might
Be likned to an eye that wants sight.
To her that has no Love and yet is fair,
A Corpse without a Soul I will compare.
I do very well remember (said Phillis and interrupted her) how his addresses
unto me made you laugh: for commonly his discourse, was only a few fragments of
words so disordered as they could hardly hold sense: And commonly when he would
name me, his thoughts so run upon you, that he would call me Astrea: But see
the variety of several inclinations! I know very well that Celadon had some
advantages of nature above Lycidas; yet I thought, though I knew no reason for
it, Lycidas to be much more agreeable unto my fancy. Sister, said Astrea to
her, you bring into my memorle a discourse which once he had concerning you and
this fair shepherdess, (said she and turned toward Diana) Fair shepherdess
(said he to me) the wise Belinda and Artemis your Aunt, are infinitely happy in
two Daughters; and our Lignon is much obliged unto them since by their means
it has the honor to have these two fair ones upon their banks. And if I have
any judgment they only do merit the amity of Astrea, and therefore I do
advise you to love them, for by that short acquaintance I have had with them, I
do foresee, you will receive much satisfaction in their familiarity: I wish
that one of them would daigne to look upon my Brother Lycidas with as much
affection as I do. And then, fair Diana, having but little acquaintance with
you, I answered him, that my desire was, he should rather become a servant unto
Phillis: and it happened as I did wish: for ordinary discourse between them
first begot a familiarity, and at last a Love in good earnest between them.
One day finding fit opportunity for it, he resolved to declare his affection
to her, and to couch the most Love in the fewest words he was able. Fair one
(said he to her) I hope you know your self so well, as to believe, that those
who love you must needs love you infinitely: It must be my actions only which
must make my affection known unto you; and at the first beg no more then an
admittance into your favor. Celadon and I were so near, as we could hear this
declaration, and also the answer which Phillis returned, and which indeed was
more sharp then I expected from her. For she and I did long before know, by the
eyes and actions of Lycidas that he loved her, and she did not dislike of it,
that at this time she answered him with so much sharpness, that Lycidas was
almost desperate: and Celadon who loved his Brother very much, being extremely
angry he should receive such a baffle, he was half angry with me, at which I
could not choose but laugh, and at last tell him: Never be so angry Celadon at
this harsh answer which Lycidas has received: Phillis could do no less;
shepherds of these times, do too much glory in the easiness of their
Mistrisses: but to the end you may see that I do very well know the humor of
Phillis, I will undertake to bring Lycidas into favor with her, provided he
will but practice a little patience and continue on his addresses. I must
confess, when first I spoke unto her, she was so shie, as I knew not what to
think, but still hoped and resolved to win her with time: But Lycidas he was
out of all patience, and resolved to give her over, and Love her no longer:
upon which occasion he writ these verses.

Upon a resolution not to Love.
WHen I beheld those glorious eyes,
Triumphant in their Victories,
I did submit unto their darts,
As to the only Queen of hearts:
So lovely did they look, and kind,
As if no rigor I should find:
But when it plainly does appear,
That cruelty it self is there,
It Is time to shrink and fall away,
Rather than Tyranny obey,
For ever; which will only prove
Pusillanimitie, not Love.
It Is true, her luster has such arts,
As conquer can all human hearts.
But when resistance cannot do,
Then fly, and it is discretion too:
It Is better far to make retreat,
Then stay, and have a sure defeat.
Lycidas had lost all hopes of ever obtaining; and therefore as Phillis and I
were walking according to our custom, by the River side, we found him writing
with his Sheephook, these ensuing verses upon a bed of Sand, which when he was
gone a little further, (for he saw us not) we read: The verses were these.

Upon no hopes of ever being Loved.
CAn it be thought the wanton wind will stay,
And whistle ever, where it does to day?
Will any think these Letters in loose sand
Can last, and to eternity will stand?
If so, then there is hopes my Love may find
Some sure foundation in her fleeting mind.
Away, away, with these fond hopes, and think,
That sand, and wind, and she, and all will shrink.
Afterward we heard him break out into these doleful expressions, lifting up
his eyes to Heaven: O ye gods (said he) if you are angry with me, because I do
with more devotion adore the work of your hands, then I do you; I hope you will
pardon that error, which you your selves have caused: Had it been contrary to
your will, that Phillis should be adored, surely you would have made her with
fewer perfections, or else infused less knowledge of them into me. Would it
not be profanation, to offer less affection unto a Divinity of such
superlative excellencies, as she is adorned with? I believe this Shepherd
continued in such discourses, but I could not hear them; for Phillis forcing me
by the arm I went with her: And when we were gone a little further, I said
unto her, Stonyhearted Phillis, why have you no more pity upon this Shepherd,
that is ready to die for you? Sister, answered she, the Shepherds of this
Country are so full of dissimulation, that their hearts do commonly deny, what
their tongues do promise; And if you do well observe this Shepherd here, you
will find him all Artifice; and as for those expressions which now we have
heard, I do believe, that when he espied us coming, he set himself in the way
purposely, that we might hear his dissembling complaints; otherwise, had they
not been better spoken unto us then to the air and senseless woods? Sister,
said I, you have forbidden him any addresses to you Even this, answered she, is
a great argument of his little love to me. Is any command of power enough, to
stop the current of a violent affection? Believe it Sister, Love that can bend,
is never strong: Do you think I should have loved him less, if he had
disobeyed me? But Sister, said I unto her, he has obeyed you, and will you be
angry with him for that? It Is true Sister, replied she, he has obeyed me; but
let me tell you, that I hold this obedience for very great disobedience; and
leaving off his adresses to me, argues his passion very indifferent. If I had
not interrupted her, I believe she would have continued her discourse much
longer; but because I much desired, that Lycidas might find better
entertainment for Celadon's sake, I told her, that this kind of discourse did
become her toward Lycidas, but not toward me: Toward Lycidas it was
allowable, by way of trial, and I commended it; but toward me, it argued too
much distrust, to conceal any secret of her soul. As for my part I would open
all my heart unto her, and therefore told her, that since it was impossible,
but she must love some or other, she could not make a better choice then of
Lycidas, since she might already gather most certain symptoms of his
affection. To which she answered, that she never did, nor would, dissemble or
conceal any of her thoughts from me, but should be extremely sorry I should
have any such opinion of her. And since I would have her entertain Lycidas, she
would obey me. And hereupon Celadon finding her afterward with me, brought her
this Letter from his Brother, which was indicted by my advice.

The Letter of Lycidas unto Phillis.
Phillis,
IT is true, that of late I have lodged my love in my heart, and would not
suffer it to appear, either in my eyes or my words: If in this I have done
amiss, then blame your own fair self, who commanded it. And if you do not
believe I love you, put me to what Test you please, and you shall find it
better, then by all my weak, though real, expressions of words.


At last, wise Diana after many a persuasive argument, we brought things to
that pass, as Lycidas was entertained; and ever since, all four of us have
found much contentment in our lives, and invented many a stratagem to color
our designs, both by discourse and by writing one unto another. Perhaps you
have taken notice of a great Rock, in the high way toward Rochell, which
without much ado cannot be ascended, but when one is at the top, there is no
fear of any eye to discover. And because it was near the high way, we made
choice of it for our rendevouz; if any did meet us, we seemed as if we went on
in the highway; but when the coast was clear, we ascended. It Is true, that
this Rock being so near the high way, we were in some danger of being heard by
passengers, if we spoke any thing loud and therefore commonly, Lycidas or
Phillis were placed as guards, to spy when any came: And because business did
sometimes so employ us, as we could not every day meet in this place, we used
to write one to another, and we made choice of another place of conveniercy, in
which we laid our Letters one to another. In brief, wise Diana, we used all
possible ways to conceal our selves; and Celadon and I, did so seldom
converse together in public, as many believed that Celadon's will was wholly
changed; for as soon as ever he saw Phillis, then he made all his applications
unto her, and she again treated him with all possible complacency: Also as soon
as Lycidas appeared, I left all other company to talk with him; so as in a
short time, Celadon himself had a conceit, that I loved Lycidas, and I
believed that he loved Phillis: Phillis thought that Lycidas loved me, and
Lycidas believed that Phillis loved Celadon: And thus unawares were we so
entangled with these opinions, as jealousy began by degrees to kindle amongst
us. The truth is (said Phillis) we were then but fresh Scholars in the School
of Love; for to what purpose was it to conceal a real love, and publish a
false one? was there not as much cause to fear the divulging of your love to
Lycidas, as your love to Celadon? Sister, sister, said Astrea, when a thing is
not, we never fear what people think of it: But the contrary, when it is, then
the least suspicion of it, puts all out of order. But now (continued she, and
turned to Diana), jealousy had so seized upon all four, as I believe our
lives had not been long, if some good Genius had not inspired us to make all
clear in the presence of one another. It was now seven or eight days since we
saw each other, at our Rocky rendevouz, and the Letters which passed 'twixt
Celadon and me, were so different from the usual strain, as if they were writ
by different persons. At last, as I told you, some good Angel having care of
us, all four did meet in one place, where no other company was: And Celadon,
whose affection had most vigor in it, began thus to speak, Fair Astrea, did I
think that time would cure a disease that reigns in me, I would wait for that
remedje; but since I know, the older it grows, the more it will increase, I am
forced to complain against you for the wrongs which you have done me, and with
more alacrity, since I can do it before such Judges as are my peers. When he
would have gone on, Lycidas interrupted him, saying, that his pain was greater
then his. Greater! said Celadon, that is impossible, for mine is extreme: And
mine, believe it, said Lycidas, is without any comparison. Whilft the
Shepherds were thus debating the matter, I was upon Phillis, and said, Do you
see, Sister, how these Shepherds complain of us? Yes, answered she; but I
believe we have greater cause to complain of them. Though I am much incensed
against Celadon, said I unto her, yet, I am much more incensed against you, who
under a disguise of friendship, which you seemed to bear unto him, has drawn
him from that affection which he bare unto me, so as I may well say, you have
stolen him from me. And because Phillis stood silently amazed at this, and
knew not what to answer, Celadon addressed himself unto me, and said, Ahl fair
Shepherdess, but as sickle as fair; have you so soon lost the memory of all
Celadon's services, and your own vows? I cannot so much complain against
Lycidas, as against you; for notwithstanding the consanguinity and amity
betwixt us, your perfections might well make him a Traitor, and forget his
duty; but me thinks it should be absolutely impossible, that so long a service
as mine, and such a perfect affection, should ever find the least stain of
inconstancy in your soul. But admit, that all in me was too little, to deserve
so great a happiness, how can you so far violate and dispense with your vows,
as before my eyes to entertain a new affection? At the same time Lycidas took
Phillis by the hand, and with a deep sigh, said, Oh fair hand, to whom I had
given up my soul! can I live, and see thee take possession of any heart but my
own? my own, I say, that did deserve the same happiness, if ever any did
deserve it, by the most sincere and pure affection that ever was? I could not
hear any more what Lycidas said, because I was constrained to answer Celadon:
Shepherd, Shepherd (said I unto him) these words, Fidelity and Affection, are
more conversant in your tongue then your heart, and I have more reason to
complain against you, then hearken unto them: but because now I do not care for
any thing that comes from you, I will not take so much pains as grieve at it;
that office is more fitly yours, if your dissembling heart would give you leave
to do it. But, Celadon, since things are thus love on, love Phillis still and
serve her, her virtues will deserve it; and if I do afford thee a blush, it is
for anger that I should suffer my self to be so grossly deceived, and for
over-loving one that is so much unworthy of it as thy self. Celadon was so
much astonished at this, that he stood stock still a long time, and could not
answer one word, which silence gave me leisure to hearken unto that answer,
which Phillis returned unto Lycidas: Lycidas, Lycidas, said she unto him, you
that can call me sickle, inconstant, and I know not what; you know full well,
that these titles are most suitable unto yourselfe, and your own actions: Do
you think that because you have got the start, and complain first, you can
therefore palliate your faults, and wipe away the wrongs which you have done
me? me, I say, not sickle as your self is, who have more reason to be ashamed
of your changing then I have to be vexed at it: But that which most vexes me,
is, that you should charge me with your own faults, and counterfeit a good
occasion for your own infidelity: But it is no matter, he that will deceive his
own Brother, may well deceive her that is no relation to him. And then turning
toward me, And you Astrea (said she unto me) you that have stolen away the
heart of a Servant from me; do you think to keep it any longer then the first
new object that shall present it selfe' No, no, though I know your perfections
have power enough to keep any heart, but such a one as is composed of feathers,
and has wings to fly away; yet, this light Butterfly will give you the slip.
Phillis, replied I, you talk of some perfections that should be in me, but
certainly they are much inferior unto yours, since they are not able to hold
Celadon from you. Celadon had now a little recollected himself, and kneeling
down, he said unto me, It is not, my Astrea, to undervalue the merits of
Phillis, that I make these most solemn vows before all the most sacred gods,
but to convince you, that she did never kindle the least spark of love in my
soul; and the wrong you have done me in changing, is not greater, then your
taxing my pure affection with inconstancy. The story would be too tedious (sage
Diana) should I trouble you with every particular of our discourse: But so it
was, that before we parted, we were all so well settled in our senses again,
that all of us did acknowledge, that we had no reason to suspect one another,
and gave thanks unto heaven, for this happy meeting all together, without
which, I believe, the roots of jealousy had never been eradicated. As for my
part, I think it was impossible ever to have brought me to reason, had I not
heard Celadon declare himself so Ingenuously before the face of Phillis.

After this, we were more discret: but I no sooner got rid of this distemper,
then I entered into another no less daingerous: for we could not so well
disguise the business; but Alcippes had a jealousy that the sparks of his
Sons affection were not quit extinguished, and had such a curious eye over all
his actions, as observing how Celadon went every day to the place where we were
wont to lay our Letters, he himself went thither, and observing how the grass
was trodden by our often going thither, a kind of tract did lead him to the very
place where I had put a Letter for Celadon the night before: it contained these
words.

Astreas Letter unto Celadon.
YEsterday we all went into the Temple, where every one assembled to offer
Sacrifice unto Pan, I would have said, to have kept a holy day, had you been
there. But such is my devotion to you, that even divine things themselves
without, you are displeasing to me. I am now so full of common business, as
were it not for the promise I have made to write every day unto you, you should
hardly have heard from me. Receive therefore this only as a testimony that I
will for ever keep all my promises to you.


When Alcippes had read this Letter, he put it into the place again and hiding
himself in hopes, that it would be fetched away, his Son came presently after,
and having no paper about him, he writ thus upon the back of my Letter.

Celadon's Letter unto Astrea.
YOu oblige and disoblige both at once, but pardon me if this expression offend
you: I am not more obliged unto the gods then unto you because you say you Love
me, but by saying you would not have written, unless because you had promised;
this does infinitely disoblige me; for so I become a debtor only to your
promise, and not to your affection: Consider I beseech you, that I am not yours
because I have promised: but because I am purely yours, without any other
circumstance nor do I wish for any Letters from you which come only upon the
conditions which are betwixt us, but only such as proceed from your good
affection: I value them not as matters of Covenant and Merchandise, but as
testimonies of a pure affection.


Alcippes yet knew not who the shepherdess was, unto whom this Letter was
intended, for it named none: but see what a spirit of contradiction will do; he
waited at the least six or seven hours longer in expectation of her, who was
to fetch this Letter, assuring himself that it would be before night. It was
very late before I came thither: as soon as he espied me, for fear I should
not take the Letter, he lay him down as if he were a sleep; and I to avoid all
suspicion, turned back and took another way: He, well satisfied with his
pains, as soon as I was gone, did take the Letter and went home, from whence
he intended to send his son immediately: because he would not upon any terms,
there should be any alliance betwixt us; by reason of the deadly emnity that
had been betwixt Alces and him; but on the contrary intended to marry him unto
Malthea the Daughter of Forelle; To whose house he sent him During this
separation, Olimpia, daughter unto the Shepherd Lupeander, dwelling upon the
confines of Forest, toward the River of Furan, came with her Mother unto our
Town. This good old woman, did Love Amarillis very well, being brought up
together from the cradle, and therefore came to visit her. This young
shepherdess was not so fair as affected, and entertained so good a conceit of
her self, as she thought that all the shepherds which ever looked upon her
were in Love with her. And therefore, as soon as she came into the house of
Alcippe, she began to busy her self with Lycidas, having an opinion, that the
cruelties which he had used toward her proceeded from Love: which as soon as
Lycidas perceived, he came to ask our advice, how he should behave himself: And
we counseled him to cherish this conceit in Olimpia, to the end he might the
better umbrage his affection unto Phillis. And a little after, as ill luck was,
it happned, that Artemis had some business close by the River Allier, and, do
what we could, she carried Phillis with her. During this separation which was
six or seven Months, the Mother of Olimpia returned and left her Daughter
with Amarillis, in hopes that Lycidas would Marry her, because for ought she
could see, he loved her very well. And being an advantageous March for her, the
Mother advised her, to trim her self up in as amarous a dress as possibly she
could: and I assure you, Fair Diana, she did trick up her self accordingly,
and did court more then she was courted, by much. One day, when he was gone
into the woods to seek a strayed sheep, she met with her beloved shepherd:
and after some common discourse, she laid her arms in a loving posture upon
his shoulders, and after she had kissed him, thus said Dear shepherd, what
displeasing qualities are in me, that I should never find the least
demonstration of favor from you? The reason is, answered he and smiled because
my favor is not worth the having: Should those words proceed from any but your
self, said she, I would say the speaker either wanted judgment or was blind.
But dear shepherd how must I Love you, before I obtain the bliss of being
loved again? How many days must I spend in courting you, before I find a
return? I believe those shepheardesses who have the happiness of your
addresses, are not more amiable then my self, nor have any advantages above
me, unless in the enjoyment of your favor. Olimpia uttered these words with
so much zealous passion, that Lycidas was startled: and, Fair Diana, as often as
I think upon this passage I cannot choose but laugh, unless my sad disaster
forbid it. But however, Phillis had commanded him to counterfeit Love of this
Olimpia, who thinking his favors to be in good earnest, became ever since his
scorn; and having made so much use of her as served his own turn, he fell to
such a disdaining of her, as that he could not endure to come nigh her. But
afterward he came unto me with so many signs of discontent, as I was
persuaded that he did repent of his foolery: but presently after, Olimpia
proved to have a big belly, and when she began to perceive it, Phillis
returned from her Journey: and as I expected her with much impatience, so I
received her with abundance of joy. But as it is ordinary for one to enquire of
that which lies nearest the heart, so Phillis after the first Salute, asked me
how Lycidas did, and how he had behaved himself toward Olimpia? Very well,
answered I, and I am sure it will not be long before he make his appearance. I
did cut off this discourse as soon as I could, lest I should say something which
might prejudice Lycidas, who for his part was not in a little perplexity, not
knowing how to accost his shepherdess: but at last, resolving to endure any
torment rather then a banishment from her presence, he came unto her lodging,
where he knew to find me. And when Phillis saw him, she runs with open arms
to salute him. But he retreating, thus said unto her, Fair Phillis, I have not
so much boldness as to come near you, unless you will first pardon a fault
which I have committed. The shepherdess, thinking he meant his coming no
sooner, thus answered; There Is nothing shall debar me from the Salute of
Lycidas, and though his crimes were more then they are, yet I would pardon them
all. Upon this word, she went unto him and saluted him with abundance of
affection. But her joys were a little quelled, when he addressed himself unto
me, and desired me to accquaint his Mistrisse with his fault, that he might
know unto what punishment she would condenme him: Not, said he, but that my
sorrows for offending her shall accompany me to my grave, but because I would
know my sentence. This word made color come into the face of Phillis believing
now, that the matter was of more moment then she expected. Of which Lycidas
taking notice, Ah, fair one, said he, I have not courage enough to hear your
condemnation. But pardon, fair Mistress, if I leave you; if my life displease
you, and my death will satisfy for my crime, then let me live no longer. At
this word he went away, and though Phillis called him back, yet he would not
return, but pulled to the door after him, and left us two alone. You may
imagine it was not long before Phillis enquired what the matter was, and why he
was in such a perplexity and without any long prologue, I acquainted her,
laying all the fault on our selves, who were so much unadvised as not to
foresee that it was a piece of difficulty for such a young man to resist such a
temptation, also hinting unto her that the sin was not of so horrid a degree,
as to be impardonable. At the first I could not mollify her implacabilitie;
nor obtain the pardon which I desired: but a few days after, Lycidas by my
advice came, and threw himself at her feet; and because she would not look
upon him, she ran into another chamber, and out of that into another, still
flying from Lycidas who still followed her, and was resolved never to leave
her, until he had obtained either his pardon or his death. At last, when she
could go no further, she stayed in her closet, where Lycidas entering and
shutting the doors after him, he fell down at her feet speaking not one word,
but expecting her sentence. But the importunity of this affectionate beggar was
more prevalent, then all my persuasions: For, after she had a long time been
there, and not a syllable proceeded from either of them, at last she said thus,
Go, go, troublesome man, it is thy importunity and not thy self, that has
obtained a pardon. Upon this blessed word he did rise, and kissed her hand,
then came and opened the door, to show me that he had got the victory; then was
he in as good a condition as ever, and his Shepherdess did so fully pardon
him, as seeing him much troubled to conceal the big belly of Olympia, who now
did swell so, as it was visible to the eye, she her self went to visit and
assist her all that possibly she could. This indeed (said Diana, and
interrupted) is a most strange testimony of affection; this, Phillis, was too
much; and I must confess my courage could never have brooked it. By this you
may judge at the height of my affection, said Phillis. It was rather a fault,
said Diana, then superabundance of Love, to pardon so easily an injury done
against the Laws of Love. Oh Diana, said Phillis, you know better how to make
others love you, then how to love. If so, said Diana, I am more obliged unto
Heaven for it, then for my life. But however, am I not able to judge of love,
unless I love my self? No, said Phillis, you cannot be a competent judge; for
otherwise you will be of too hard a temper, and cannot pardon as love requires:
For Love, if it be rightly in tune, resembles Music consisting of several
parts, which, if all be well tuned, makes a melodious harmony; but, if one part
discord, then all is harsh: So, cruel Diana, perhaps you will say, that after
one has gone through a long and pleasing service, the first offense will spoil
all the former services. It Is very true (said Diana). Oh heavens! (cried out
Phillis) what a hard task has he who loves you? He who loves me, replied
Diana, must take heed he never offends me in matter of affection; and believe
me, Phillis, you have done Lycidas more injury than he has done you. Then said
Phillis, and laughed, heretofore I said, that it was love that prompted me unto
this act, but hereafter I will say, it was revenge; and to such as are the most
curious, I will say, it was for such a reason as I learned of you. They will
judge, added Diana, that heretofore you did love; and now, that you know what
it is to love. However, answered Phillis, if it be a fault, it proceeds from
ignorance, and not from any defect in Love, for I think my self obliged unto
it; but you that have been so long mute, I pray tell us, how I assisted to
bring this child into the world. Then Astrea replied thus:

As Soon as this Shepherdess declared her self, Lycidas did very confidently
accept of her offer, and sent a young Shepherd unto Moin, to bring a Midwife
from thence, with her eyes blinded, that she might not know whither she went.
Diana then, as being astonished, did put her finger to her mouth, and said,
Shepherdess, this is not such a secret as you imagine, for I remember I have
heard of it. I beseech you, said Phillis, tell us how you heard it, that we may
see how reports do jump. I cannot tell, added Diana, whether or no I do well
remember it: the poor Philander was the relator, and assured me, that he had it
from Lucina a Midwife. One day as she was walking in the Park, betwixt mount
Brison and Moin, with several of her companions, a young man came unto her,
whom she knew not, and at first brought some commendations to her from some of
her friends who were at Feurs, and afterward told her some particulars,
purposely to draw her from the rest of her company, and when he had her alone,
he told her, that a better occasion brought him thither, and it was, that for
all pitties sake she would go and help an honest woman, who, without her aid,
was in very great danger. The good woman was a little surprised at this, but
the young man conjured her to conceal her wonder, for he would rather choose a
death, then this business should ever be suspected. Lucina being now a little
better assured, and promising she would be secret, she asked him the time when
she should be ready. Prepare your self, said the young man, for a voyage of
two months; and to the end you may be no loser by the bargain, here is as much
money as you can get any where else in that time. Then he gave her some pieces
of gold in a paper, and asked her if she would go in the night: And the woman
finding her wages to be very good, did answer him, that she would go at what
time he pleased. About fifteen or sixteen days after, as she was coming out
of Moin, about five or six of the clock in the evening, she saw him return,
with his face quite altered: and coming to her, he said, Mother, the time is
come, we must depart, the horses are ready, and necessity requires haste: She
would have gone into her house to have taken order about some business, but he
would not let her, lest she should tell any: So going into a little private
bottom, close by the way side, she saw two horses, and a handsome man in black
cloths, who kept them: As Soon as this man saw Lucina, he came to meet her with
a smiling face, and after many thanks, he set her on horseback behind him who
fetched her; then getting upon another horse, they set forward through the
fields a good pace; and when they were got a little off the Town, and night
grew dark, this young man pulled a handkercher out of his pocket, and do what
Lucina could, he blindfolded her: Then afterward turning the horse half a
score times round, to the end she should not know which way they took, they
traveled a good part of the night, she not knowing which way they carried her,
unless as she thought over a River two or three times; then causing her to
alight she walked a while on foot, and as she could guess, through a Wood,
where she got a glimpse of light through the handkerchieffe, which presently
after they untied, and then she found her self in a very fine Tent, hung with
Tapestry, and made so close, as no wind could come in; on the one side she saw
a handsome young woman lying in a little field bed groaning and crying out very
loud, but masked; at the beds feet she saw another woman masked also, who by
her habit seemed to be well in years, and held up her hands, with tears in her
eyes; on the other side she saw a young Chamber maid masked, holding a candle
in her hand: At this Tent door, stood the man who held the horses, grieving
much for the pain this woman was in; and the other man, behind whom she rid,
did fetch all things that was necessary. You may easily imagine how much Lucina
was amazed at all this; for it is to be thought, that this young woman thus in
pain was in Labor, and it was not long before she was delivered of a Daughter;
so as she being well brought to bed, and the Child put into a Cradle, Lucina's
eyes were again blinded, and after a full reward for her pains, she was carried
the same way she came: And all this I received from Philander. Astrea and
Phillis harkened unto this tale very attentively, and Phillis could not choose
but laugh, which Diana seeing, asked her the reason: It is, said she, because
you have told us a story which we are altogether ignorant of; and for my part,
I cannot imagine who this should be, for it cannot be Olympia, but must of
necessity be some other Shepherdess. Truly, answered Diana, then I was
mistaken; I took that handsome man who held the horses for Lycidas; that old
woman, for the Mother of Celadon; and the Chambermaid for you; and imagined
that you were all masked, because you would pass unknown. I assure you (said
Astrea) it was not Olympia; for Phillis used no other artifice, but only to get
Lucina unto her house, for, as fortune was, Artemis was then from home: And
because Olympia was with Amarillis, she was to faigne her self sick, which, as
the case was with her, she might easily do, and desire some change of air; so
she was to come unto Phillis, who would be glad of her company: Amarillis
yielded to the desire, and so Phillis came to fetch here And when her time drew
near, Lycidas got the Midwife and blinded her eyes, that she might be ignorant
which way she went; but when she was come to the house, her eyes was then at
liberty; nor was Olympia or any masked, imagining that the Midwife could not
know any of their faces. This was all the artifice that was used; and when
Olympia was well again, she returned home: Also we have been told since, that
she used a very fine device, for the bringing up of the child: She hired a
woman to say that it was hers, and then to lay it to the charge of a young
fellow who served her Mother; and because the fellow was altogether innocent,
he denied it; but was so ashamed, that he ran away: The woman pursued even unto
Lupeander's Chamber, and there, though the fellow still refused it, she set the
child down in the midst of the room, and ran her ways. They say, that
Lupeander was very angry, and Olympia also at this fellow. But, the conclusion
was, Olympia turning toward her Mother, However, said she unto her, this child
must not be lost, it must not be punished for the fault of another; but it will
be an act of charity to see it brought up: Her Mother, who was of a good and
charitable disposition, consented unto it. And thus Olympia got her Daughter to
be in the house with her.

All this while Celadon was with Forella, and entertained with all possible
welcomes; and Malthea, at her Fathers command, did currasse him as much as she
in civilitie, could. But Celadon was so displeased at this separation from us;
that all these sweets yielded him but a bitter relish; and he lived in such a
drooping way, as Forella being very angry, that his Daughter should be so
slighted did acquaint Alcippe with it, to the end he should not expect any
further progress in that match: who knowing the resolution of his son, and, as
I think, moved unto some pity, he resolved once more to use some other
artifice; and after that, never to trouble him any more. Then, whilst Celadon
was with Malthea, Phocion my Uncle, so contrived it, that Corebes, a very rich
and honest Shepherd, should apply himself unto me: And since he had all the
good qualities that were desirable, it was already so divulged, as if the
Wedding were resolved upon. Alcippes thinking to make use of this advantage,
devised this trick, which I shall relate. There was a Shepherd called
Squilinder, dwelling upon the borders of the Forest, in a Town called
Argentall, a crafty fellow, and very perfidious, who, amongst the rest of his
knavish qualities, had this, that he could counterfeit any hand so exactly, as
the writer of the Original could not know it from his Copy. To this man
Alcippe's showed that Letter of mine which he found, as I told you before, and
writ another unto Celadon in my name, which was thus indicted.

Astrea's counterfeit Letter unto Celadon.
SInce I am forced to it by the command of a Father, you must not think it
strange, if I entreat you to put a period unto that love, which heretofore I
conjured you to make eternal. Alces has bestowed me upon Corebes: The match
will be very advantageous to me, if I can but quickly enough forget you. But
since it is mere folly to attempt against what must be, I advise you so to
forget all passages betwixt us, and to arm your self with such resolution, as
Celadon may blot Astrea out of his memory, as Astrea, out of her duty to a
Father, must quit the remembrance of Celadon.


This Letter was cunningly conveyed unto Celadon by an unknown messenger. Oh!
how his heart was sunk, when he received this sad news: Now Astrea, (did he
say) I see there is nothing in this world that is durable, since all those
vowed resolutions betwixt us are so soon vanished. Now I am a sad witness,
that all women, be they never so full of perfections, can easily return to
their natural inconstancy. Now, life end, since Astrea has lost her affection,
and since I can do nothing else, but grieve for my great disaster. Thus did he
breathe out abundance of sad complaints, and he was the sooner persuaded to
believe such a change in me might be, by the common reports of my marriage unto
Corebes. He lay all the day upon his bed, and when night came, he stole out of
all company, and got into a thick unfrequented wood, shunning all society like
a salvage, and resolved never to come into any company again.

In this desperate resolution, he wandered over all the Mountains of Forests,
and at last found out a desert unfrequented place, where he intended to finish
the remainder of his dismal days. The place was called Lapan, from whence the
fatal Lignon has his Original: Upon the banks of this Spring, he built
himself a little Cabin, where he made a shift to live above six Months; during
which time, his ordinary food was tears and sighs: And his solitude had
continued longer, had not Alcippes commanded Lycidas to go and look him out,
resolving (since all was in vain) never to cross his affection more: But
Lycidas had looked long enough before he had found him, but for one accident
which happened that day.

I chanced to be then by the banks of Lignon, looking upon the water, and
condoling the loss of Celadon; Phillis and Lycidas looked also in the water as
well as I, and we observed something which swimmed down the stream; Lycidas, to
satisfy the curiosity of his Mistress, who much desired to know what it was,
did step into the River, and with a bough brought it out; and finding it to be
only a piece of paper, he threw it away upon the ground, being angry he had
taken so much pains for a thing of no more value: Phillis, she took it up, and
opening it, we read these words:

Go thou poor piece of paper, more happy than he that sends thee; go and view
those banks where my Shepherdess uses to walk: and if, being accompanied
with those tears wherewith I swell this River, thou shall chance to kiss the
shore where the prints of her feet are, stay there where my miserable fate will
not suffer me to be: If it be thy chance to come into those hands, which have
robbed me of my heart, and she shall ask thee what I do, tell her, faithful
paper, that I am night and day washing away her infidelity with my tears; and
if thou do move her to so much repentance, as to drop a tear upon thee, tell
her of the sin she has committed against her own faith and my affection; and
that my sorrows are witnesses both before men and gods, that she is both the
fairest and the most perfidious woman upon earth; and also, that I am the most
faithful, and the most affectionate adorer of her that ever lived, with this
assurance, that I shall never enjoy any contentment, but in death.

We no sooner cast our eyes upon the writing, but we knew it to be the hand of
Celadon: this was the cause of Lycidas his gazing up the water to look for him:
and he used such diligence that in two or three days he found him out in his
solitary habitation, so much unlike what he was, that he was not knowable: But
when Lycidas told him that he must come to me, and that I did so command it; he
could hardly be persuaded but that his Brother would deceive him. At last, the
Letter which he gave him from me did so revive him that in a few days he
cheered up his countenance, and came unto us, yet not so soon but Alcippes:
dyed before his return, and Amarillis followed him, a few days after. Then had
we some hopes that fortune had shot her worst arrows against us, since they
two who did most cross our designs were dead, but it did not so happen: for
the business of Corebes so continued, that Alces, Hippolita and Phocion did
much trouble my tranquillity; and yet our misery did not proceed from them,
though Corebes was partly the cause of it: for when he came to make his
addresses to me, being very rich, he brought many shepherds with him, amongst
which was Semires; a shepherd truly of many excellent qualities, but the most
false and cunning man that ever lived: as soon as ever he saw me, his design
was to serve me, not valuing the friendship twixt Corebes and him and since
Celadon and I had agreed to dissemble it, the better to color our loves, he to
seem as if he loved all shepheardesses, and I to admit patiently of all
addresses to me, he presently did think that my good reception of him did
proceed from some good affection to him. But he had not so soon known of the
affection betwixt Celodon and me, had he not by ill luck found some of my
Letters: Now though all knew that he loved me, yet few believed that I loved
him, so coldly did I carry my self toward him: and because Alcippes had found
our Letters which had cost us so dear, we would not trust them that way any
longer but invented another trick which we thought more safe. Celadon was wont
to have a hole in the lining of his hat, in which he used to put such Letters
as he writ unto me, then he would throw it at me in a jesting manner, or else
leave it by me, that I might take it out, and return mine the same way back
again: I know not how, but one day as ill luck was, I let fall one of my
Letters, and Semires took it up; which when he read, he found these lines.

Astreas Letter unto Celadon.
My dear Celadon,
I Have received your Letter with as much joy, as I know you did mine; and
there is not a syllable in it, but is a full satisfaction to me, unless your
thanks: they are neither becoming my affection, nor Celadon, who long since
gave me all he had: These thanks you give, are either yours or not yours: if
they be not yours, then nothing that was this title, can be acceptable to me;
if they be yours, why do you give me that which you gave me before? Celadon, I
beseech you use no more any of these complements, unless you will have me
think you to be fuller of Civility then Love.


After he had found this Letter, his thoughts were not so much of Love as how
to make Celadon and me at odds, and he began thus. In the first place, he
beseeched me to pardon him for being so bold, as to lift up his eyes so high,
as upon me, whose beauty had constrained him unto it: and that he was so
conscious of his own small merits, that he would never trouble me any more, only
beseeched me to forget his rash attempt: afterward he did so much court the
friendship and familiarity of Celadon, as if he had loved him above all the men
in the world: And the more to blind me lie never met me, but took an occasion
to speak very advantageously of my shepherd, covering his intentions with such
a subtle cloak, that none could imagine he had a design it it; his commends
of the person whom I loved, did, as I said before, so deceive me that I took
great delight in talking with him: and thus two or three Months passed very
happily both for Celadon and me. But I think it was to make me the more:
sensible of of my ensuing misery, which I shall never remember but with warry
eyes: here she stopped and in lieu of words, did by her tears represent her
sorrows unto the company, that neither she nor they durst open their mouths
fearing to augment her tears: for the more one thinks to stop the current of
tears by reason, the more they will flow. At last she began to pursue her
former discourse: Alas, wise Diana, said she, I cannot remember this fatal
disaster without a tribute of sad tears, Semires now had gotten such
familiarity both with Celadon and me, as we were seldom asunder. And when he
thought he had sufficiently insinuated himself into credence, and thought he
could persuade me to what he would, one day after we had long talked of
several infidelities, which shepherds used toward shepherdesses whom they
feigned to Love. I wonder said he, that so few shepherdesses should take
warning by so many examples, though otherwise they are very discreet and wise.
The reason is, answered I, because Love has blinded their eyes: 'Faith I think
so, replied he, for otherwise it is impossible but you should see something
which concerns your self. Then holding his peace, and seeming as if he could
say more, but repented of what he had said, Semires, Semires, (said he, turning
his back) what do thou do? Do thou not see that she will be displeased at
the knowledge of it? Why will thou then torment her? And then addressing
himself unto me, he went on: I see, fair Astrea, that my talk had like to have
displeased you, but pardon me I beseech you, since it was only my zeal to your
service, that I said so much: Semires, said I unto him, I am much obliged to
you for your good will to me, and should be much more if you would finish that
discourse which you begun: Oh shepherdess, (answered he) I doubt I have said
too much already, but perhaps time will tell you more, and then you will know
Semires to be your faithful servant. Oh deceitful man, how good did he make
his wicked promises unto me? For since that I have known but too much, to know
it with any desire of living: at that time he would tell me no more, purposely
to whet my desire of knowing it: but when he thought that my desire was now
eager enough, and after I had very importunately urged him to tell it, he
answered me thus. Fair shepherdess, you seem to be so very desirous, that I
should think it a fault in me if I did disobey you: but truly, I am much afraid
it will more displease you. Then after I had assured him there was nothing
could much displease her, he knew so well how to persuade me that Celadon loved
Aminthea Daughter unto the Son of Cleanthes, that jealousy, the usual
companion of all Souls who Love truly, began to make me think this might be
true, forgetting the command which I had imposed upon him, to feign all love
unto all shepheardesses. However, to disguise my displeasure, I answered
Semires that I never did nor would believe, Celadon did more particularly apply
himself unto me then unto others; and that the familiarity which was between
them, was only the consequent of a long acquaintance: but as for any matters of
love, and addresses of that nature, that they were altogether indifferent unto
me. Then this subtle man answered me thus, I thank the gods that your humor
is such; and since it is so, you will take some delight in hearing some of
those passionate expressions, which he bestowed upon his dear Aminthea. I must
confess, wise Diana, when I heard Aminthea called, his, I changed color: and
because he offered to relate their discourse, I seemed willing to hear more of
the infidelity of Celadon, though alas more faithful, then I was well advised.
So I accepted of his offer, and indeed he made good his promises. For a little
after, he came running unto me, and told me, he had left them together not
far off and that Celadon's head did lie in Amintheas lap, and she holding his
head; relating these particulars purposely to nettle me the more. Then I
followed him, though I neither knew which way I went, nor what I did, until we
came very near, though they neither heard nor saw us. I have since thought,
that it was because they cared not who either saw or heard them; but so it was,
that I heard Celadon answer her, Believe me, fair shepherdess, never did
beauty make a deeper impression in any soul, then it has in mine: but Celadon
answered Aminthea, It is not possible a heart so young as yours, should long
retain that impression which love has made in it. Incredulous shepherdess,
(replied my Celadon) let us leave off these reasons; do not measure me by the
yard or weights of another: but bless me with your favor, and you shall see
whether or no my young heart can preserve them as long as it lives: Celadon,
Celadon, replied Aminthea, you would be but deservedly punished, if your
dissimulations should become truths, and if heaven in my revenge should make
you love Aminthea in earnest, whom now I know you do but jest with. Hitherto,
all was well enough: but Oh heavens what a strange answer of dissimulation did
he return? Fair shepherdess, answered he, if I do mock or jest with you,
may Love turn all my mockery upon my self, and if I have merited it that he
would punish me with your menaces. Aminthea, not being able to reach the
intention of his discourse did answer him only with a sigh and in such a
manner, as I in my language did interpret, that she would not have rejected
him, if she could have credited his language. But that which most perplexed me,
was, that after Celadon had been a while silent, he fetched a deep sigh which
presently she answered with another: and when he did rise up to speak unto her
she covered her eyes with her hand and blushed, as being ashamed that this sigh
had escaped her: and after a little pausing silence, Aminthea said thus unto
him. Come Celadon, are you so soon weary of my company? I rather fear (said
he) that I shall weary her, whom I extremely desire to please and therefore
since you command it, I will stay. I dare not use commands (replied the
Shepherdess) where entreaties perhaps will be too indiscreet. Use what terms
you please, replied the Shepherd, but I am much your servant. So he set
himself down, and began thus.

A Madrigall Upon a resemblance 'twixt his Lady and him.
WEll may one say, that our two hearts
Are like a Rock that never starts:
A Rock in Constancy isimine,
A Rock insensible is thine.
Fair Diana, I was not able to stay any longer in this place, but stealing
gently away, I returned to my flock, so sad, as all that day I could not utter
one word, and passed away the night with a thousand sad conceits, and cried as
long as I had any tears. I do admire I should be so blinded; for had I retained
the least spark of judgment, I should have remembered, that it was my command
he should faigne love: But the next morning when he came unto me, I gave him
such harsh entertainment, as made him desperate, and caused him to throw
himself into that gulf, where he and all my joys were drowned together.

At this word she looked as pale as death, and had not Phillis revived her,
taking her into her arms, she had swouned.

The noise which they made at Astrea's swouning was so great, that Leonida
waked, and hearing some talk so near her, her curiosity invited her to know who
they were. And because these three Shepheardesses were risen up to go away, all
she could do was to wake Silvia, to show them unto her. As Soon as she saw them,
she knew Astrea, though the disaster of Celadon had much altered her. Leonida
asked her, who were the other two? The one of them, said she, who is on the
left hand, is Phillis, her deer companion; and the other is Diana, daughter to
the sage Relinda and Celion: I am very sorry we have slept so long, for I am
confident we should have received some news from them; for it is likely they
came into this place so far from company, purposely to talk with more freedom.
I must ingenuously confess (said Leonida) that I never in all my life saw any
fairer then Astrea, she has the advantage of all others. Consider then, said
Silvia, what hopes Galathea has to divert the affection of this Shepherd from
her. This consideration did touch Leonida so to the quick, that she did resent
it more for her own cause than Galathea's: However, Love, which never leaves a
Lover without some sweet hopes, would not treat this Nymph worse then others;
and therefore, though with small probability, yet, she promised her self thus
much hope, that, perhaps absence from Astrea, together with her own kindness,
mightwork an alteration in him. Then, after some other such discourse, these
two Nymphs parted, Leonida toward Feurs, and Silvia toward Isoures, whilst
the three Shepheardesses retired to their Cabins.

No sooner had they set foot in the great meadow, where of late they used to
meet, but they espied Lycidas talking with Silvander; yet, as soon as ever this
Shepherd saw Astrea, he grew so pale and altered, that least Silvander should
take notice of it, he broke from him with a hollow excuse; but striving to
avoid meeting with them, Phillis with Diana crossed the way to overtake him,
and when she came at him, she said unto him, If you thus fly your friends,
Lycidas, what would you do to your enemies? The company you keep so much,
Phillis, answered he, does not deserve the title of friend. She whom you so
much complain of (answered Phillis) does endure more torment for her offending
of you, then you your self does. There is no way to cure the wound (answered
the Shepherd) but by breaking the weapon which gave it. By this time Astrea
was come up, who addressed her self unto Lycidas, and said unto him, I am so
far, Lycidas, from thinking your hatred of me unjust, as I must confess, you
cannot hate me so much as you have cause for; yet, if the memory of him, who
causes me to give you this sad satisfaction, be yet as fresh in your mind, as
it is, and ever shall be, in mine, you will also remember, that I was she whom
he loved above all the world. Lycidas would have answered, and perhaps,
according to his passion, very sharply; but Diana stopped his mouth with her
hand, and said, Lycidas, Lycidas, if you do not accept of this satisfaction,
both I, and all the world, will say, you are unreasonable. Astrea, not
insisting upon what Diana said, and taking away her hand from before his mouth,
she said, No, no, wise Shepherdess, do not constrain Lycidas, let him use all
the harsh language he pleasth, I know they are effects of a most just sorrow;
yet, I know withal, that his loss is not greater then mine. Lycidas hearing
these words, and not being able to command himself, he went away: Phillis
followed, and knew so well how to represent the grief of Astrea, and the
villainy of Semires, that at last she reconciled him to the Company.

But though Leonida made all the haste she could; yet, because she slept so
long, she could get no further then Ponsins; her Host being a very honest man,
lodged her in the best lodging he had: In the next room unto hers, were lodged
two other strangers, there being only a thin partition betwixt their two
Chambers; so as Leonida could hear all that they said, and hearkening at the
partition, she heard one of them say unto the other, What should I say more
unto you, only, that Love has made you thus impatient. Leonida thought she
should know the voice, but she could not well remember it, until the other
spoke, saying, But that, Climanthes, is not it which troubles me; for, the
attempt shall never so much dismay me, but I will still hope for a good issue
of our Enterprise. That which I most fear, and which makes me fit upon such
thorns, as you see me, is, that you have not made her well understand what we
have determined to do, or else, that she does not give any credit unto your
words. Leonida hearing this discourse, and knowing very well who it was which
spoke, being both amuzed, and desirous to know more, she settled her self so
near the partition, that she lost not a word of what was spoken: And then she
heard Climanthes say, I have often told you, that the business is impossible.
Yes, said the other, only in your judgment. Truly, answered Climanthes, to make
you confess it, and to ease you of your pain, I will once more make you a
repetition of the whole business. Then he began thus.

The History of the Falsities of Climanthes.
AFter we were all parted, and you had by your discourse made me acquainted
with Galathea, Silvia, Leonida, and all the Nymphs of Amasis, as afterward you
did by a sight of them, I conceived, that the next principal thing which might
further our design, was, to know how Lindamor was habited the day of his
departure: For, you know, that Clidaman and Guyamant being gone into Merovea,
Amasis commanded Lindamor to follow him, with all the brave Cavaliers of this
Country, to the end that Clidaman might appear in more luster. And it seemed,
as ill luck was, that Lindamor intended to change the Livery of his servants;
but so it was, that I having an observant eye of every thing, one night as he
was in the street, I heard him command one of his men to go unto his Tailor,
and fetch the Coat that he had made against the day of Rendevonz, that he might
try how it fitted him: And since he had charged the Tailor to let none see it,
he gave this servant a Ring as a token, that he came from his Master: I
followed the servant so close, that I knew the lodging and the name of the
Tailor: The next morning betimes I went unto him, and told him that I came from
Lindamor, to see in what forwardness his clothes were: for Amasis was so
pressing to have him go, and his fears of his cloths not being finished in
time, made me come to bring him the certain truth, for he would not trust him;
he would have given his Ring for a token (said I) but he told me, this would be
sufficient that I tell you, he sent last night for the Coat, and he who came
for it, brought it again. Thus I deceived the Tailor, and took notice of his
cloths as well as possibly I could. Then I seeming to hasten him with his work,
he told me, that he had time enough; for, he had seen a Letter which Amasis did
write unto the Mayor of the Town, commanding him to summon all the gallantry of
the Town against such a day, on which Lindamor, and such as went with him, were
to depart. By this means I came to know the day of Lindamor's departure; and
moreover, then you were in this country, which was an accident that fell out
very happily for the furthering our design, which you had already been
advertised of. In order to this, I retired my self into the great wood of
Savignieu, near a little River which ^^ns through it; there I erected a little
Hut of boughs, so close, that many passed by never espying me; and this I did,
that it might be believed I had long dwelt there; for you know, that none in
this Country knew me. And to make it seem I had long inhabited there, the
leaves and boughs which covered my Cabin were all withered. I decked up a
Table with a Looking-glass upon it, setround with Ivy, Misletoe, and Holline,
and strewed my room with Rushes, Vervin and such like: I set my Lookingglasse
in the most dark part of the room, to the end my Art might not be so soon
discovered; and opposite to this mirror, I placed my painted Paper, wherein I
had so exactly drawn the place which I intended to show Galathea, as none could
distinguish between the Original and the Copy. Above this glass did hang a
plank, upon which an ugly grim visage was painted, and hanged by a small thread,
which, with the obscurity of the place, could not be discerned; at the bottom
of this plank was fixed a steel, which, when the plank fell, the steel did hit
against a piece of flint, purposely so set, as it never failed of fire; about
which place I had set a composure of Sulphur, and Salt-peeter, which, when
fire did fall into it, did break into strange kind of flames, in such a
strange manner, and with such celeritie as might well cause wonder. All this I
invented, that it might be thought either some Divinity, or else some
Witchcraft. After all things were thus ordered, I did sometimes expose my self
to sight, but very seldom; and as soon as I perceived any saw me, I presently
retreated into my Cell, where I made a show, as if I lived only upon roots
herbs, and air, though in the night I changed habit, and provided all things
necessary. Within a few days many took notice of me, and my fame was so great,
that it reached the ears of Amasis, who used often to come and walk in the
Gardens of Mount-Brison. Upon a time, Sildres, Silvia, Leonida, and several
others of their company, did walk along the banks of my little River, where
then I seemed, as if I were gathering some herbs: as soon as I perceived they
saw me, I ran hastily into my Cabin; they being full of curiosity to see me,
and to talk with me, did come after me through the wood: I, by that time had
got upon my knees, and when I saw them look through my door, I went toward it,
where the first that met me was Leonida; and because she had thrust open the
door, and was ready to enter, I sharply reprehended her, saying, Leonida, the
Deities whom I adore, does command you not to profane their Altar. Upon these
words she was a little surprised, and retreated for, my habit of a Druide got
me reverence, and my naming (Deitle) did strike with terror: But, aften a
little recollection of her self, she said thus unto me, The Altars of your
Deities be they whom they will, cannot be profaned, by receiving my devotion,
which came hither only to render that honor which the heavens demands of us.
The heavens indeed (answered I) does expect both devotion and honor, but not
different from such as they ordain. If any zeal to the divinity whom I adore,
has brought you hither, then you must observe what she commands. What is her
commandments (said Silvia)? Silvia, (said I unto her) if you come with the
same devotion that your companion does, then do as I shall bid you, and your
devotion will be acceptable unto my deity. Before the Moon does enter into her
decrease, wash your right thigh as low as your knee, and your right arm as low
as your elbow, before day, in this River, which runs before this sacred Cave;
and afterward come hither with a Chaplet of Vervine upon your head, and a
Girdle of Fern about your middle; then shall I declare unto you the mysteries
of this holy place. Then taking her by the hand, I said thus unto her, Would
you have me (for a testimony of that favor, which the deities are pleased to
confer upon me) tell you some passages of your life past, and some that are to
come? No, not I (said she) for I am not so full of curiosity: but you my
Companion (said she, and turned toward Leonida) I have known you heretofore
full of such curiosity. And so I am still (said Leonida, and presented her hand
unto me). Then calling to memory what you told me concerning these Nymphs in
particular, I took her hand, and asked her, whether she was born in the night,
or in the day time; and understanding that it was in the night, I took her left
hand, and after a considering pause, I said unto her, Leonida, This Line of
Life being handsome, well marked, and long, does demonstrate, that you must
live long, and free from any corporeal maladies; but this little Cross upon
the same Line, almost at the top of the Angle, does portend some maladies of
Love, which will hinder you from being so sound in mind as in body: and these
five or six little Points, which are sowed like little grainee here and there,
upon the same Line, do signify, that you will never hate them that love you,
and will much delight in being courted. Then look upon the other Line, which
takes its root from that which we spoke of before, which passing through the
midst of the hand, does raise it self up toward the hill of the Moon, it is
called the middle natural Line; These fractions which you see and seem so
little, do signify, that you are easily angered, even against those, over whom
Love has given you authority: And this little star which turns against the
rising of the pulse, does show, that you are full of goodness and sweetness,
and that your anger is soon over. But observe that Line which we call the Table
Line, which joins it self with the middle natural Line, so as both do make
an Angle, this does demonstrate various troubles in matter of Love, and which
will often render your life very displeasing, and tells me, that it will be
very long or never, before your desres come to a conclusion. I would have
continued, when she pulled back her hand and told me, that this was not that
which she did ask of me, but she defired to know what would become of that
design which she had in hand, and that I would not speak so generally as
before, but come to particulars. To which I answered, that the Divine powers
did keep the future to themselves, unless sometimes out of their goodness they
revealed them unto their servants and that sometimes for the public good,
sometimes to satisfy the servent prayers of those who do often importune them
at their Altars: and very often to show that nothing is hid from them; but
always unto such as are prudent and discreet: for the secrets of the gods
would not be made common, or divulged, but upon special occasions. I tell you
this, that your curiosity may rest contented, though I have not so clearly
discovered things unto you, as you desire. Nor is it either expedient or
necessary, I should tell you any more: but to the end you may know, that the
gods are not niggards of their favors but speak familiarly unto me. I will
tell you of such things as have happened unto you, by which you may very well
Judge, that I do know them.

In the first place, fair Nymph, you know that though I never saw you before,
yet at the very first entrance I called you by your names; which I did, that
you might believe me to be above the common degree of knowledge, not that I do
ascribe any glory unto my self, for that would be high presumption, but unto
the gods whom I do adore in this place. Then you believe that all I say, I
learned from my master. (And in this I lied not, for it was you Polemas who
told me all) But, continued I, particularities will make my discourse very
long; it were convenient, if we went under some of those shady trees. Upon this
we went, and then I began thus; Truly, Clemanthes (said Polemas to him and
interrupted him) you could not carry out this beginning with more artifice. You
shall judge, answered Cleanthes, whether I did not continue it with as much or
more prudence: Then thus I began, Fair Nymph, it is now about three years
since the noble Agis in a full assembly was given unto you for a Servant. At
the first, you were very indifferent; for then the unripenesse of both your
ages, had not made you capable of such passions as Love did conceive: but since
that time, your beauty in him, and his addresses unto you, did by degrees
kindle those sires which nature at the first had laid a foundation for: so as
that which at the first was but indifferent in you both, became now particular;
and Love did furnish his soul with all such passions as usually do accompany
it: likewise you began to bear him so much good will as to accept of his
affection and services above others. The first time he ever made any overtures
unto you, was when Amasis did walk in the gardens of Mount-Brison, when he took
you by the hand, and after a long pause, upon a sudden he broke into these
expressions: Fair Nymph I will no longer dispute with my self, whether I
should or I should not declare, the thoughts of my soul unto you, for now my
soul begins to be angry with me, and constraines me to it. Here I stopped, and
said, unto her; Leonida, will you have me repeat the very same words to a
syllable, that you used in answer to him? Believe me, (said Polemas them) you
run a great hazard to be discovered. No no, answered Cleanthes, and to give a
testimony that I have not lost my memory, I will repeat unto you the same
words: But replied Polemas, perhaps I might either forget or mistake them: Oh
never doubt that (said Cleanthes) for I believe she herself cannot remember her
own very words; so as having an opinion that I recieved mine from the gods,
doubtless she would have believed them the same, though you had never been
familiar with her. But remembering that you served her long, and that your
services were always well received until you changed affection and addressed
it unto Galathea, and upon that reason she took part with Lindamor against you,
therefore I spoke more confidently of the past passages, knowing well that Love
will not let a lover conceal any thing from the party loved; but to return to
the purpose, she answered me; I see you can tell us what you will, but we can
believe what we please, this she said, as being a little nettled in that which
perhaps she would have concealed from her companions: however I went on True,
Leonida, (said I,) you may believe what you please, but I am sure tell you
nothing but what you know is true: you answered Agis, as if you did not
understand his meaning, whatsoever it be, Agis (said you unto him) out with it:
for dissimulation misbecomes all men, especially such as you. This advice
(answered he) together which my own passion constraines me to tell your Fair
Nymph, That the inequality of my merits compared with yours is not able to stop
the violence of my affection but if the will of a giver be more to be looked
unto, then the quality of the gift, I dare boldly say, that mine is not a
despisable sacrifice. For the heart which I do give, I do give it with all the
affections, with all the faculties, and with all the power of my soul; and this
so absolutely, as hereafter, it is not mine, I do disavow and renounce it as a
thing that does not belong unto me: untowhich you answered; Agis, I shall
believe these words, when time and your services has told as much as your
tongue: This, Leonida, was the first declaration of affection which you
received from him, which afterward he did prosecute with many addresses and
quarrels which he underwent against many when he was jealous. It was now the
time, Leonida, when you, as you were curling your hair with hot Irons, you
burned your cheek, upon which subject he composed these verses.

Agis, Upon the burning of Leonida's cheek.
AS Love was sporting in the fuire
And lovely tresses of your hair,
A sparkle of his fire did seek;
To kiss the beauty of your cheek.
And being full of hot desire,
He kissed it as hot as fire.
Judge cruel Nymph, by this, what pain
Poor lovers by Lov's fire sustain:
Since but apittance, or a part
Of his great fire, can cause such smart.
The scorching Luster of your eyes,
So full of flaming cruelties
Against my heart a hundred sends
Whilst only one, your cheek offends;
But had Love bit aright the mark
Upon your heart had light the spark.
Judge cruel Nymph, by this, what pain
Poor Lovers by Loves fire sustain:
Since but a pittance, or a part
Of his great flame, can case such smart.
Now, Leonida, to make it appear, that I do know al these things from a
Divinity who never lies, and whose eye and ear does look into the very center
of all hearts; I will tell you one thing which none did ever know but your self
and Agis. She was now afraid, lest I should discover some secret which would
anger her, and indeed it was my design to make her have that apprehension and
therefore with a troubled mind, she said thus unto me; man of God, though I do
not fear that you or any other can say any thing which will much prejudice me,
yet the discovery of secrets is a thing of so tender a concernment as be they
touched by never so gentle a hand, yet it will annoy: therefore I beseech you
let this discourse have an end; she uttered these words with so much alteration
in her looks, and in such a faint tone, as to cheer her up, I was forced to
say thus; you need not think me of so shallow discretion, but that I know how
to conceal any thing which will offend you: and therefore fince you will know
no more, I know how to be silent; also it is time for me to return to that
Divinity who calls me: then I did rise up, and bad them adieu. Then after I had
ceremoniously washed my hand in this River, upon my knees, I said, Oh
Sovereign Dietie which resides in this place, behold how in this water I wash
away, and purify my self from all the prophanitie which the conversation with
men might have defiled me withal, since I came out of thy holy Temple. At this
word, I washed my hands, my head, my feet, and all parts over, so entered into
my cabin, not speaking a word after unto her: and because I did imagine, that
their curiosity would invite them to come and see what I did, I went unto my
Altar, and kneeling down; I let down, the plank which had the steel in it, and
which immediately fell upon the flint, and fired my composition. The Nymphs
first seeing my looking glass which cast a very resplendent Luster, and after
such a flaming combustion upon a sudden, they returned home with a great
opinion of my sanctity, and reverence toward the Divinity whom I adored.
Could matters be better executed then this? No certainly, answered Polemas, for
I believe any one that was not acquainted with it, might have been deceived as
well as the Nymphs.

Whilst Climanthes talked thus, Leonida who heard him, was so ravished out of
her self, as she hardly knew whether she was awake or asleep, for she found
all he related to be very true; and yet she could not well believe that it was
so: But whilst she was thus in dispute with her self, she heard Climanthes
begin again thus, Then these Nymphs went away, and what reports they made of
me, I know not; but I conjecture they talked very highly of me, and such
strange things, that all the Court was full of me: for, as fame always
increases by passing from mouth to mouth; so an infinite number came to see
me, some out of curiosity, others to know their Fortunes, and many to see
whether all reports of me were true; so as I was put to all my shifts for
maintaining my reputation. To avoid some, I said, that this was a day on which
the deity would not hear nor answer; to others I said, that some had offended
the divinity, and therefore they would give no return, until I had appeased
them by fasting; to others, I did prescribe a long penance before I could
undertake them: And when all was done, I said, they had either done too much,
or too little, of that which I did impose upon them, and so I always gained
time: As for such as I knew any thing of their business, I dispatched them
readily enough; and that was the reason, why all others, who desired to know as
much as they, did wholly submit unto whatsoever I did impose upon them. At the
last, Amasis her self came to see me, and brought Galathea with her; after I
had satisfied Amasis in all her demands, which in sum was, whether Clideman
should be prosperous in his voyage: and I answered her, that he should run
through much variety of fortune, that he should be wounded, and that he should
be in three Battles with the Princes of France; but that at last, he should
return with much glory; Then she went away well satisfied, and desired me to
recommend her son unto the tuition of the deity whom I adored. But Galathea
much fuller of curiosity then her Mother, taking me aside, thus said unto me,
Good Father, I beseech you oblige me so far, as to let me know, what Fate I
must expect. Then I did bid her show me her hand, I looked her in the face, I
made two or three circles on the ground, and turned toward the same; then I
took the measure of her hand, of her foot, of her neck, and many other
ceremonies did I use. At last, looking steadfastly upon her, I said, Galathea,
You are infinitely happy, if you can but know how to take the advantage of one
hour; and you are extremely miserable, if either out of carelessnesse, or out
of love or out of fear, you let this hour slip: But, the very truth is,
unless you would make your self incapable of that happiness, unto which the
heavens destined you, you cannot attain unto greater felicity; all your
happiness, or all your misery, depends upon Love. Be advised therefore, and
take a strong resolution, not to be entangled by the allurements of love; let
neither the counsel of Friends, nor command of Parents, stagger you; for if
you do, then there is none under heaven will be more miserable then your self.
Oh heavens! (said Galathea then) how you amaze me. Nay, never wonder (said I
unto her) for this which I tell you is only for your good: and to the end you
may carry your self with more prudence, I will discover unto you, as much as
the deity will permit me; but be sure you keep all I shall say most secret,
and do not impart it to any upon earth. After she had promised me so to do, I
proceeded on. Daughter (said I) for so my divine office allows me to call you,
you shall be courted and sued unto, by many noble Cavaliers, whose virtues and
merits may happily move you to cast an eye upon some of them: but, if you do
measure your affection, either by their merits, or by their loves, and not by
what I shall say unto you, then you will become as miserable, as one, that is
out of the favor of the gods, can be. As for me, who am the interpreter of
their will, by thus telling you, I do deprive you of all excuses, which can be
drawn from ignorance. You know, that heaven requires obedience and submission
above all other sacrifices, therefore be sure you remember what I say. Upon the
Bacchanalian feast day, when men are swelled with the enthusiasms of their god,
you shall be in the great Town of Marcelles, where many Gallants will see you;
but, take good heed of him who shall wear a suit made of green cloth of gold:
If you do love him, I shall lament your sad fate, for you shall be the Butt of
all disasters and misfortunes. Father, said she unto me, I do know a good
remedy against all these, and that is, to love none at all My Child (said I
unto her) there is danger also in this remedy; for, you may as well offend the
gods, in not doing that which they would have you do, as in doing that which
they would not have you do; therefore take heed of that. How then must I behave
my self (said she)? I have already told you what you must not do, (answered
I); And now I will tell you what you must do: In the first place you must know,
that all corporeal or sphituall bodies, have their sympathies and antipathies
from the lesser we may come to the proof of the greater. My aim is, to make you
understand, that you have both a good and a bad Genius waiting upon you, one
contrary to the other; and to avoid the bad, you must court the good, who will
make you infinitely happy, did you but know to hit your hour Oh Father! (said
she) I do conjure you by the divinity whom you adore to tell me what I should
do. There is another person, (answered I) whom if you do marry, you will enjoy
more felicity, then ever any mortal did. I beseech you, said Galathea, who is
it? That, fair Nymph (said I) must not come from me, but only from Hecathe whom
I adore, so as if I do not satisfy you in that, do not think it is for want of
any good will, but because she has not yet revealed it unto me; may be,
because I had not so much curiosity as to enquire it. But if you would know,
then observe what I shall say unto you, and then you shall know as much as is
necessary: for, as the Gods do liberally dispense their benefits unto men when
they please, so they would be acknowledged Gods: The sacrifices of mortals are
pleasing unto them, as testimonies, that they are not ungrateful for the
benefits which they receive. The Nymph much ravished then, answered, That she
desired no more, and that she would punctually observe whatsoever I should
ordain. Now then is the time, said I unto her, for the Moon is now at the full,
or very near it; and if you should let her decrease, it would for ever after be
too late. Then I did command her to do the same things I did Silvia and
Leonida, to wash her self before day in this little River, both thighs and
arms, and to come thus, with a Chaplet of Vervine, and a Girdle of Moss or
Fem, before my Cell, and that I would prepare all things necessary for the
sacrifice. Well, said she, I will come, and bring two of my Nymphs with me, and
so privately, that none shall ever know of my coming but they: but, be sure you
be well advised what you speak before them of this business, for they will
endeavor all they can to divert me. I was very glad of this caution, having my
self the same fears; and because I perceived, that she resolved to follow my
counsel, otherwise she would not have cared who had known it. Thus she went
away, with a full resolution to return the third day after. The reason why I
said, that it must be before the Moons decrease, was, to the end, that if any
came to me in the mean time, I might put them off with an excuse, that the
Mocil was not yet at the full. Also I said, that it must be before day, to the
end I might have fewer people come to trouble me And as for the Bacchanalian
Feast, I had computed it to fall upon the same day, on which Lindamor was to
take his leave of Amasis at Marcelles, and consequently of Galathea; and also,
that he should wear this day a green suit. All things then being thus resolved
upon, and prepared, I took order for the sacrifice: and though I was not well
versed in that mystery, yet, I showed all the skill I had, lest they should
find me ignorant in any thing.

The morning being come, and day within little of dawning, I found her in the
same posture I appointed, with Silvia and Leonida. I wished with all my soul,
Polemas, that you had been there, that you might have enjoyed the happiness to
have seen this fair one, in such a lovely mode; you had seen how the wanton
wind did play with her lovely locks, which hung loose in curious curles upon
her alabaster shoulders, and had no other cover, but the Chaplet of Vervine.
There you might have blessed your eyes with a sight of her naked arms and
^^ighes, no show so white; and her pretty little feet might have shamed Thetis.

I must ingenuously confess, that I wished the wings of time had been clipped,
that I might have looked longer upon these beauties, who, as I told them, must
needs be well perfumed with the finest Aromatique smells, lest the visions of
the deity of Styx should offend them, and to that end showed them a place more
private, where they could not easily be seen.

Upon the side of a hill from whence this little River runs, there was a very
close and thick thicket of wood, whose branches were so interwoven with leaves,
they did make most close and delightful umbrage; so as the penetrating
Sunbeams could not reach into the hollow vault under it: This gloomy shade did
encourage them unto much boldness, but yet their curiosity to be informed of
what they defired, much more: There then it was where these three Nymphs began
to undresse themselves, and use all such necessary perfumes as I prescribed;
and I knowing the place very well, did steal my self so near, as I could
easily see them naked. I must confess, I never saw so lovely a sight in all my
life; but above all, I found Leonida most admirable, both in the straight
proportion of her body, in the purely whiteness of her skin, in the
smoothness and plumpnesse of every part she excelled them all by much; so as I
began to discommend your judgment, and think you a man unexpert in hidden
beauties, since you quitted Leonida for Galathea: who, it is true, has something
that is fair in her face; but, her other parts are so fat short, of what by her
face might be expected, as she may be truly called a deceiver. Oh heavens!
Climanthes (said Polemas, who could not endure to hear her whom he so loved
thus spoken of) leave off this discourse, for Leonida's face is not worthy to
come in comparison with Galathea's. Well sir, (answered Climanthes) think what
you please, but I am sure Leonida's face is the least fair part about all her
body. Then I would advise her (said Polemas) to hide her face, and show us what
is more fair: But I believe, Climanthes, your eyes were not competent judges;
for the obscurity of the place, perhaps, would not suffer you to see them
perfectly. But i beseech you let this discourse alone, and go on with your
story. Leonida, who heard all this, and seeing with what scorn Polemas did
speak of her, she began to be so much offended with him, as she resolved never
to pardon him. On the contrary, though she hated these impostures of
Climanthes, yet she could not choose but love to hear her self so much
commended: for nothing does more tickle a young Lady, than applauding her
beauty, especially, when there is no suspicion of flattery. Whilst she was in
these thoughts, she heard Climanthes continue his story, on thus, Then these
three Nymphs came unto me, where they found me before my Cell, and preparing
all things for the sacrifice I lighted up three candles, and I burned incense
three times round the room then I took off their Chaplets of Vervine, and
crowned them with Poppy, and put some falt into their mouths, and bad them chew
it: Then I took three black Heifers, the best I could choose, and nine Ewes
which had never taken the Ramm, whose black and long wool resembled silk, so
soft and smooth it was I cut off the hair which grew between their horns, and
cost it into the fire, sprinkling upon it milk, wine, flower, and honey; and
after I had called upon Hecathe three times, I thrust my knife into the hearts
of these Animals, one after another, and took their blood in a great basin:
Then falling upon my knees, I called again upon Hecathe; afterward I rose up,
and seemed as if I were transported, saying unto the Nymphs, See, see, the
deity! it is time, it is time, it is time! then taking Galathoa by the hand, I
stared with my eyes, shook my head, gaped with my mouth, made my breast to
pant, and all my body trembled, as if I were in a holy rapture: Then being near
the altar, I said, Oh holy deity, who resides in this place, give unto me
power to satisfy this Nymph in her demands with all truth. The room was dark,
and had no light, but such a hollow gloominesse as the candles gave; but the
day being now light, and the Sun up, it shined upon the painted paper, and made
it represent it self much better in the Looking glass; afterward I addressed
my self unto Galathea, saying, Oh fair Nymph! thou art the favourit of heaven,
thy prayers are heard, and thy sacrifice is received* It is the pleasure of the
deity, that not only by the ear, but also by the eye, thou may know the
place where thou shall find thy happiness. Come near this altar, and say
after me, Oh, most mighty Hecathe, whose habitation is in the Stygian Lake, at
whom the churlish Dog with three heads never barks; may thy altars ever smoke
with acceptable sacrifices, which I do vow annually to pay, so as, great
goddess, thou will let me see what I desire. At this word I let down the plank
which had the steel in it, which being fallen upon the flint, the fire did
flash presently, so as Galathea was surprised with fear: But I did say unto
her, Fear not fair Nymph, it is Hecathe who shows you what you desire. Then
the smoke by degrees vanishing, the Looking glass was to be seen; and, as good
luck was, the Sun shined so clearly and directly upon it, as made the painted
paper most plainly appear in it: After they had a while beheld it, I said unto
Galathea, Know Nymph, that Hecathe by me does let thee know, It is in this
place which you see in the Glass, where you shall find a jewel, half lost
and despised, out of a thought that it is false; and yet it is of an
inestimable value, take it and keep it carefully. This River which you see in
it, is Lignon: that Grove of Willowes beyond it is toward Mount Verdan.
Observe well the place and remember it. Then taking Galathea aside, I said unto
her, You have, as I told you before, a Genius, that swells with abundance of
malevolent influence; and another, the most benign and sweet, as possibly can
be desired From the evil influence guard your self, if you do love your own
contentment: the good influence is that which you do see in the mirror.
Observe well the place which I have let you see, and to the end you may the
better remember it, I bid you go and see it, and observe it well; for, when the
Moon shall be just of the same age, that this day she is, a little sooner, or a
little later, you shall find him whom you most love: If he see you before you
see him, he shall love you, and you with much a do will love him: On the
contrary, if you see him first, he shall be hardly brought to love you, but you
will love him immediately: But however, you must overcome your self and love
him, yea, and overcome him also, if need be; for doubtless you will at last
bring it to pass: If you do not meet him the first time, then go again the
next Moon, upon the same day, and same hour, and so to the third; for come he
will, though Hecathe will not assure me of the day. Then taking a little branch
of Hollin in my hand, I went unto the Looking-glass, and with the end of it,
showed her all these places: Look, (said I) see where the Mountain of I soures
is; see where Mount Verdun is, see where the River Lignon is, see, a little
beyond it, where the Meadow is, through which you have often gone to hunt: All
these places you may perhaps know, but I do not know them. Now Nymph, the
sacred deity of this place commands me to tell you, that if you do not
punctually observe what I say, and what you have promised, she will augment all
the miseries which your destiny does threaten you with all: For my part, I do
think my self happy, that before my departure I have given you this advice:
for, though I am not of this Country; yet, your virtue and piety does oblige me
to love you, and to pray unto Hecathe to make you fully happy: And with this
prayer I will take my leave of you; for the goddess whom I adore has
commanded me to depart before the day, to morrow. An this word I did put them
all out of my Cabin, after I had taken from them their Vervine, Fern, and
Hollin Chaplets, which I did burn in the fire.

I did prefix her three Moons, to the end, that if you failed one day, you
might be there another. I told her that if she saw you first, then she should
easily love you; and if you saw her first, the contrary; only because I knew
very well you would be first there so as she would find in her self the truth
of my prediction, for you know, she loves Lindamor. I told her that I was to
depart before to morrow, to the end she should not think strange at my
departure, if out of some fresh curiosity she should come again: For having now
done as much as my aims did drive at, my best way was to haste away, lest some
Druide should hear of me, and punish me, which, you know, was always my fear.
Do you think, Polemas, I have omitted any material circumstance? No certainly
said Polemas, only me thinks you gave her too large a time; I would you had
confined her to one day, and then I should have been sure to have met with her.
For my part, said Climanthes, I know not what to think, but that she has
counted the age of the Moon wrong; and I do verily believe, that but for this
Shepherd who was drowned, and who caused many people to seek about for him,
you had met with him that day: But let us have a little patience, for I am
confident, that the same reason which made you retreat, did also make her do
the like. But, me thinks it is time to rise, to the end we may depart. Then
opening the window, he perceived it to be bright day. Away, away, make haste
(said Climanthes to Polemas) the hour will be past else; you had better be
many hours too soon, then a minute too late. Would you have me go thither now
(said Polemas)? do you think she will come, since it is fifteen days past the
prefixed time? No matter (answered he) perhaps she has miscounted the days,
who can tell? and therefore let us go.

Leonida was afraid least Polemas and Climanthes should see her, and therefore
durst not rise till they were gone: but when they were out of the house she
dressed herself. And after she had taken leave of her host, she continued on
her Journey so confused at the cunning artifice of these two persons, as she
almost never minded her way and she was touched so to the quick, that Polemas
should so despise her beauty, that to be revenged of him, she would make
Lindamor acquainted with his treachery, which she thought she could not better
do then by the means of her Uncle Adamas unto whom she intended to communicate
the, matter. And in this resolution, she made all the haste she could unto
Feurs, where she thought to find him; but she came too late, for he went
homwards betimes in the morning, having the day before, finished all ceremonies
belonging to the sacrifice: as he went the day was very hot, therefore when he
was in the plain of Mount Verdun, he turned out of the way where he saw a
handsome shade of trees, to rest himself a while. And he was no sooner come at
it, but he espied a shepherd coming and seeming as if he intended to take the
same convenience of shade. And because when he came near, he seemed to be
exceeding pensive, he would not take any notice of him, lest he should disturb
his thoughts, but shaded himself purposely to hear what he would say: at
last, he heard him break out thus: Why should I be so simple as to love this
wethercock? in the first place her beauty cannot much move, for she has so
little as all she has cannot merit the name of Fair: moreover, there are no
other considerations that can help out her merits, or retain any man of parts
in her service: Again, her affection is all that can possibly oblige me, and
that is of such a mutable temper, as if she have any impression of Love in
heart, I believe it is but like unto wax and wax so soft as will easily take
any new impression and deface the old: at the most, if I do love her, I must
confess it is merely because I think she loves me. This shepherd had gone on
his discourse, had not a shepherdess overtaken him, who it seems followed
after him: and sitting down by him thus began to say: Come, Corilas, come, what
new disgust is it, that makes you thus pensive' The shepherd returned as
disdaining an answer as he could, and never so much as turning his head toward
her, answered thus; I am thinking what a trick of Legerdemaine you have used,
to get away from them whom even now you loved; why Corilas (said she) can you
think I Love any but your self? Than you? Said the shepherd, can you think I
believe you Love me? What then do you believe of me (said she) I believe you
are a fool, (said he) to love one that hates you. You have a very strange
opinion of me (said she): And you (said Corilas) have strange effects in
yourself Oh heavens (said the shepherdess) what kind of a man have I met
withal? I have more reason to say in so meeting with Stella, answered he, what
kind of a woman have I met withal? For never was any more incapable of amity
then you; you I say, who delights in nothing more then deceiving those who
trust you; who imitates Hunters, that with abundance of toil does hunt the
game, and then gives it, as a reward, to the dogs. There is so litele reason
in all you say (said she) as those have less that will stay to answer you. I
wish (said the shepherd) that I had always as much reason in my soul, as
there is at this time in my words, then should I not grieve so much as I do.
Afterward both of them being silent a long while, at last she began to sing
and thus in singing to express her self unto him. Also he, because he would
not sit mute without returning answer, thus replied unto her.

The Dialogue between Stella and Corilas. Stell. COme shepherd come and tell
me why
For want of Love thou do me fly?

Cor. Because to follow such a light
And ayrie spirit, is a flight,
Which must be followed with wings,
And men do never use such things.

Stell. I do remember well the time
When Loving me, you thought no crime;

Cor. Of passed time no talking spend,
He lives but ill that does not mend;
Time past, is past recovery;
And so with it, my memory:

Stell. To Love, I fear, you do not know
Only can make a loving show:

Cor. Why do you lay on me the blame
When you are guilty of the same?
You Love by false opinions voice
And not by any prudent choice:

Stell. By heaven, I Love you, and lament
You unto changing thus are bent;

Cor. Where once my Love becomes a due
I am unalterably true,
And think me not in Love like you
Who every day does love a new;

Stell. No no, I find thee faint and hollow
And can a new affection follow;

Cor. If any time you pleased me
Then did I think you fair to be;
It Was only thought; the troth is this,
You did no beauty e're possess:

Stell. Perfidious Lover; can thou find
A heart to kill her, that is kind?

Cor. You charge me when your self offends;
Must he that is injured make the mends?
But I never Loved; and take it from me,
What never was, will never be:

Stell. Nay, once you loved me; but 'its strange
That you so cruelly can change:

Cor. When loving you, a crime I find,
It Is wisdom sure to change my mind;
Repentance late is better far
Then never turn, when one does err;

Stell It Is fitter far you did regret
Your infidelity so great;

Cor. What you call infidelity
Discretion is, and policy:
And this is all that can be said
All Love betwixt us two is dead.

The shepherdess seeing he had all his replies so ready, she left off her
singing, and said thus unto him, why Corilas is there no manner of hope in you?
No, said he, no more then there is in your fidelity. Never think that all your
flattery and fair language can make me change my resolution; for, believe it, I
am most firmly fixed. It is mere vanity to make use of any arms or charms
against me, they are all too weak. I would advise you Stella to employ them and
your time upon some other, who not knowing you, will not perhaps slight you as
I do* Noveltie is pleasing you know: and perhaps you may meet with some, whom
heaven having a design to punish, may Love you: The shepherdess was in good
earnest nettled at this yet turning it into a seeming Jest, she smiled and
said: Oh Corilas I cannot choose but laugh at your cholerique humor, but ere
long* I shall see you in a better mood: Nay I know, replied the shepherd, that
it is your humor to laugh at those who love you, but I assure you, that you
may laugh long enough at me before I do Love you; Thus these two enemies
parted: and Adamas knowing by their names of what families they were he had a
desire to know more of their business: and calling Corilas by his name, he
came unto him; and causing him to sit down by him, he thus said, my Son (for so
I may call you out of the affection I ever had unto your family) you need not
be sorry that you have spoken so freely unto Stella before me: I am very glad
to see you so discreet: but I do desire to know further of your business, to
the end I may give you my faithful advice. As soon as Corilas saw the Druide,
he remembered that he had often seen him officiating in several Sacrifices: but
since he had never spoke to him before, he had not the confidence to relate the
passages twixt Stella and him; that he was ever willing that all the world did
know the Justice of his cause, and the perfidy of Stella: which Adamas
perceiving, by way of encouragement told him that he was partly acquainted with
the business already, and that to his comfort many did speak in his behalf. I
am afraid, Father (said Corilas) that the trifles of our villages will be very
tedious unto you. No No: replied Adamas, a relation of this business will much
please me, and time also will be well employed by so spending away the heat of
the day.

The History of Stella and Corilas.
SInce, Father, you command it so (said the Shepherd) I will relate the whole
matter unto you. Stella is the Widow of a Husband which Heaven gave her, rather
for a name then ought else: for, besides his sickness: his age, which was
above sixty six, had so impaired his strength, that he left her a lusty young
Widow, before she was almost married: And the affection she had unto him was
not so much, as to make her grieve too much for her loss; nor indeed was her
humor such, as to take any thing too much to heart. When she saw her self
ridd of two heavy yokes, both almost at once to wit, a riddance from an old,
crasy, and peevish Husband, and from that strictest observance which is
expected from Ghildren to Parents, she then began to show her self, and ruffle
in the world with a great noise: And as she was none of those killing beauties,
that make themselves loved by force, so her affectednesse did not at all please
any that looked upon her. Her age was some seventeen or eighteen, an age that
is apt to commit much folly, when liberty is given unto it. This was the reason
that Saliam her Brother, a very honest and discreet Shepherd, not being able
to endure the expensive courses which she drew upon him, and in some sort to
restrain her, did get her out of his village, into such a place, where she
might live in less danger of scandal: in order to which, he entreated
Cleanthes, that he would be pleased to let her accompany his Daughter Amintha,
because they suited so well in age, though Stella had a little the start of
her: And Cleanthes being content, there grew such a familiarity betwixt these
two Shepheardesses, and they lived such private lives and contented, as they
were never out of sight of one another. Many did wonder, that these two being
of such different tempers, yet they did so well comply; but the sweet and
loving disposition of Amintha, and the supple and easy nature of Stella, were
the causes; so Amintha never crossed the designs of her Companion, and Stella
never thwarted whatsoever Amintha desired; so as they kept such a
correspondency together, as nothing was hid from each other. But at last,
Lysis, the Son of the Shepherd Genetian, leaving the frozen valleys of Mount
Luna, and coming into our more pleasant plains, and seeing Stella at an
assembly in the Temple of Venus, when Astrea did carry away the prise of
beauty, he fell so in love with Stella, as I do not well know whether or no, it
has not sent him to his Grave: And she was so compliant to him, as after
several journeyes and messages, things were come to that pass, as Lysis moved
her to marriage, unto which she gave as favorable an answer as he could
desire. At this time, Saliant was constrained unto such a far off journey, as
he knew nothing of this treaty: besides, she did now take upon her self such
absolute authority, as she did not communicate her matters unto him. On the
other side, Amintha seeing her so soon resolved upon marriage, did often ask
her, whether or no she was in good earnest; and told her, that it was a matter
of so great importance, as required very great and serious consideration.
Amintha, answered she, never trouble your self, for I am not gone so far, but I
can easily make a retreat. Mean time, Lysis did make himself so sure of
marriage, as that he set down the day, invited many of his friends, and was at
such charges, as are usual upon such occasions. But Stella, according to the
custom of many women, who are proud of their own liberty, started from her
first intentions, and broke all off by such unreasonable demands, as she knew
the Parents of Lysis would never consent unto: But, his love being above all
difficulties and satisfying all her unreasonable demands, she was at last
forced to break off with him upon no other pretense, but the slenderness of
his affection to her. You may easily imagine how Lysis resented this affront;
but however, he could not yet master his love: And I remember upon this
subject, he composed these Verses, which afterward he gave unto me.

Upon Anger against Love.
IS Anger mad, in making me to go
Against such a fatal and puissant foe?
Must I conducted be into the field
By such a Captain, as is sure to yield?
A Leader in such lamentable arms,
Against love that is armed with arrows and with charms.
Can faint and feeble Anger ever think
Victorious Love to conquer, and make shrink?
No, no, the wafting of his wing will shatter
Thy Squadrons all, and will thy Bulwarks batter.
Love has of anger such infinite of odds,
As with his fore-works he can conquer Gods:
Resistance will but add unto his glory,
And being conquered, make more sad my story.
I Will therefore mercy ask, and quarter cry,
Which if my fairest shepherdess deny,
Then triumph in Elizian shades will I,
And my own death shall be my victory.
The cause of Stella's change in her affection, was the courtship of another
Shepherd called Semires, which did imprint it self very deep in her soul, and
which Lysis did perceive the last of all men, for she did conceal it more from
him than any other. This Shepherd Semires was of all men that my conversation
ever met with, the most dissembling and crafty; that he was otherwise a man of
very excellent parts, which caused this Shepherdess to go against her own
promise, and reject the match with Lysis, and to confer all her favors upon
her new Lover, who yet did not long triumph in this victory. For so it
happened, that Lupeander making a great Feast at the marriage of his Daughter
Olympia, Lysis and Stella were invited thither; and I being a kinsman unto the
Bride, I would not sail to be there also. I know not whether Love did it cut of
revenge, or whether it was the natural giddiness of Stella's wavering temper;
but so it was, that she no sooner saw Lysis, then she had a mind to recall him
into her favor; and in order to that, spruced up her self in all her
affectednesse which nature had very imprudently been prodigal of unto her:
But, the offended spirit of this Shepherd had armed him with so much courage,
as to hide all his affection to her, though he could not extinguish the flames
of love. Toward night, when every one prepared for dancing, and to apply
themselves unto those persons most suitable to their liking; Stella did so
pursue Lysis; that he being in a corner of a window, he could not handsomely
avoid her, but was forced to receive the assaults of his loving enemy. Semires
all this while observing how she pursued Lysis; all the evening, according to
the natural temper of all Lovers, he began to be sprinkled with jealousy,
knowing well, that a candle newly extinguished, will soon light again: And
seeing her so close to Lysis, he got so near, as seeming to talk unto another,
he heard her ask Lysis, why he shunned her so much? To which Lysis replied, The
reason is, because you do so impudently pursue me. But Shepherd, replied
Stella, I know from whence your discontents proceed, and I believe, not from
him whom you imagine. For gods-sake (answered Lysis) let me alone in
quietness; it is enough that thy offense proceeds from your hating me, and
your hatred from your own levity: But it is no matter, all is forgotten, and now
I have no mind to love. Well, well, (answered she) I know from whence all your
anger proceeds, and certainly you have some seeming reason for it; but, I
beseech you consider it a little better. Is it such an impardonable injury, not
to take a man to a husband, as soon as ever he has asked the question? Is it
not the custom of our Country, that he should ask that question twice? The
truth is, if I had married another, I had done you an injury: But, what
likelihood is there, that I should ever refuse a man so constant, that has
loved me almost these three months? The offended spirit of Lysis not suffering
him to love her, and his affection not suffering him to hate her, he did not
know in what terms to answer her; and yet, to stop the torrent of words, he
thus said unto her: I have had sufficient experience, Stella, that you know
better how to say then do, and that you abound much more in words than reason:
but, take this for an unalterable certainty, that look how much I loved you
heretofore, so much, or more, do I hate you now, and shall do as long as I
live; so as there shall not be a day, in which I will nor divulge you unto all
the world, for the most ungrateful and consening woman under heaven. Upon
this, forcing his affection and the arm of Stella away, he broke from her, and
left her alone in the window, whilst he went amongst the rest of the
Shepherds. Semires, who, as I told you, heard all this discourse, was both so
amazed and ill satisfied with her, as he resolved ever since to make no more
addresses unto such a wavering weathercock; which resolution was much more
confirmed by me; for, I having long looked for an opportunity of speaking to
her, and seeing Lysis had left her alone, I accosted her; for I must confess
that her allurements had some power upon my soul, and so much as the affronts
which she had put upon Lysis would not let me see her imperfections, and
fleeting disposition. And as every one is apt to flatter himself in his own
desires; so I supposed that what the merits of Lysis could not obtain from
her, my good fortune might. As long as Lysis courted her, I would not let my
affection appear, for besides consangunity, there was a great league of amity
betwixt us: but when I saw he was off, and thinking the place vacant (for I
never took notice of Semires) I thought it a fit time to open my self, before
she entertained any other so addressing my self unto her, and finding her all
pensiveness, I said unto her, that certainly it was some great occasion which
thus had altered her; for sadness was seldom seen in her pleasant humor. It
is that troublesome Lysis (answered she) who has put me in mind of old stories,
and still upbraids me with the refusing of him: Does that trouble you, (said I
unto her?) can it choose (answered)? how she for affection is not so soon put
off as ones clothes are but because I did a little delay his desires, he took
it for an absolute discharge: Truly (said I) Lysis did not deserve the honor
of your favor: for what he could not compass by his merits, he ought to have
tried what all his services accompanied with a long patience would do, but his
boiling temper, together with perhaps his too little love would not permit him.
Had the same happiness happened unto me as unto him, with what affection should
I have entertained it? And with what patience should I have waited for it? You
would think it strange (reverend Father) to hear me tell you, how suddenly
this shepherdess changed: yet I protest she entertained the overture of my
Love, as soon as ever I made it: and in such a manner, as, before we parted,
she permitted me to call my self her servant. You may easily conceive that
Semires, who heard all this, was no better satisfied with me then he was with
Lysis: but ever since he has discontinued his addresses, yet so discreetly as
many think Stella to be the cause, for she seemed not to care for it, because
the place of her affection was possessed with the new hopes she had of me,
which was the cause that I received many favors from her and which Lysis
quickly perceived. But Love which always will triumph over freindship, did
keep me from speaking unto him, lest I should offend the shepherdess: and
though he was much offended that I should thus conceal my my self from him,
yet I never did speak unto him without Stella's leave, who also seemed desirous
it should be so. But I who then was ignorant of her tricks, and strived at
nothing but how to content her, one night when Lysis and I were together, I had
this discourse with him: I must confess Lysis (said I unto him) that I have
not so clearly opened my self unto you, as our freindship required; but now you
must help me out, or else I am undon: I (answered Lysis) why you may be assured
that I will never fail the part of a friend, though your mistrust of me might
alter the case: and yet do not think but I do know of your Love* but your
silence so offended me, that I said nothing of it: Since you did know it,
replied I, and never spoke to me of it, I have the greater cause to be
offended: for I do confess, that I have something failed in point of freindship
by my silence: but you must consider that a lover is not himself, and his
disease is an excuse for all his errors: but you who are not troubled with the
same passionate disease, you have no excuse for your failings in point of
freindship. Lysis hearing my reasons, began to smile and said. You are very
pleasant Corilas, and I will not contradict you, but I pray you tell me, how I
may make amends for my fault: In doing that for me, said I, which you could
not: for your self, which is that I may obtain the affection of Stella: Oh
heavens (cried out Lysis then) unto what a dangerous precipice have you brought
your self: Shun it, Corilas, shun it, for it is a most dangerous passage, which
ruins all those which ever took it: I speak unto you by experience; you know
it, I know, that from any other, your merits can obtain more then mine; but it
is gross folly to hope for any thing from this perfidious woman, whom neither
virtue nor reason will move; to which I answered that to hear him say so, was
no small contentment: for, said I, until now I was afraid you had retained some
thoughts for your self, and therefore I was so reserved but since, thanks be to
the fates, it is not so, I will in this business put you to the trial of
friendship: I know that the hatred which succeeds Love is always measured
according to the grandeur of its predecessor: and that you once loving this
shepherdess: and now coming to hate her your hatred will be far greater then
if you had never loved her: Yet understanding from Stella her self, that I can
never arrive at my desires but by your means, I do conjure you Lysis by our
friendship to aid me, either by advising or speaking for me or any other way.
I will take it as a most extreme proof of your fidelity. Lysis was extremely
surprised at this desire, expecting any other prayer from me then this; by
which, besides his dislike from this of speaking unto Stella, he had lost a
friend whom he loved most. Yet he answered thus unto me; Corilas, I will do as
you desire, you can expect no more from me: but still remember that in messages
of Love such persons should be employed as are not hated. Thus poor Lisis in
lieu of a lover became a messenger of Love: a difficulty which his affection
to me made him undertake, and he had full intentions to serve me, though
afterward he changed his mind; but the violence of his Love must plead his
excuse, for Love has a most predominate power over men: and truly his
affection to me is to be both commended and admired, since he was once willing
to part from her he loved to let me enjoy her. One day watching an opportunity
of speaking unto her, he found her at home by herself, none being by to
interrupt their discourse: then calling to memory the affronts he formerly had
received he so armed himself against her charms, as Love at this time could
have no hope of overcomming. And though the shepherdess studied always to
triumph over him, yet he did so oppose his spleen against her and his
freindship to me, that at this combat he was conqueror Before he began to
speak she went to meet him, and pumped for some of her affected language; What
new happiness is this, said she, that has brought back my longed for Lysis to
me? What an unexpected favor is this? Come come, since you are returned I will
begin to hope again for I dare swear that never since you left me, have I
enjoyed a minute of content; to which the shepherd answered: More eloquent
then faithful shepherdess, I am better satisfied with this your ingenuous
confession, then if I had not been offended at your in fidelity; but let us
leave off this kind of discourse, and forget it for ever: answer me only to
such demands as I shall make unto you. Are you still resolved to deceive all
those who shall ever Love you? For my part, I must believe you are; for none of
your humors are unknown unto me: but I came to see and ask how many adorers:
you have, and whether you did not say and protest and swear unto them, that
none should ever be deceived by you; for if you did, certainly they are in my
predicament and rank. The shepherdess did not expect these reproaches yet she
answered him, and thus. Shepherd, though you came only with designs to wrong
me, yet I give you thanks for the visit, and confess that you have reason to
complain against me. I complain (answered he)? no I pray you let that alone;
I will neither wrong you nor complain against you: but am so far from it,
that I will rather commend your humor: for had you seemed to love me any
longer, I had been longer deluded: And I pray God, the loss of your Love bring
me no more hurt then it does sorrow, you shall never hear that I complain of
you: for injury and truth cannot subsist together, no more then you and
fidelity: can but take this for a most certain truth, that you are the most
deluding and ungrateful shepherdess in all Forests. Me thinks, discourteous
shepherd, (answered Stella) that this language would become any other mouth
better then yours. Then Lysis began to address himself in another dialect:
Hitherto (said he) I have borrowed my language from the just anger of Lysis;
but now I will borrow it of one that has more to do with you then Lysis has;
and that is from a discreet shepherd who loves you, and who values nothing
upon earth comparable to your favorable acceptance of him and his services. She
thinking that Lisis mocked her, answered him thus; Leave off this discourse,
Lysis: it is enough that you once did Love me without any reviving of the
memory of your errors; It Is very true, said the Shepherd, they were errors
indeed that moved me to love you; out you err as much as I did, if you think
that I do love you now, or that I speak for my self: No, no I speak in behalf
of poor Corilas, who is so wholly your devoted, as nothing can draw him off: I
told him how I had tried you, and what little assurance there was to be found
in your soul and words: I swore unto him, that you would certainly deceive him,
and that I was sure you would keep me from being forsworn: But, the poor,
miserable, loving thing, is so blinded, as he thinks, what I cannot obtain, his
merits can; and yet to undeceive him, I told him, that merit was the greatest
impediment to obtain any thing from you. And to the end you may believe what I
say, I pray read this Letter which he has sent you. But because Stella would
not read my Letter, Lysis did open it, and read it aloud unto her.

The Letter of Corilas unto Stella.
Fairest Shepherdess,
IT is most impossible, that any eye should look upon you, and not love; and as
impossible to love you, and not be extreme in his affection: If you please but
to consider this truth, when this paper shall be presented unto your most
lovely eyes, I assure my self, that the grandeur of my pain will, out of
pity, find a pardon for aspiring unto such a height as your merits, though
this presumption does justly merit punishment. In expectation of your doom, I
beseech you give my thoughts leave to kiss your fair hands a hundred thousand
times, not being able within the compass of that number, to include those
sorrows, which the denial of this supplication will give me, nor those joys
which will swell me, if you receive me, as most truly I am

Your most affectionate and most faithful Servant.


As Soon as Lysis had read this Letter, he went on with his discourse: Come
Stella, (said he) what death must he die, or how must he live? For my part, I
pity him with all my heart, and wish you could do the like. I pray consider
how bitter your denial will be to him. This discourse did touch this
Shepherdess to the quick, and seeing how far Lysis was from loving her, she
interrupted him in this manner, Me thinks Lysis (said she) if Corilas were in
such a mind as this paper speaks him, he was very ill advised to employ you,
since your mediation is more like to procure him hatred then love, and you
rather a messenger of war then peace. Stella, it is true, answered he, he was
very ill advised in his choice; but if he had showed as much judgment in the
rest of his actions, as in this, he would not have stood in need of your help;
he has had trial of your dissimulations, he knows what force your charms
have; and what friend could he have made choice of, without the danger of a
competitor, unless my self, whom you hate even unto death? But, let us leave
this discourse, and pray tell me plainly and in good earnest, whether or no you
will show him any favor; for the truth is, I dare not return to him, unless I
carry a good answer with me, unto which I do conjure you, both by his affection
that now is, and mine that was: Unto this, the Shepherd added so many
arguments, and importunate prayers, as the Shepherdess believed him to be in
good earnest; and her own natural disposition did easily incline her to it;
for, it is the custom of such as easily love, to believe as easily that they
are loved but Lysis at this time could obtain no further from her, then that
the affection of his cousin for want of his, should not be disagreeable unto
her; but time should advise her farther. And since this, Lysis has several
ways so solicited her, that he got from her as much assurance as he desired;
and because he was well acquainted with her levitie, he obtained from her a
promise in writing under her hand, and knew so well how to turn her, that he
obtained of her whatsoever he desired. Thus he returned to me, and gave me an
account of all he had done, except of this promise: for, knowing Stella's
humor, he always doubted she would deceive him, and that if he showed me this
paper, it would imbarque me the more, and be harder to get me off. All this was
unknown unto Amintha, from whom Stella concealed it more, then from any other.
After I had received so much assurance, as I could desire no more, and after I
had given her all humble and hearty thanks, I began, by her permission, to take
orders for the marriage, and spoke it very freely and openly, though Lysis
always foretold me, that in the end I should be deceived. But, the very shadow
of that good which we desire does so flatter us, that we lend but a deaf ear
unto any that shall tell us the contrary. Whilst this Marriage was preparing,
and publicly divulged, Semires, who, as I told you, discontinued his addresses
by reason of Lysis and me, he being netled with the discourse which went of
him, resolved, at what rate soever, to infinuate himself into her favor, with
a design to quit her afterward, and make it appear, that this separation
proceeded from himself: There needed no great artifice to bring this about,
for her sickle humor, according to its fleeting temper, did at the very first
assault, quit me for Semires as a little before she had quitted Semires for me:
But for all that, the promise which she had given under her hand, and which she
could not deny, did exceedingly stick in her stomach. At last, the Marriage day
being come, and I had assembled together all my Parents, my Friends, and
Neighbors, I held my self so sure, as I thought upon nothing but bidding them
welcome. But she, whose thoughts were quite another away, when we came to the
very point of Marriage, she started back, and formed excuses far worse then her
first; at which I was so extremely offended, that I went away without ever
bidding her adieu; and ever since I held her in such disdain, that she could
never infinuate her self again into my esteem.

Judge (reverend Father) whether or no I had good reason to hearken to her, and
whether those who speak in my disadvantage be not wrongly informed. Truly,
answered Adamas, she is a woman that is unworthy of her name; and I do wonder,
since she has deluded so many, that any man will ever trust her. Nay Sir, said
Corilas, I have not yet told you all; for after every one was fallen from her
except Lysis, all her artifice was, how to get the promise which he had out of
his hands, because she saw, that it was a great thorn in her side: Therefore
with an impudent and dissembling brow, she thus spoke unto him, Is it possible
Lysis, (said she) you should have lost all that affection which you have so
often vowed unto me? Is there no spark of love yet left in you? In me, (said
Lysis)? no, I Will sooner die. Upon this word, he went out of the house; but she
followed him so close, as she got hold of his hand, and holding it between
hers, she brought him back in such an amorous posture, as any would have judged
them to be very loving; and though he knew her deluding humor well enough, yet
could he not choose but be pleased with her flatteries, although he gave no
faith unto them; and therefore thus said unto her, Oh heavens, Stella! why do
you so abuse those favors, which the heavens have so prodigally bestowed upon
you? Did but that fair body contain a soul that had any near resemblance unto
it, who could possibly resist it? She who knew well enough what charms were in
her carresses, did use all the artifice of her eyes mouth, tongue, and all the
invention she had to make him melt, insomuch as he was almost out of himself;
And at last she came out with these words, Lovely Shepherd, (said she) if you
be the same Lysis who was once so sweetly affectionate unto me; I beseech you
hearken unto these words, and believe them: and if you do find any cause of
complaint, I will make it evidently appear, that this which you esteem as a
second fault, was committed only as a remedy for the first, which I will repair
with all possible and desirable satisfaction. These smooth words wrought upon
Lysis, and did overcome him; yet, not to show himself so simply weak, he
answered thus: Stella, I am so incredulous of all you say, as I believe not a
syllable; and if I knew any thing which would displease you, I would do it. If
you would displease me, said the Shepherdess, then come into the house. With
that intention, I will, (answered he). Thus when they were entered into the
house, and stood near the fire, she began thus; Now Shepherd, will I unmask
the Riddle of all my dissimulations with you, and make it most apparent, that
poor Stella, whom you have accounted such a leight huswife, is much more
constant then you imagine her, and will let you plainly see, that in
satisfaction of those wrongs you have done me, that you have reason to confess
them, and be sorry: But, said she, upon a sudden, what have you done with that
promise which once you had of me, in favor of Corilas? for, if you have given
it unto him, it will extremely cross our designs. Who could possibly imagine,
but that after all this, she had loved Lysis? So this Shepherd having an
opinion, that she would do that for him, which she had refused me, he restored
back unto her that promise, which he had so closely kept from me. As Soon as
ever she saw it, she took it, and tore it all in pieces then threw it into the
fire: Afterward, turning toward Lysis, and laughing, she thus said unto him,
Honest Shepherd, you may now be gone when you please, I know none that will
hinder you, and it is very late. Oh heavens! (cried out Lysis, seeing himself
overreached) is it possible I should be so simple, as to be gulled three times
by one and the same person? What reason have you to say, said Stella, that you
are gulled? Oh! most perfidious woman, (said he) did you not tell me, that you
would make it appear, that your second fault was committed, only to give
satisfaction for the first? and to show me that you were constant, you would
discover your very heart and intentions to me? Lysis, said she, you are still
harping upon the wrong string; pray tell me, wherein have I wronged you, if I
did never love you, am I not constant, in not loving you still? And do I not
discover my heart and intentions to you, since now I have gotten that from you
which I desired, I give you free liberty to go home in peace? Could you think
that all my words which I have given you for this hour together, tended to any
other purpose, but to get this paper from you? and now I have it, I will bid
you goodnight, good Lysis. You may imagine what crestfallen Shepherd Lysis
was, when he heard all this; he was so damped, that he sneaked away, and never
gave one word. But since this, Semires revenged all our quarrels, and he who,
as I told you was the cause of my misery, or indeed, my happiness (for so may
my separation from her be called) he, I say, resenting still the first affront
which she put upon him, and considering her extreme levity, as Lysis and I were
served, so served he her, and broke off the Marriage with her in the midst of
the Congregation which gave many an occasion to say, That often she who hurts
another, receives her punishment by the same arms.

Thus Corilas concluded: and Adamas in a smiling manner said thus unto him, The
best counsel I can give you is to fly this deluder; to beware of her
fallacies, and to please your Parents who do so much desire to see you married.
When any good match is offered take it, and never insist upon the circumstances
of Love; for nothing will sooner wash off these istains which this giddy woman
has cast upon your honor, nor sooner purchase esteem amongst your neighbors,
then to marry your self not by Love but by Reason: for that is the greatest
action of your life; Upon which depends all the happiness or misery of man.
Upon these words they parted toward their several homes, for it began to be
late.

Again, Leonida not finding Adamas at home, she went away again as soon as
ever she had dined: and because she was resolved to stay all that night, with
those fair shepheardesses which she had seen the day before, out of a desire
she had to be more intimately acquainted with them, she went to the place where
she found them before; and there she espied one a far off, but could not
discern who it was: yet drawing near she perceived it to be the same she
looked for. She might very well esteem this as a happy meeting: for all these
shepheardesses, as chance was, were come out of the Town purposely to pass away
all the rest of the day together, to the end they might more freeely impart
their secrets unto each other out of the reach of all ears. So as Leonida
could never have come in a more opportune time to satisfy her curositie, then
she did: and stealing near them she heard Astrea, say unto Diana; Now wise
shepherdess I hope you will perform your promise unto Phillis and me, in
acquainting us with your story, since we have imparted ours unto you.

Fair Astrea, answered Diana, my promise doubtless obliges me unto it, but much
more the amity that is betwixt us; knowing well that amongst friends it is a
crime impardonable to conceal any corner of their souls from each other: the
only reason why it is so long before I have given you that satisfaction,
believe it dear shepherdess, was, because time and leisure would not permit
it: And though I am certain, that I cannot relate the follies of my youth unto
you without many blushes: yet that dificulty will easily be over come when I
consider that it is to please you: Why should you blush at all (answered
Phillis) since it is no crime to Love? If it be not one (replied Diana), yet it
is such a shadow of one, and so resemblant as one is often taken for the other.
Such as are so deceived (answered Phillis) sure have very ill eyes. It Is very
true indeed, (said Diana) but this is our misery, that there is more bad eyes
then good ones: we shall be very angry, said Astrea, if you think ours such.
The Love I bear unto you both (answered Diana) may assure you that I cannot
make a wrong judgment of you: and I dare trust you with my very soul: But
should I impart my self so freely unto some, I should find my actions meet with
a wrong construction: And therefore since it is your pleasure and command, that
I should relate my life unto you, I do conjure you both, by all the sacred
Laws of friendship, never to speak of it again. Then both of them protesting
to bury all in eternal silence, she thus began her discourse.

The History of Diana.
IT will be very strange Fair and discreet shepheardesses, if this discourse
which you desire should be related, do not prove tedious unto you, since the
relation I shall make, has not so many words it it, as it has cost me tears:
but since it is your pleasure I should revive the sad remembrance of them, I
beseech you give me leave to make it as short as I can. I do assure my self,
that though you have never seen either Celion or Belinda, yet you have heard
that they were my Father and Mother; and perhaps have heard of the crosses
which they met withal for the Love of one another, which shall spare me the
relating of them, though they were presages of my ensuing miseries. And be
pleased to know, that after the heats of Love were a little cooled by marriage,
to the end they might not be idle, they began to look narrowly into the
business of their estate, and had envolved themselves into so many suites of
Law, as they were forced to compose some of them, by mediation of friends.
Amongst the rest, a neighbor of theirs called Phormion, did so trouble them,
that to stop all those gaps, their friends advised them to make some alliance
with him: and because neither of them had any children (neither having been
long married) they both swore by Theutates upon the Altar of Belinus, that if
they had but one Son and one Dauyhter, they should Marry together: and this
promise was confirmed by so many sacred oaths, as he who broke them was the
most perjured man in the world. A little after, my Father had a Son, who
perished when the Goths and Ostrogoths did ravage this Province. A little after
that, I was born, but in such an unhappy hour for me, that my Father never saw
me, he dying before I was born. Phormion, seeing my Father dead, and my Brother
lost, (for those barbarians, took him away, and either killed him, or let him
starve for want) and that my Uncle Diamis was gone away in displeasure at this
loss, he resolved if he had a Son, to accomplish their former promise. It
happened a little after, that his wife was brought to bed, but it was of a
Daughter, and fearing lest he should have no more children by his wife, he
caused it to be rumored, that it was a Son, and carried it so cunningly that
none knew the contrary. And it was the more easy to be don, because none
believed that he would use any such tricks: also, the better to color the
matter, he caused her to be named Philidas. Whom, when she was grown to an age
of practicing such excercises as young shepherds use she was not ill at them.
Phormions design was, that seeing me without Father, Brother and Uncle, to
make himself Master of my estate, by this dissembled marriage: and when
Philidas and I were grown bigger, then to marry me unto one of his Nephews
whom he loved very well: and truly he was not frustrated in his design: for
Belinda was too religious to be wanting in any duty to her husband. But yet,
she seeing me ravished away and gotten into their hands (for presently upon
this pretended marriage, I was seized into Phormions custody) she did so
dislike this course, as not being able to endure it, she left the Country, and
went into the Lake Lemane, to be Mistress of the Vestalls and Druides of
Emenes as the aged Cleontine did Prophecy by her Oracle. Mean while I was in
the hands of Phormion, who presently sent for his Nephew, ^ upon whom he
intended to bestow me, whose name was Amindor: here did begin my griefs: For
Phormion his Uncle did let him understand that by reason of our nonage, the
marriage of Philiduss and me, was not so assured, but that if we two did not
well agree, he could well enough break it off: and that if such a thing should
be, he had rather she should marry me then any other; therefore he advised him
to carry it with so much discretion as none should take any notice of it, but
still to win upon my affection as much as he could, to the end I might bestow
my self upon him when I was free. This young shepherd did so take this design
to heart, as he neglected no manner of courtship and complacency toward me. At
the same time Daphnis a very handsome and discreet shepheardess returned from
the confines of Furan, where she had lived many years: and because we were
neigbours, our conversation made us such friends as I began to be less
discontented then I was wont: for I must confess that the humor of Philidas
was so displeasing unto me, as I could hardly endure her: also her fears of my
growing more knowing, made her so jealous of me, that I could hardly speak unto
any. Things being upon these terms, Phormion fell suddenly sick, and was so
soon stuffed with a cattarh that he could neither speak, nor give any order
either about his own business or mine. Philidas at the first was a little
troubled; but afterward seeing that she was absolute Mistress of her self and
me also, she resolved to keep up this authority, considering that the liberty
which the name of Man does carry with it, was much more pleasing then the
servitude of our sex. Nor was she insensible of that wonder which would be over
all the Country, when she should declare her self to be a woman: upon these
reasons, she continued in the same name and notion, which she did when her
Father was alive; and fearing more then ever, lest some should discover what
she was, she kept me so near her, as she was seldom or never without me. But,
Fair shpheardesses since you must know all my young follies. I must first beg
your excuses, and that you will know, I had so great an inclination to Love,
another way: but that my heart was so hardened against Philadis and Amindor as
love had not arms or arrows strong and sharp enough to pierce so much as my
skin. But alas, it was the shepherd Filander, who had my heart; Filander who
having given me some assurance of his love, and now not being, has carried with
him all that was mine; surely (said Astrea, and interrupted her) either
Filanders affection was very little, or else you did carry it with a great
deal of prudence* for I never so much as heard of it. Which is a thing very
strange. That it was not talked of, answered Diana, I am more obliged unto your
good intentions then our prudence. And as for the affection of this shepherd,
you may judge what it was, by my ensuing discourse. And the heavens, who know
our pure and clear intentions, had a mind to favor them. The first time I
ever saw him, was upon that day which we celebrated unto Apollo and Diana, when
he came into those sports in the company of a Sister, so extremely like him
that the eyes of all the assembly were upon them. And because he was nearly
allied unto my dear friend Daphnis, as soon as I saw her, I did so embrace and
carresse her as ever since she thought her self obliged to love me; Her name
was Callirea, and was married unto a shepherd called Gerestan, upon the
confines of Furan, whom she had never seen until the very day she married him,
which was a reason why there was but a very flender affection between them. My
complacence to the Sister gave occasion unto the Brother to stand by me, as
long as the sacrifice lasted; and I cannot tell, whether to his good or bad
fortune, but I had that day dressed up my self in my best trim, conceiving
that my very name upon this feast, did more particularly oblige me to it, then
any other. And he, being a stranger, and having no other acquaintance amongst
the Shepherds and Shepheardesses, than such as his Sister brought him, did not
leave us all that day: So as, I conceiving my self in some sort obliged to
entertain him, I did what I could to please him, and my labor was not lost;
for, from that time, this poor Shepherd did begin such affection to me as did
not end till he died: And I am most confident, that if the dead have any
remembrance of the living, he loves me still; and in his ashes preserves that
pure affection which he vowed unto me. Daphnis took notice of this, the very
same day, and at night told me of it; but I did so long reject any such
thoughts, as she was forced to say thus unto me. I see, Diana, you will not
believe me; but, be assured, that Filander does extremely love you. This
advertisment did so imprint it self in my mind, as the next day made me
observe something, which induced me to be of her opinion: For, in the
afternoons, we were accustomed to assemble under some shady tree, and sitting
round, to sing. It chanced, that Filander having no acquaintance but Daphnis
and me, he did sit down between us, which Amindor taking notice of, did swell
with such a pitiful fit of jealousy, that he, in a fuming chafe, left the
company; and first looking upon me, as if it were I that he meant, he went
away, singing this Catch.

Amindor's Catch against Levitie.
God, in his mercy, may do much, and save her;
But he that comes next is sure to have her.
Can any be so blind,
As think to get her Love;
Who wavers like the wind,
Which wantonly does rove?
No, God in's mercy may do much and save her,
But he that comes next is sure to have her.
A Weathercock can move
At every blast of wind;
And she at any love,
Can turn her fleeting mind.
So God in's mercy may do much and save her;
But he that comes next is sure to have her.
One Nail drives out another,
And he that next does kiss her,
Will quite drive out the other,
And make the first to miss her.
God, in thy mercy, I beseech thee make her
In Love more constant; else, the Devil take her.
I had so much power over my self, as not to seem any thing troubled at this
song; and Daphnis out of her discreet affection unto me, never staying the end
of this Catch, did interrupt him, and begun another song, addressing her self
unto me.

The Madrigall of Daphnis, upon the affection she bore unto Diana.
SInce, fair Diana, I do find you prove
The Center, unto which all hearts do move:
Then, why not mine? why should I not adore
Her, that of beautles has the greatest store.
And since they say, the purest Love of all,
Has from resemblance its Original:
Then our affections needs must be extreme,
Since both our Sexes are the very same.
Then, the better to cover the color of my cheeks, and to make it seem, I took
no notice of Amindor's invective Catch; as soon as Daphnis had done, I answered
her thus.

A Madrigall, upon the same Subject.
WHy such a wonder should it seem, that I
And you, though both be women, yet should vie
Affection? Is It a miracle to see,
That women well as men should Lovers be?
But if impossible; Oh, then be you
The Shepherdess, and I the Shepherd true.
After us, every one sung their own fancies; and Filander when it came to his
turn, he did sing these ensuing Verses with an excellent voice.

Filander, upon the beginning of his Love.
THough I foresaw my expectation high,
And my desires; were swelled with vanity:
That Love was full of flaming fire and pain;
And though I loved, should not be loved again:
Yet still I hoped, and at her I aimed,
Only because I would be more inflamed.
'Twas so decreed by fate, and 'twas not I
That could anticipate my destiny:
No wonder then; that in obedience
Unto this dire and fatal Ordinance,
I should adore her, and, I hope, no crime:
A heart that is base so high could never clime.
But as the fading Marygold does die,
And wither only by the world's fair Eye:
So I, like it, did say, Oh! glorious Sun,
Let me be scorched, till my days be done:
For in that death, this pleasure I shall have,
No fire but thine could burn me to my grave.
When as the Phoenix, by an art so rare,
And nature, both together, does prepare;
To make her Cradle in her Tomb, she says
Unto the fire, wherein her corpse she lays,
By dying in thy flame I will assume
My glory out of ashes, now my Tomb.
Many more did then express their several conceptions in verse, but I have
forgotten them: But so it was, that me thought Filanders words were aimed at
me, and I cannot well tell, whether it was the hint which Daphnis had given me,
or the language of his eyes, which spoke much more plain then his tongue: I
cannot tell, but either the one, or both, made me apply this song to my self;
and as these verses did give me a little light of it, so his discretion did a
little after, much more plainly testify it unto me: For, it is the principal
effect of a true affection, to carry it discreetly, and never to let it be
known, but by those effects which cannot be hid. This young Shepherd knew of
Amindor's humor, and love had taught him so much curiosity, as to find out,
that his jealousy was no less than that of Philidas; and therefore he
conceived, that the best way to blind both their eyes, was, to court their
friendship: and Love had made him so subtle and prudent, that in the carriage
of the matter, he did not only deceive Amindor's, but almost all eyes else; for
he would never come where we were, but suffered us always to come unto him.
It Is true, that crafty Daphnis did presently find it out; for, said she,
Amindor is not a man of such agreeable parts, as to attract unto him such a
well accomplished Shepherd as Filander, but there must needs be some farther
reach in all Filanders addresses to him; she indeed did prompt me to take the
first notice of it, and I must confess, that his discretion did so please me,
that if I would suffer any to love me, it should be him; but, the time was not
yet come, that I could be wounded this way, although his actions and carriage
did please me, and though I did in some fore approve of his design. When we at
any time took our leaves of him, he would always wait upon us a long way; and
at parting, I never heard such expressions of friendship, as he used to
Amindor; nor such offers of service, as he tendered unto Philidas: Then would
sly Daphnis whisper me in the ear, and say, All these expressions are meant
unto you, and you do him wrong if you do not answer him. And when he thanked
Amindor for any favor, she would say, Oh what a fool is he, to think, that
these offerings are intended to his Altar? And he so well knew how to
dissemble, that he served himself into the very heart of Amindor: And Philidas
was so tickled with his high commendations of her, as she would often send, to
desire him he would come and see her. Heavens knows, how often he had solicited
for this opportunity, for it was as much as he could desire, thinking his
design could not possibly have a better beginning. As fortune was, one day
when Daphnis and I were walking under some shady trees, and talked our selves
almost quite out of discourse, we heard a voice, which at the first we thought
to be of some stranger; the desire of knowing who it was, made us draw toward
the place, and Daphnis going first, she espied Filander before me, and beckned
unto me, that I should tread gently; and when I was come near her, she named
Filander in a low voice, who was laid down, leaning his head against a tree,
and began thus, I should defy and scorn Love, and all his policies and charms,
did he not make use of my fairest Diana's arms against me. And so went on.

When I heard my self named, fair Shepheardesses, I trembled, and trod upon
the ground, as if a Serpent were under my feet; and without any longer stay, I
went away as gently as I could, lest I should be seen, though Daphnis, in hopes
to make me come again, did let me go by my self: At last, she seeing I
continued on my way she also stole softly off, and afterward ran after me as
fast me as fast as she could, and, when she could hardly draw her breath, she
chid me in a very interrupted manner; but when she had recovered her wind and
could speak plain, she thus said unto me: As I live Diana, if the heavens do
not punish you, I shall think they are unjust: Could you be so cruel, as not
so much as to lend him a hearing? What good could I do unto him, (said I) by
staying any longer there? You might have heard what hurt you have don him, said
she unto me. I do him hurt, answered I? you do me wrong, in saying I could hurt
one whom I never thought upon. Therein, said she, you hurt him most; for, did
you ofter think upon him, you could not choose but be moved unto pity. I
blushed at that word, and the changing of my color did make Daphnis believe,
that I was offended with her, and therefore in a smiling manner, she said unto
me, I did but jest, Diana, and do not believe he thought upon you; and as for
using your name, I believe he meant some other of the same name that yours is.
Thus we went on talking and walking we knew not whither, until another path
had brought us unto the same place, where Filander was; and though I did it out
of heedlessnesse, yet Daphnis perhaps did it out of design, however, I was
forced to look upon him lying upon the ground, leaning his head upon his arm,
and seeming as if he were awake; for he had a Letter before him, all wet with
tears which trickled down his cheeks: but, indeed he was asleep and we were
more assured of it, when Daphnis, more consident then I, stooped gently down,
and brought me the Letter, all steeped in tears, which sight did much move me
to pity, and much more the Letter, which was thus written.

Filanders Letter unto Diana.
THose who have the honor to see you, do run a most dangerous piece of
fortune: If they do love you, then they are too bold; and if they do not, then
they have no judgment, your perfections being such, as, with reason, they can
neither be loved nor not loved; and I being constrained to fall into one of
these two errors, have chosen that which is most congruent to my humor, and
from it, it is impossible to retreat. Do not take it ill, fair Diana, that
since it is an absolute impossibility to look upon you, and not love, that
since I have seen you, I do so. If my rashness do merit punishment, remember,
that I had rather love you, and die, than live, and not love you. But alas! why
do I say, I had rather? as if it were in my choice; for I must out of a fatal
necessity be your most humble servant, and you must be what you are, which is,
the fairest Shepherdess that ever lived: So as without any Rathers, I must
both live and die under this fatal, Must.


I had no sooner read this Letter, but, with a trembling hand, I returned it,
and Daphnis did gently put it in the place where she found it: she came softly
off without waking him, and coming unto me, who stood a pretty distance off; I
pray, sweet Diana, said she unto me, give me leave to speak freely unto you.
Our friendship Daphnis (answered I) does give you that power without the
asking. Then, Diana, said she, I must tell you, that I do pity Filander with
all my heart, for most certainly he loves you; and your own soul, I Am sure
cannot deny it. Daphnis, (said I unto her) let the faulty do the penance. If
so, said she, then I Am sure that Filander must not: for, I cannot allow it any
fault to love you, but, I believe, his fault had been much greater if he had
not loved you; for fair ones were made only to be loved. I dare appeal unto
your judgment, answered I, whether I can pretend unto that title. But however,
I do conjure you by our friendship, not to let him understand that I have any
knowledge of his intention; and if you do love him, advise him never to mention
it unto me: For esteeming both him and Callirea his Sister, as I do, I should
be very sorry to banish him our company, which, you know, I should be forced
unto, if ever he speak of it unto me. How then would you have him to live, said
she unto me? I would have him live, replied I, as he did before he ever saw me.
But that he cannot do, replied she, for then he was not scorched with those
flames which now do burn him. Then, said I, let him seek some remedy to quench
those flames, without offending me. The fire is great, added she, and will not
be quenched. Be the fire as great as it will, said I, it will not burn him, if
he will not come near it. Although, answered she, the burned use to fly the
fire; yet, if he do fly, he will carry his fire with him, and the pain too. In
conclusion I told her, that if it was so, then let him burn on, for I could not
help him. With such discourse as this we returned toward our flocks, and at
night to our lodgings, where we found Filander so carressed by Philidas, and
Amindor also, that Daphnis believed he had bewitched them, it not being their
humors to use others so. He stayed many days amongst us, and all that while,
he made not the least show of any thing unto me, but lived in such a discreet
manner, that had not Daphnis and Iseen, what we did, we had never entertained
the least suspicion of his intention. At last he was forced to depart, and not
knowing what to resolve upon, he went unto his Sisters house, for he loved her,
and had as great a confidence in her, as in himself. This Shepherdess, as I
told you, was married by force, and had no other contentment, but in the
friendship of her Brother: As soon as ever she saw him, after the first salute,
she was very inquisitive to know from whence he came: and he answering, that he
came from Philidas, she asked him how Daphnis and I did: And he telling her
also, speaking very highly in my commendations; she whispered him in the ear,
and said, I am afraid Brother, that you do love her better then you do me. He
answered, that indeed he did love me, as my merits did oblige him to do. Then I
have guessed right, (said she) for I know not a Shepherdess in the whole
world, that is owner of more merit; and I must confess, that were I a man, I
would, whether she would or no, devote my self her servant. May I believe
Sister, said he, that you speak this in good earnest? Yes truly Brother,
answered she, I will swear it, by that which is most dear unto me. Then I do
believe, replied he, that if you were a man, you would have a hard task in
hand; for, I perceive her to be of an humor that is not easily bended:
Moreover, Philidas and Amindor are so deadly jealous of her, as one or both of
them are never out of her sight. Oh dear Brother (cried she out) I plainly see
that you are taken, since you have so precisely observed these particulars, I
do beseech you conceal it no longer from me: for Love, if it be a fault is very
pardonable: and she was so importunate, that, after a thousand protestations
and suplications never to impart it, he confessed it unto her, and in such
passionate expressions, as she could not possibly doubt it. And when she asked
him how I received this declaration? Oh heavens, said he unto her, did you but
know her humor you would say that never any did undertake a more difficult
piece of business. All that I have done hitherto, is to blind the eyes of
Philidas and Amindor, making them believe there is none in the world more
theirs then I am; and I have so well thriven in my design upon them, as they
were never well but when I was with them: then he made a report of all the
passages unto her. But said he, though I did intend to discover unto Diana, how
much I was hers, yet such an awing power she had over me, as I never durst, and
I am afraid I never shall, only unless a long continued practice should
embolden me, for otherwise it cannot be, but Philidas and Amindor will take
notice of it: So as, dear Sister, to tell you my condition, it is to tell you,
that I am the very next door unto despair. Callirea who loved her Brother above
all the world, was so sensible of his pain, that after she had a while thought
upon it, she said thus unto him. Brother, will yoube pleased to let me
contribute my good will toward your satisfaction, and render you a testimony
of my forwardness to serve you? Dear Sister, answered he, though in this or
any other business, I make no doubt of your good will: yet I am afraid of the
success; how ever I shall entertain any thing which comes from you.

Then Brother, said she, I will go this way to work; you know what a
resemblance there is between our faces, our statures, and our speech, and were
it not for a difference in habit, even those that are continually with us, will
take the one for the other: Now since the best way to compass your design, is
to keep about Diana without suspicion, can a more easy and secret way be
devised, then for you to be taken for a woman? So may you keep Diana company
without giving the least suspicion of jealousy unto Philidas, and I may
return unto Gerestan in your habit unto whom I will make an excuse and say
that Daphnis and Diana kept you with them by force. All the difficulty will be
to get his leave to go unto them, which I doubt will be very hardly obtained.
Dear Sister, said Filander, I never made any doubt of your wit or dearness to
me; and now I find you to be the best Sister that ever man had, since you are
pleased to take this pains upon you, which I most humbly beseech you to do,
and know, that it is the only way that can keep a Brother alive who loves you
above himself. Then did he embrace her with all possible acknowledgments of
obligation, which made her more willing to serve him then before: at last, she
said thus unto him: Sweet Brother let us leave words to them that love less,
and let us think how to put our business into action. I hope, said he, it will
easily be effected, if you can but obtain your Husbands leave, which I hope
will also be effected, if you pretend that your journey is only with intentions
to bring the match about, betwixt Amindor and his Niece, which he does very
much desire, and telling him that you make no doubt, but that you with the help
of Daphnis shall in time bring it to pass. But what course shall we take with
our hair? for yours is too long, and mine too short, and therefore I doubt will
much trouble us: Never take care for that, said I unto him: for yours is long
enough to be dressed up like mine; and I will circumcise mine into your cut.
But, dear Sister, said he unto her, will it not grieve you to part so with your
hair? No Brother, answered she, there is nothing so dear unto me, which I would
not part with to procure your contentment, though it were my very skin. At this
word he embraced her, and told her that next unto god she would be his great
deliverer from his torments. Then Filander, to lose no time, took the first
opportunity that offered it self, of talking with Gerestan, representing unto
him the advantage and feasibilitie of bringing this match about: and because
Filander desired so much time as to let his hair grow a little longer, he
pretended a journey about the dispatch of some business, and would shortly
return. But Philidas no sooner heard of Philanders return, than she went to
visit him accompanied only with Amindor, and would not part with him before
they brought him unto us, where he stayed seven or eight days and was not any
bolder to declare himself unto me than at the first.

During which time, to show how hard a thing it is to constrain nature long;
although Philidas did counterfeit the Man as well as she could for her life,
yet was she forced to resent the passions of a woman: and the addresses and
merits of Filander wrought such effects in her, as he desired they had wrought
in me.

Thus the poor Philidas was so much besides her self, that she could not live
out of Filanders fight, and did apply her self so unto him, as did amaze him,
and had not his desires of being near me restrained him, he would never have
endured that kind of life. At last when he thought his hair was reasonably well
grown, he returned to Gerestan, and told him that he had already broken the Ice
of the business, but Daphnis, did think it expedient to see his Niece before
she spoke in the business, and likewise that Amindor also saw her, and
therefore she thought the best course was to let Callirea carry her thither,
and she to show her self as complaisant as she could unto Amindor and the rest.

Gerestan who desired nothing more then to be rid of his Niece did hearken unto
this proposition with a very willing ear and did peremptorily command his wife
to make her self ready for the voyage, who to make him more eager upon it, did
seem to be a little unwilling, and showed some signs of sorrow to part from
her Husband, saying that such business as this, might be well enough effected
without her, and that it would take up a great deal of time, which might
better be spent in her household affairs. But Gerestan who would have her will
to yield to his in all things, was so extremely hot upon the matter, that three
days after, she departed with her Brother and her Niece. The first days
Jorney was to Filanders, where they changed habits, which so well fitted each
other, that even those in their company could not perceive the change: And I
must confess I was deceived as well as they, and found no manner of difference
betwixt them. But well might I be deceived, when Philidas was, who looked upon
him with the eyes of Love, which they say are more observant then all the eyes
of Linx: for as soon as they came, she left the feigned Callirea, I mean
Filander, and carried the true into a chamber to rest her self. All the way as
they came, Filander instructed his Sister in all passages, and how she should
find the persons with whom she was to transact; now though Callirea was
resolved to undergo all difficulties, for her Brothers contentment: yet
thinking Philidas to be a man, it went much against the hair of her mind to
talk with her. As for us, when Daphnis and I were retired, we treated Filander
with all the civilities that are used amongst women, I mean, such as either
amity or privacie requires, which that shepherd did receive with much
Jollitie; and as he has since sworn to me, he was almost transported besides
himself. Had I not been a mere child in matter of observation, certainly his
actions and behavior would have discovered him unto me: but the truth was,
she did counterfeit the matter so exceeding well, that Daphnis was deceived as
well as I: while we retired into our chambers after supper Callirea and
Philidas did walk into the chamber. I know not what their discourse was, but
ours was nothing but assurance of amity and cordial expressions of affection,
which Filander used in such a passionate way as it was easy to judge, that
though she would have said nothing, yet he could not be blamed for want of any
good will, but for the want of boldness.

For my part I was extremely free in my expressions also; for believing him to
be a woman, I thought my self to be obliged unto it, by his expressions of
good will to me, by his merits, and by the kindred of her and Daphnis.

From this time, Amindor, who before bore me much good will, began to change
his affection and to love the feigned Callirea: And Filander fearing his
demeans would not please this young man, did strive as much as possibly he
could to comply with him: and the fleeting humor of Amindor, would not let him
receive such favors, without being in Love. Which I do not at all think
strange: For the beauty, the judgment, and deportment of Filander was such, as
that he came nothing short in the perfections of a woman, so as he might well
delude any man.

Observe what a wanton Love is; and how he sports and spends his time! He made
Philidas who was a woman to love a woman, and Amindor who was a man to love a
man, and that so extreme passionatly that this very particular was subject
enough to discourse of. Filander he knew how to play the woman most admirably;
and Callirea did so well counterfeit her Brother, and neither of them wanted
prudence to carry out the matter.

That cold demeanure which Callirea showed unto me, removed all causes of
jealousy out of Philidas, and besides Philidas did love her; and I must
confess, that seeing her so fall off from Philidas, from Daphnis, and from me,
we had an opinion, that Filanders mind was changed: at which I much rejoiced,
by reason of the amity I bore unto his Sister. Seven or eight days were thus
spent, and none did think them one jot too long; for, every one of us had a
particular design. But Callirea, who feared, lest her Husband should be angry
at this long stay, did solicit her Brother to make known his design unto me,
telling him, that it was not likely I should refuse his service, since he bad
been so familiar with me: But for all that, he had not yet the confidence to
declare himself: Yet, to delude Gerestan, he desired her to go unto her
Husband in that dress wherein she was, assuring her, that he could not find
any difference between them; and to let him understand that by the advice of
Daphnis, she had left Callirea with Philidas, to treat with Amindor about the
marriage of his Niece.

This proposition at the first did astonish his Sister; for, her Husband was a
piece of angry flesh, and the least disgust would move him unto passion. At the
last, her desires to content her Brother in every thing, did move her to yield
unto the motion: And to render this excuse more colorable, they did speak unto
Daphnis concerning Amindors marriage, which, for diverse considerations, she
rejected; but, knowing that this business was their pretense, under which they
got leave to come this journey, and without which they never had obtained it;
Daphnis, who was well pleased with their company, did communicate the matter
unto me; and we all agreed, that the best way was, to seem, as if the project
were feasible: And in order to that, Daphnis did write unto Gerestan, advising
him to let his Wife to stay a little longer amongst us, the better to effect
the business, and that she hoped all things would be brought to a happy issue.

Upon this Embassy, and thus clad, Callirea went unto her Husband, who being
beguiled by her dress, as well as the rest, he took her for her Brother, and
liked the cause of his wifes stay so well, that he willingly consented unto the
motion upon those terms. Judge, fair Shepheardesses, whether I might not well
be deceived, since her own Husband was, and could not distinguish them.

Now, Filanders affection grew to that height, that he could no longer conceal
it, do what he could; and therefore he told me, that though he was a woman, yet
he could not choose, but be extremely in love with me, and should be much more,
were he a man; and expressed himself so very passionately, that Daphnis, who
loved me very well, did say, that until then, she never knew it; but that she
her self was also in love me: which was no stranger, then that Philidas should
love Filander. And this disguised Callirea protested, that the chief reason
why she did constrain her Brother to go, was this match which was propounded;
for which many so reasons were showed me, that I easily believed it to be so.
Being thus satisfied with this excuse, she spoke of her passion unto me,
without any difficulty, but still as a woman and vowing unto me, that the very
same resentments and passions which use to be in men that were in love, were in
her, and that it was a great consolation unto her to express them.

Twelve or fifteen days thus passed, with so much delighting satisfaction unto
Filander, as he has since sworn unto me, that he never spent his days more
happily, although his desires did swell him with abundance of impatiency, which
yet did daily augment his passion: And pleasing himself in these thoughts, he
would very often walk alone to entertain them: Now, because he was seldom from
us in the day time, he would often make use of the night, when he thought all
asleep, and go into the Garden, where, under some trees, he would enjoy his
thoughts; and using often to go out thus, Daphnis took notice of it, who lay in
the same Chamber: And as commonly the worse, rather then the better, is
suspected, she was jealous of Amindor and her; but, for her satisfaction she
would watch; and watched so, that seeing the disguised Callirea go out of his
Bed, she followed him by the light of the Moon into the Garden, where just
under my Chamber window, she saw him sit down, and lifting up his eyes unto
heaven, she heard him say thus aloud:

Even as the Moon does quite outshine,
And dimn another star;
So my Diana, most divine,
Transcends all beauties far.
Though Filander uttered these words loud enough, yet Daphnis was so far off,
that she could not hear, but here and there a word, and therefore she stepped
nearer as gently as she could, though he was so taken up with his own
imagination, that, had she walked before him, he had hardly seen her, as since
he told me. As Soon as she had gotten her self near him, so as she could hear
him sigh, she heard him say in a low voice to himself, How unreasonable is my
partial fate, that has made her worthy of all services, and yet me not worthy
to serve her? And that she should not accept of their affections who do love
her; yet, to inspire them with extreme passions. Ah Callirea! how pernicious
proves thy plot unto thy tranquillity? and how art thou punished for thy bold
presumption? Daphnis did hearken unto Filander very attentively; but though he
spoke loud and distinct enough, yet, her prejudicated conceit of his being
Callirea, would not suffer her to comprehend his meaning: But afterward her
curious ear heard him utter these words, But Oh, presumptuous Filander, what
excuse caust thou find for thy fault? and what punishment can equal thy
offense? Thou do love this Shepherdess, yet, how durst thou be so
imprudently bold, as to offer this injury unto her? At this word he stopped; but
still his eyes and his sighs did express the extremity of his passion: And to
divert his sad thoughts, or rather to flatter them, he started up upon a
sudden to walk, and spied Daplnis, though she, to conceal her self, did run
away; but, because he was resolved to know who it was, he ran after her, and at
the corner of the little wood overtook her; and thinking that now she had
discovered all, which he had so closely concealed, in a kind of half anger,
he said unto her, What, Daphnis, makes you so full of curiosity, as so to spy
out my actions in the night? It is (answered Daphnis in a smiling manner) to
get that out of you by craft, which otherwise I could not: And this she thought
she had spoken unto Callirea, not having yet discovered that he was Filander.
Well then (replied Filander, thinking he had been discovered) what great
Novelties have you learned by it? All, said Daphnis, that I desire to know.
Then (said Filander) your curiosity is sufficiently satisfied. So well,
answered she, that I see, all your diligence about Diana, and all the great
affection which you make a show of unto her, will in the end be repayed with
grief and vekation. Oh heavens! (cried out Filander) I see I am discovered: But
wise and discreet Daphnis, since you do now know the cause of my being here
with Diana, you have in your hands both my life and my death: But surely if you
do consider how much I am yours, and how ready I was ever to serve you upon all
occasions, I hope you rather wish my contentment and happiness, than my
despair and ruin. Daphnis still thought it to be Callirea that spoke, and had
a conceit, that all these fears proceeded from Gerestan, who would have taken
it very ill, his Wife should do any such office for her Brother; but to
satisfy him, she said, Callirea, you need not to make any question of me; for,
I am so well acquainted with your business, that I would have contributed my
best counsel and assistance, though you had never spoke unto me; but, that I
may the better serve you, I beseech you acquaint me with the whole business,
to the end your freedom toward me, may the more oblige me, and your mistrust
of me may not offend me. I will, dear Daphnis, said he, upon condition you
promise me to say nothing unto Diana, until I consent unto it. This request,
answered the Shepherdess, might have been well spared; for such is her
humor, that I would never advise you to trust her with it. Hence is my grief,
said Filander; for I do already so well know it, that I do think my design
almost an impossibility: For at the first, when my Sister and I resolved to
change habits, she assuming mine, and I hers, I did then foresee that all the
advantage I should get by it, was, that I might with more freedom be near her
a while in that disguise, and not be taken for Filander. How Is this (said
Daphnis, all amazed) for Filander? Are not you Callirea? The Shepherd, who
thought she had known him before, was now very sorry that he had so rashly
discovered himself; but seeing it was now past, and that there was no
revocation of his words, he bethought himself how to make the best use of it
he could, and therefore said thus unto her, You see Daphnis, that I do clearly
trust you with all my hopes, and have freely discovered the greatest secret of
my soul unto you; a secret of such importance, that if any besides your self
should know it, all my hopes are dead fore ever; therefore I do put my self,
and all my happiness into your hand, so, as you must either become my friend,
or else I must die. Know therefore Daphnis, that here you see before you
Filander, in the habit of his Sister; and that love in me, and compassion in
her, has caused us thus to disguise our selves. Afterward he related unto her
his extreme affection, his compliance with Amindor and Philidas, the invention
of Callirea, her resolution to go unto her. Husband in a man's habit: and, in
short, all the passages, with all possible demonstrations of love: So as though
Daphnis did wonder at the bold attempt of him, and his Sister; yet, she saw the
grandeur of his affection, which might well lead him unto such follies: Yet,
had she been of their counsel at the first, she would not have advised unto
this enterprise; but, seeing things did hit so happily, she resolved to aid him
all that possibly she could, and to spare no pains nor care to effect his
desires: After which promises, with many assurances of amity, she gave him the
best advice she could, which was, to insinuate himself by degrees into my
affection For, said she, the very word of Love does more offend a woman, than
the thing it self does; and it is always very welcome unto any, so the name
of it be hid. Therefore I think them to be well advised, who do make themselves
loved of their Mistresses, before ever they speak of Love; for Love is a thing
displeasing only in the name, though in it self it be agreeable unto all. And
therefore, that you may find a more favorable reception from Diana, you must
not so much as name Love, no, nor to let her see it, but must carry the matter
so discreetly, that she may first love you, as soon as ever she shall know that
you love her; for, she being once embarked, she cannot afterward retire to
the Port, although she should see a storm in coming. Me thinks hitherto you
have carried it with very much prudence, but you must still continue it: The
seeming to be in love with her, although you seem a woman, is to very good
purpose; for certainly, any Love that is once suffered, will in the end produce
a reciprocal return.

We see, that we do many things with much facility, which would seem full of
difficulty, if the custom of doing them, did not render them easy unto us.
Meats unaccustomed, are often at the first disgusted, which afterward are
pleasant by use. An ear that is accustomed to Music, will tune the voice
higher or lower unto a right harmonious cadency; when one that is not used to
the Art, will make a jar. So a Shepherdess, who often hears the well tuned
talk of a Lover, will, in time, make her soul ply unto the harmoy of it and in
time, will incline insensibly to the resentments of Love; my meaning is she
will love the company of that person, and by little and little begin to pity
his pain and at last, before she be aware, will love him. Judge Filander, by
these instructions, whether or no I love you, and have pity of you, since I do
discover unto you the secrets of our School: and receive this advice as an
earnest of what I desire to do for you.

With such discourse as this, the day beginning to draw on, they returned into
the house, laughing at the love of Amindor, who took him for a woman: And
falling asleep again, to recompense the last nights loss, they did lie in bed
long in the morning, which gave the young Amindor an opportunity of surprising
them; and had not I entered at the same time into the chamber, I believe the
juggling had been discovered: for, he going to the supposed Callirea's bedside,
his love began to be a little too licentious, and his rash and indiscreet hands
had like to have gone too far; but, Daphnis desired me to take him off, and to
part them; which I did, with no small contentment to Filander, who, by way of
thanks, kissed my hand so affectionately, as if I had any sense in me, I might
have known him to be really in love. Afterward, bidding them good morrow, I
carried Amindor away with me, that they might have time to dress themselves.
And because they intended to put their proposed design into execution,
presently after dinner, when we all, according to our custom, assembled under
a shade of trees, to enjoy the cool air; although Amindor was there, yet,
Daphnis conceived the opportunity to be good: for, to hear such discourse in
his presence ^ would remove all manner of suspicion, and he would not think it
strange, if afterward he should by chance hear Filander speak like a man unto
me. Daphnis then beckening unto Filander, to the end he should second her in
the design, she thus said unto him, What is it, Callirea, that makes you so
mute in Diana's company? The reason is, answered he, because I am thinking what
wishes I should make, that might make me more servicable unto my Mistress; and
amongst the rest, I had one, which, I think, I ought not to desire. What is it,
said Amindor? It is, said Filander, that I were a man that I might render more
acceptable service unto the fair Diana. Why, said Daphnis, are you in love with
her? Yes, answered Filander, and infinitely more then I am with all the world
besides. I should sooner wish (said Amindor) that you were a woman again, both
for my sake, and for Philidas. It is not the consideration of either of them
(said Filander) shall make me change my wish, Why, (said Daphnis) do you think
that Diana would love you better? I should hope so, said Filander, and the
Laws of Nature would oblige her to it; unless, as in her beauty she
transcends her power, so she should in, her humor disdain her ordinances. You
may think what you please of me, (said I unto him) but if you will believe me,
there is not a man upon earth that I do love more then you. Also, replied he,
there is none that breathes, which is more devoted to your service then I But
fair Diana, that happiness you mention, will last no longer, then until you
shall discover the poorness of my merit; or, until some better object present
it self. Do you think me, replied I, of such a wavering temper? It is not,
Fairest, that I think you guilty of the sin of inconstancy, replied he; but it
is because I am conscious, that the fault is in my self. The fault is more on
my side, answered I: And upon this word, I did embrace him, and kiss him, with
as much sincere affection, as if he had been my sister. Hereupon Daphnis smiled
in her self, to see me so deceived. But Amindor, jealous (as I think) of us
both, did interrupt us; I think (said he) that all this is in good earnest, and
that Callirea does not dissemble. I dissemble, said he? Heaven punish me more
then ever perjury was punished, if ever any love was more passionate or
sincere, than mine to Diana. If you were a man, (said Daphnis) do you think you
could express your passion in the language of a man? Though I must confess
(said he,) that my wit and eloquence is but very shallow; yet I believe I
should not stand mute upon such an occasion, for my extreme affection would
prompt me, and supply all other defects. I beseech you, fair one' (said
Amindor) let us see how you could behave your self upon such an occasion. If
my Mistress will give me leave (said Filander) I will; but yet upon condition
that she will grant me three requests: The first is, that she will answer unto
what I shall ask her: The second, that she will not think, what I shall present
unto her under another person then Callirea, to be fained, but take them as
most real and true, though impuissant passions. And the last is, that she will
never permit any but my self to serve her in this kind. I seeing every one
delighted with the motion, and also really loving Filander under the notion of
his Sister, did answer him, that for his second and last request, they were
granted as soon as desired; but as for the first, I was so unaccustomed to
answer all questions, as I was sure they would be but unpleasing. Yet because I
would not be refractory in any thing, I said that I would acquit my self as
well as I could. Upon this word he took me by the hand, and began thus.

I could never have believed, Fair Mistress, considering the transcendency of
your perfections, that any mortal durst have loved you, had I not
experimentally found in my self, that it is impossible to look upon you and
not Love. But knowing the heavens to be more Just than to impose
impossibilities upon any, I took it for granted, that they would have you
loved, because they suffered you to be seen. In this belief, I assumed the
boldness to look upon you, which I had no sooner done, but my heart immediately
submitted. The Law permits one to go and dispose of their own; take it not
ill, Fair shepherdess, that I give you my heart, which if you refuse, I shall
for ever disavow it to be mine. Here he stopped, to see if I would answer him;
but in such a manner, that had not his habit disguised him, I could not have
doubted but that he was in good earnest. And because I would be as good as my
promise, I answered him thus; Shepherdess, were all these high applauds which
you bestow upon me true, perhaps then I should think they proceeded from your
affection to me; but knowing them to be mere flatteries, I must needs think the
rest no better then dissimulation. This, Fair one, said he, does too much
disparage your judgment for it is impossible to make any doubt of your
perfections and merit, but I rather think, that perhaps you are used with such
excuses to deny such things as you are not pleased to grant. But I am able and
with all truth to swear, by Teutates, and all that's holy (and you may know I am
not forsworn) that you did never in all your life refuse any thing that was
given you with a more sincere and perect good will. I do know very well,
answered I, that the shepherds of this Country are accustomed to such language
as has little truth in it, nor do they think that the gods will punish all the
perfidious oaths of seeming lovers. Whether or no it be the peculiar vice of
your shepherds (said he) I refer it unto your knowledge. But for my self
who am not of this country, I am not guilty either of their shame or crime: but
will out of your most cruel words draw some satisfaction to my self. If the
gods do punish the oaths of perfidious lovers, and if I be guiltiy, then the
gods will send the punishment of perjurie upon me: and if they do not, then you
must be forced to confess, that since I am not punished, I am no liar. And if
I be no liar, then you must confess I am your lover. So let your wit turn it
which way you will, it cannot be denied but that you are the fairest upon
earth, or else there is none in it; and that your beauty is infinitely adored,
by that shepherd who presents himself before you, and who implores your
favor, which he thinks he may merit, if a most perfect love could ever do it.
Whether I am fair or no, replied I, I will be judged by any indifferent eyes:
but how ever you cannot deny that you do dissemble and are perjured: and I must
tell you Callirea, that these expressions which you have used as a man shall
make me resolve, never to credit any words, since you being a woman do know how
so well to dissemble. Why Diana do you interrupt the discourse of your Servant?
(said he and smiled:) do you wonder that Callirea should express so much
affection to you? No no, it is absolutely impossible to diminish or increase,
for it is most violent and shall be eternal. I will in spite of opposition
love you, and Love you to my grave, and in my grave also if it be possible; as
Tirisias being a woman, became a man, why may I not hope, that the gods may as
well change me? Believe it (Fair Diana) that since the gods never made any
thing in vain, it is not likely they should inspire me with a most perfect
affection to no purpose. Daphnis seeing this discourse went a little too far,
and was daingerous, because this Lovers passion had a little transported him,
and might discover him unto Amindor: she did interrupt him, and said;
Doubtless, Callirea, your love is not in vain, since it is employed to serve
this shepherdess, no more then a candle consumes it self in vain, which
gives light unto all about it: For all the world adores her as well as you, and
you do most excellently employ your time if it be in her service. Come come
(said Amindor) let us leave this discourse, see where Philidas comes who though
he be a man, yet he will take no delight in it: Then Philidas came, and every
one rose to salute him. But Ami^dor, who was pitifully in love with the
disguised Callirea when his cousin came, took an opportunity to draw her
aside. Then taking her by the arm and seeing none within hearing began to say
thus unto her: Is it possible, fair Callirea, that the language wherein you
expressed your self unto Diana, should proceed from your heart? Or did you use
them only to show the acuteness of your wit? Believe me, Amindor, answered
Filander, I am no liar, and the expression of my affection to her, was the very
thoughts of my heart, and if there be any want of truth in it, it was only want
of words to express my resentments. Unto which with a deep sigh, he answered
thus. Since it is so, fair Callire^, and that you are sensible of the same
wounds, I cannot but think you can be also very sensible of that affection
which others bear unto you. And therefore I shall use no other language to
express my self unto you but what you used unto Diana; only add this
consideration unto you, to the end you may know the grandeur of my Love, that
if the blow may be judged of by the strength of the arm that gave it, then my
wound must needs b^ the deeper, since the beauty of Diana is not comparable
unto yours and if you do love her so extremely, Judge how great the affection
of Amindor must needs be that loves Callirea? For he knows not how to declare
it better unto you, but by making a comparison of it with your own. Shepherd,
answered Filander your declarations of any Love to me, are both unjust and very
offensive unto me, who have a husband that will not with patience suffer such
affront if he knew it. Moreover, since you speak of Diana, unto whom, I have
wholly dedicated my self, I must tell you, that if you will have me measure
your affection by mine, according to the causes which we have to love, I cannot
believe you have much; since what you call beauty in me, is not worthy to
retain the name of it, if compa^^ed with hers. Fair shepherdess, (said
Amindor then) I could never have believed it an offense to love you; but since
it is, I do confess that I merit punishment, and am ready to receive what
doom soever you please; but you must resolve to put altogether, and punish me
for loving you as long as I live, for it is impossible I should liv^, and not
Love. But never think, I beseech you, that the displeasure of Gerest^^n can at
all divert me: he who fears neither dainger nor death it self: can never fear
a man. But as to your self, I must ^e^ds confess my self to blame in
comparing Diana unto you since doubtless she comes infinitely short, which if
you can be so good as to pardon, I will protest never to commit the like error
again. Philander who had an opinion that Amindo. loved me, and who did love m^
himself, could hardly endure to hear me thus un lervalued; but having a
design not to discover himself, he had so much power over himself as to put it
up and thus answered him. How is it possible Amindor (said he.) that your
tongue should so much belly your heart? Can you think I do not know that you
dissemble? And that all this while your affection is devoted unto Diana? My
affection (replied he, as if surprised) Nono, that is wholly yours: may never
any love me, if I love any but you: I cannot say but heretofore I have wished
her well, but her humor is so full of inequality, sometimes all fire, and
sometimes all Ice, that now I am very indifferent toward her. I wonder said
Filander, how you dare to say so, for I know she loves you, and you still love
her? I will not deny said Amindor but that she may love me, but who cares. This
was right according to Amindors humor, which was ever full of vanity, and
would have all men believe, that he could have many good fortunes: At this time
Filander found out his artifice: and had he not feared the discovery of
himself, he was so incensed against him in my behalf, that I believe he would
have given him the lie. However he could not choose but give him a very sharp
answer. Amindor (said he) you are the most unworthy Shepherd that ever lived
and not fit for any good society: Can you find a heart to speak thus of Diana,
unto whom you have professed so much amity? and unto whom you are so much
obliged? What can we hope for from you, since you will not spare her who
transcends us infinitely in merit and perfection? As for me, I think you the
most daingerous person that lives, and such as would live in rest, must fly you
as from the Plague. At this word Filander left him, and came to us with a
countenance so inflamed with anger, as Daphnis knew that he was offended at
Amindor: who was so astonished at the separation that he knew not what to do.
At night Daphnis asked Filander what their discourse was; and because she
thought this might much increase my amity toward the disguised Callirea. The
next morning she related it all unto me, with such bitter invectives against
Amindor, and so advantageously for Filander, that I must confess, that I could
never since forbid my self from loving him when I knew him, conceiving, that
his real good will unto me, did oblige me to it.

But Daphnis, who knew that, if I loved him as Callirea, I should also love him
as Filander, did advise him to discover himself unto me, telling him, that
though at the first I might perhaps repulse him, and be angry; yet, in the end,
all would be well: and for her part, she would so solicit in his behalf, that
she feared not but to bring all unto a good conclusion: Yet all her persuasions
could not infuse so much courage into him: so as Daphnis resolved to do it her
self without him, or his knowledge; for, she foresaw, that Gerestan would ere
long have his Wife home again, and then all the plot was spoiled.

With this resolution she came one day unto me, when she found me alone, and
after much other-common discourse, she began thus: Diana, said she, what should
be the meaning of Callirea's folly? I verily believe she will run out of her
wits; she loves you so extreme passionately, as, I think, she will not live;
All day long she is in your Chamber, and all nights in the Garden; and so
pleases her self with her own melancholy fancy, that I cannot shake her out
of her musings. I would I could give her any consolation, (answered I) but what
would she have me do? do I not repay affection for affection? do I not make it
appear in all my actions? am I failing in any point of courtesy or duty toward
her? All this is true, replied Daphnis; but, did you hear her discourses to her
self, I believe you would extremely pity her: and I beseech you, unknown to
her, let us go one night and hear her. I did promise her, that I was very
willing, and would go with her as soon as she would; for Philidas would ere long
make a visit unto Gerestan, and then would be the fittest time.

A few days after, Philidas, according to his intentions, went to see
Gerestan, and carried Amindor with him, resolving not to return of seven or
eight days: When he was gone, Filander, according to his custom, went into
the Garden half dressed, when he thought every one was a sleep. Daphnis, who
went to bed the first, as soon as he was gone, did come to me, and told me: I
put on my clothes as fast as I could, and followed her, until we came into the
Garden. When she found where he was, she beckened unto me, to come a little
after her; and when we were so near as to hear, we sat our selves down upon the
ground: Presently after I heard him say, But why should I put my self to all
this patience? what will all these delays do me good? Shall I die, before I
discover my malady to the Surgeon? Then staying a while, he began again
with a most profound sigh, Why should I fear that she will banish me her
presence, and doom me to death? for, if I should die, it is a comfort to
shorten such a miserable life, and my death would satisfy for the fault I have
committed; if death do not fall upon me, from the incensed brow of the fair
Diana, will not the violence of my affection cause it? What then should I do,
and what shall I say unto her? Alas, I would not offend her, if I could
possibly help it: And why should I keep silence, since my death will give her
most certain knowledge? What then, shall I offend her? Ah! alas, injury and
amity are never together. Rather die, there is an end: But, if I should die, do
I not deprive her of the most faithful servant ever that she had? Is it
possible, I should offend in adoring her? I will then tell her, and at the same
time open my breast, that the sword may more easily punish my crime, if she
condemn me to it. Thus then will I say unto her, Here, fairest Shepherdess
here is Filander in the habit of Callirea, who, in lieu of begging your favor,
looks for nothing but your sury: Revenge your self then, Oh fairest, and
punish him, and be confident, that if his death will please and satisfy you,
it is most welcome to him.

Fair Shepherdess, when I heard Filander thus express himself, my
amazement was so great, that I knew not what in the world to do: I was so
vexed, and trembled so extremely, that I would have gone away, and never have
looked upon this impostor any more: But Daphnis, to complete her treason, held
me by force; and, as I told you, being near this Shepherd he turned his head
at the noise which we made; and thinking it was only Daphnis he came unto us:
But, when he spied me, and thought I heard him, Oh heavens, said he, what
torment is little enough for me? Oh Daphnis, who could ever have expected this
treason from you? At this he ran away, as if he had been distracted, though
Daphnis called him two or three times by the name of Callirea; but fearing to
be heard by others and more fearing, that Filander might do some hurt unto
himself, she left me alone, and followed him, saying unto me in an angry
manner at parting, Well Diana, if Filande, do perish, you will resent it as
long as you live. Judge, fair Shepheardesses, if I was not astonished at this
accident: But so it was, that I could not hit the way out of the Garden a long
time; at last, groping on every side, and recollecting my spirits, I found my
Chamber, where, lying me down upon my Bed, and trembling, I could not close an
eye that night. As for Daphnis, she searched for Filander so long, that at last
she found him more dead than alive: and after she had chid him, for not closing
with so good an opportunity; and yet assuring him, that I was not so much
troubled at the accident as he was, he took a little heart to himself; but yet
not so much as to embolden him the next morning to come out of his Chamber.

I, on the other side was extremely offended against them both, and was forced
to keep my bed, lest I should make my displeasure seen unto those about us, and
particularly unto the Niece of Gerestan; but, as good fortune was she had no
more wit then there was need of, so as we did easily hide from her this scurvy
business, which was almost impossible to do, especially for Filander, who had
her company almost continually. Daphnis, she was not a little busied in the
matter and perplexed, for, at the first, I would not look upon her and her
excuses: but at the last, she did so overcome me that I promised to forget the
injury she had done me, yet vowing, that Filander should never look me in the
face again: and I do think, he had gone away without a sight of me, had he not
feared the danger which Callirea would have incurred; for she had a Husband,
that was extremely perverse and peevish, and it was this very consideration
that restrained him. But for all the arguments that Daphnis could use, I never
stirred out of my bed, feigning my self sick, for five or six days. And had I
not heard that Philidas and Amindor, with Callirea, were returned I had no seen
him of a long time: but my fears, that Philidas would take notice of it, and
lest th^s secret should come to be divulged all over the Country I did resolve
to see him, upon condition, that he should never make the least show of what
was past, though I had not so much power over my self, as not to show my
displeasure ^he promised me, that he would observe my commands, and kept his
promise; for, he durst not so much as turn an eye toward me; and if he did at
any time by chance give a glance upon me, it was in such a submissive manner,
as did assure me his love was extreme. Presently after, as fortune was,
Philidas, Amindor and the disguised Filander, came into my Chamber, where, the
windows being close, we could the better hide the disorders in our faces.
Filander had acquainted his Sister with all passages, and that was the reason,
that the stay of Philidas was not so long as he intended; for she telling him,
that her Sister was sick, they returned.

But this discourse would be very tedious, if I should not omit many of our
trivial quarrels. But so it was, that Callirea being acquainted with all
passages, sometimes turning them into rall^rie, and sometimes into
seriousness, she so brought it about by the assistance of Daphnis, that I
consented unto Filanders stay, until his Sisters hair was grown unto its
length again knowing, that it would ruin both her and my self, if I should
hasten her return. And so it fell out, (as Daphnis did well enough foresee)
that during the time Callirea's hair was growing, the discreet carriage of
Filander, and the knowledge of his great affection, began so to flatter me, as
I did of my self excuse his disguise; so, as before he went, he obtained what
he so much desired, which was, that I would forgive and forget his
Imposturisme; and promised him, that as long as he kept himself within the
compass of his duty. I would accept of his good will, and cherish his merit as
it deserved. His contentment upon this did much confirm my opinion of his
affection, for it was so great as he could not dissemble it. Whilst we were
upon these terms, Philidas, whose love did still increase, now resolved to
discover himself unto the disguised Filander: and in order to this one day
when they were walking together under a shade of Trees in the Garden, she spoke
thus unto him, Well Filander, said she, cannot all my affection to you become
so happy, as to obtain your affection again? Callirea answered her, I do not
know Philidas, what affection you would have, nor how it should be greater unto
you than it is, unless you your self do instruct me. Ah! said she were your
will like mine, I should quickly instruct you. I do wonder Philidas (said
Callirea) that you having had sufficient trial of me you should make any
doubt. Do you not know, said Philidas, that extreme desire is always followed
by doubting. If you will swear that you will never fail me in point of amity,
I will declare unto you something, that perhaps will make you wonder. Callirea
was a little surprised at this, not knowing what Philidas should mean; yet,
being desirous to know the conclusion, she answered him thus, I will swear
Philida whatsoever you would have me, nor can I any ways express my desires
of doing you service. Upon this, by way of thanks, and being transported
together, Philidas took her about the neck and kissed her, with that vehemence,
as Callirea blushed, and pushing him away with her hand very angrily asked him,
what scurvie fashion that was? I do know, answered Philidas, that my action
makes you wonder; but, if you will have a little patience to hear me, I assure
my self, that you will rather pity, than have any ill opinion of me. Then she
began to relate unto her all the passages betwixt Phormion and Celion our
Fathers; the subtletie of her Father, to let her pass for a man, although she
was a woman; and all that I have related already unto you, and then continued
in this manner, Now, that which I do require in performance of your promise,
is, that knowing my extreme affection to you, you would take me to be your
Wife, and I will marry Diana unto Amindor, whom my Father has brought up in
his house, purposely to that end: And hereupon she added so many arguments to
persuade him, that Callirea, amazed beyond all expression, answered him, That
it was true indeed, he had told her most strange things, and such as she could
hardly believe, unless she had some other assurance than words. Then he,
unbuttoning his doublet, did show him in her breasts, a convincing token of her
being a woman. Oh heavens! said she, for shame show me no more. Callirea then,
that she might have the more time to consult with us, did seem, as if she were
glad of the motion; but pretended, that she had Parents from whom he expected
all his advancement, and, without whose advice, she could not resolve upon a
business of this importance; and therefore she charged him, to keep the
business secret; for, divulging of it, would give the world an occasion to
talk: and assured him, that if nothing was wanting but her consent, she would
give him good testimony of her good will. With such discourse as this they
ended their walk, and returned to their lodging, where all that day, Callirea
durst not come unto us, lest Philidas should think she should speak unto us;
but, at night, she acquainted her Brother with all the discourse and
afterward, both of them went unto Daphnis, and acquainted her. You may imagine
how great the wonder of every one was; but Filander was most pleased,
conceiving it conduced much unto the accomplishment of his desires. In the
morning, Daphnis desired me to go and see the feigned Callirea, and the real
one stayed with Philidas, to the end she should not suspect any thing. The
heavens know, how I was astonished at this news; I protest unto you, my
admiration was so great as I knew not whether I was awake or asleep. Daphnis,
she complained against me, for concealing it so long from her: to which I
answered, That I knew nothing of it until this hour; and when I told her,
that though we were Children together, yet, I thought all men to be like
Philidas. She laughed until her sides did ache at my ignorance. At the last,
lest Belinda should dispose of me according to her pleasure, or, that Philidas
should put me upon Amindor, and he have rash attempts upon me, I promised
Filander, at the solicitation of Daphnis and Callirea, to marry him. This was
the reason why (after he had assumed his own habit, and assured Philidas, that
he would make the motion unto his Parents) he returned so soon with his Sister
unto Gerestan, who never had the least suspicion of this disguise. Since that
time, I permitted Filander to write unto me; and he conveyed his Letters so
finely unto me, that neither Philidas nor Amindor ever knew of them.

Hitherto, fair Shepheardesses, this business had no bitterness in it. But
alas, that which followed was so full of woeful wormwood, that I shall never
relish any sweet again as long as I live. It chanced, to my fatal misfortune,
that a stranger traveling through this Country, did find me asleep, near the
Fountain of Sicomores, whither I was invited by the coolness of the shades,
and the murmuring of the spring, to sit me down, and so fell asleep; he no
sooner had cast his eye upon me, but he found something that pleased him. Oh
heavens what kind of man, or rather, what kind of monster, he was! His face
was as black as hell; his hair ruffine like, resembling wool, but much longer,
and more disordered; his beard like grisly moss about his chin; his nose
crooked and long, his mouth big, and his lips hanging over his chin like unto
tripes; but, nothing was so horrid as his staring eyes in all his face there
was not one bit of white to be discovered. This lamentable Lover was designed
me by destiny, and to take from me all thoughts of ever loving again: For,
being ravished at the sight of me, and transported with lewd desires, he could
not choose but come nearer to kiss me but, being armed, and onhorseback, the
noise awakned me, and so, that as he was slooping to satisfy his hellish
desire, I opened my eyes: And seeing this Monster so near me, I first cried
out, and afterward did strike him upon the face with all my force. He being
half up and half down, and not expecting such resistance, was so surprised at
the blow, as he leaned on the other side, so as I had time to rise. When I was
up, he did rise, and being very heavily armed, and fear adding wings to my
heels, he could not overtake me on foot, and therefore he leaped suddenly into
his saddle, and galloped after me; and when I was almost quite out of breath,
poor Philidas who was not far off, hearing my voice, did come running unto me,
and saw this cruel fiend pursue me with a drawn sword in his hand; for his
anger at this blow which made him stagger, made him also forget all love.
Philidas did most generously oppose his fury, making it appear by this last
act, that her Love unto me was as great as her Sex would permit. At the first
she got hold of his bridle, which so incensed this Barbarian, that with
enequalled inhumanity, he ran her through the body, and she died immediately,
falling between his Horses feet, who fell so to bound and curvet, that he threw
his Rider. And because Philidas upon the first receipt of her wound did cry out
aloud, and named Filander; he not being far off, did hear the voice, and seeing
her in so sad a condition, he was much moved but much more when he saw this
Barbarian running after me with a naked sword in his hand, and I, as I told
you, so out of breath, that I could hardly set one foot before another. How do
you think this poor Shepherd did now behave himself? I do not think ever any
enraged Lioness robbed of her young ones, did run so fiercely after him that
carried them away, as Filander did after this cruel Monster; and he being
heavily clogged with his Arms, the poor Shepherd soon overtook him, and cried
out. Stay Knight, stay, do not offer any violence unto her that deserves
rather to be adored. And because he still stayed not, either because his fury
had stopped his ears, or because he did not understand the Language, Filander
took up a stone and threw it at him, which hit him such a blow upon the head,
that he fell to the ground, and which without his Armor had certainly killed
him; but getting up again immediately, he forgot his anger against me, and
turned it so furiously upon poor Filander, as he having nothing in his hand for
defense but only a Shepherds hook, he could not avoid that fatal blow which
he received upon his body: But yet, feeling his enemies sword already entered,
such force and courage did his natural generosity give him, that in lieu of
recoyling, he advanced, and so far, as till the sword was up to the hilt, and
gave his cruel enemy such a blow on the forehead with his Shepherds hook that
he felled him to the ground, and seizing upon his throat with his hands and
teeth he made a shift to kill him. But, alas, this victory was dearly bought
for as this Fiend fell dead on one side, Filander fell on the other, but so,
that the point of his sword hitting upon a stone, the weight of his body made
it come out of the wound. I, who always was looking behind me to see whether
this Monster did overtake me, when I saw him wounded so dangerously, forgetting
all manner of fear, I stopped; and when I almost dead as well as he did see him
in this lamentable state, sat down upon the ground calling him in a most sad
tone by his name; and using all my diligence to help him but he had lost so
much blood, that he could not answer: Yet see the force of a pure affection; I
who had used never to see so much blood without a Faint had now the courage to
put my handkerchief into his wound, and to tear my other linen to stop the
course of blood on the other side: This officious diligence did him some
service for he having his head in my lap, he opened his eyes, and began to
speak: and seeing me all in tears, he forced himself to say thus unto me; If
ever I hoped for a more favorable End than this, fair Shepherdess. I pray the
heavens never to have pity upon me: I did always foresee, that the meaness of
my merit could never bring me to my desired happiness; and my fears always
were lest despair should drive me unto some cruel resolution against my self.
The Gods who do know what is good for us, better then we do our selves, did
very well know that I had not lived so long but for you; and therefore they
would have me also to dye for you. Judge then what contentment it is to me,
since I do not only die for you, but also to preserve that which is most dear
unto you, your Chastity. Oh my most fair and dearest Mistress, there wants
nothing now, but one thing, to complete my contentment: And that my soul may
sing an Anthem unto you in the Elizian fields, I do most humbly beg it. He
uttered these dying words with much pain; and seeing him in that sad condition,
I gave him as satisfactory an answer as his heart could desire: Dearest friend
(said I) surely the Gods never inspired you with such a sweet and pure
affection, to extinguish it so soon: I hope yet they will lend you so much
life, as may give me opportunities to let you see, that I will not yield unto
you in point of amity no more than you do unto any in point of merit. And for
a testimony of my unfeigned affection to you, ask what you will of me, and
obtain it; for there is nothing that I will deny you. At these words he took my
hand, and drawing it nearer him, I do kiss this fair hand (said he) with a
thankful soul, for all the favors it has done me. But ah, fairest Mistress,
since I do suffer the pangs of death for your sake, I do conjure you by my
most pure affection, and by your own good promise, to let me carry so much
contentment with me out of the world, as to say, I am your Husband, and then my
soul, dye when it will, will be at ease. I do vow unto you, fair Shepherdesses,
that these words did so pierce my heart, that I was hardly able to sustain
myself; and it was only my desire of pleasing him which gave me courage; and
therefore as soon as he had made his request, I said thus unto him. Filander, I
do consent unto what you do require of me; and do swear unto you before all
the Gods, and particularly the deities of this place, that Diana receives you
for her Husband, and with her whole heart and soul gives her self unto you. In
speaking these words, I kissed him. And I, said he, do give my self and soul
unto you, thinking my self most happy in the glorious Name of Husband unto the
fair Diana. Alas, this word Diana, was the last he ever breathed; for drawing
me toward him to kiss me, he expired, leaving his last breath upon my lips.
What should I now do, fair Shepherdess, since he is dead? for I did love him
with most perfect affection. I fell upon him, and without either pulse or any
motion was carried home. Oh heavens, how I did resent this loss! and have ever
since preserved so lively a memory of him in my soul, that me thinks I see him
every hour before my eyes; and methinks I hear him every minute bid me love
him still: And so I do, fair soul, with an eternal love. And if thou have any
knowledge of what is don here below, receive, dearest friend, these tears which
I do offer unto thee, as a testimony, that as long as Diana lives, she will love
her dear Filander. Astrea, to interrupt the grieving language of Diana, said
thus unto her; I beseech you, fair Shepherdess, who was this monstrous piece of
cruelty that was the cause of this dire disaster? Alas, said Diana, I know not
what they call him, but I am sure he is the cause of my eternal tears. But yet,
answered Astrea, is it not known who he was? They say, replied Diana, that he
came out of a certain barbarous country beyond the Straits, which (I know not
whether I term it right) is called Hercules Pillars; and the cause of his
coming, so unfortunately for me, was because he was in love with a Lady in that
Country, who commanded him to search all Europe over, and to see if he could
find any so fair as her self; also, if he met with any Lover, that would defend
the Beauty of his Mistress, he was obliged to fight with him, and to send his
head, together with his Mistresses Picture over unto her, and her Name. Alas,
I would to the Gods, that I had not run away when he followed to kill me, that
my life might have saved poor Filander. Upon these words she shed such
abundance of tears, that Phillis to divert her, turned the discourse, and did
rise up. Me thinks (said she) you have sit too long, it would be better to walk
a little. Upon this, all three did rise up, and went toward their village.
Leonida, who as I told you, was within hearing, did not lose a syllable of what
was said; and the more she heard, the more desirous she was to hear. But when
she saw them gone, without any mention of Celadon, she was very angry; yet in
hopes to discover something more if she stayed a while amongst them, when she
saw they were gone, she came out of her Bush, and followed them, but at a
distance; for, she would not have them think, that she overheard them. Phillis
by chance turning about did see her, and also knowing her, did show her unto
her companions who stayed, and seeing she came toward them, they went back to
meet her, and to do those civilities her quality did merit: so they met and
saluted: Leonida full of courtesy, after the first complements, addressed her
self unto Diana, and said unto her; Wise Diana, I came purposely this morning
from the house of Adamas my Uncle, to wait upon you and the rest of these fair
Shepheardesses, and to see whether the reports of your virtue Diana, of your
beauty Astrea, and your merit Phillis, be answerable unto what Fame has
trumpetted in your commendations. Diana seeing her Companions referred it unto
her, she returned this answer. Great Nymph, perhaps it had been much better for
us, that fame had been more silent, and not raised your expectation to too
great a height; however, since you are pleased to do us this honor, we do
receive it as is our duty, in all humble gratitude: At these words, they
conducted her into Diana's village, where she was entertained with such
welcome, and so much civility as she wondered how it was possible to find people
so accomplished in Woods and Pastures.

The Afternoon was spent in several questions which Leonida asked of them and
amongst the rest she enquired what was become of a Shepherd called Celadon,
that was the son of Alcippes? Diana answered that not long since he was
unfortunately drowned in the River Lignon. And his brother Lycidas, said
Leonida, is he yet married? No, said Diana, nor do I think he is in any haste;
for the loss of his brother is yet too fresh in his memory. But I pray, said
Leonida, by what mischance was he lost? by endeavoring to help this
Shepheardess (said Diana) who fell into the River first: And then she pointed
unto Astrea.

The Nymph, though not seeming, yet taking notice of Astrea's actions, did see
that her complexion changed and to hide her blushes she covered her face with
her hand and therefore concluded that she did love him really: And to make a
further discovery she continued her questions. And was his body never found,
said she? No, said Diana only his hat was found, and as it was swiming down
the River was stayed by some bushes. Phillis knowing if this talk continued it
would draw tears from the eyes of her companion, she interrupted. I beseech
you, great Nymph, said she, what good fortune for us was it, that brought you
unto this place? I told you at the first (said she) it was to be acquainted
with you, and to enjoy the happiness of your good company. Since it is so, said
Phillis, it would not be amiss, so it suit with your pleasure, to go out with
us unto our accustomed exercises, so will you best be acquainted with our way
of living, and also that you give us leave to use the freedom of our villages
before you. With all my heart, said Leonida, for I know that constraint is
never agreeable and I Will assure you, that I did not bring with me any intentions
of displeasing you. Thus Leonida taking Diana by one hand, and Astrea by the
other they walked out, until they came unto that wood which extends it self as
far as the banks of Lignon. They were no sooner set down, but they heard one
sing not far off, and Diana who knew the voice turned toward Leonida, and
said, Great Nymph, will you please to heir the discourse of a young Shepherd,
who has nothing of Rural about him but his Name and Habit? For being educated
in great Cities, and amongst persons of civility he smells not at all of the
Country. Who is it (said Leonidas) It is the Shepherd Silvander (answered
Diana) who has not been amongst us much above a year. I beseech you said the
Nymph, of what Family is he? It is a question very hard to be resolved,
answered Diana: for he himself knows not who were his Father and Mother, only
has some far fetched conception, that they were of Forests, and therefore he
came hither with a resolution to stay. And truly our Lignon would have a great
loss should he^d part; for I do not think a more complete Shepherd ever came
into the Country. Your commendations of him, said the Nymph, is invitation
sufficient to go and see him, and therefore let us go to him. If he do see us,
said Diana, and thinks he shall not be troublesome unto you, he will be sure to
wait upon you presently: And as she was saying so, he came. For, as fortune
was, the Shepherd as he walked espied them, and came to them; but because he
did not know Leonida he seemed as if he would have passed by, when Diana said
unto him; What Silvander, is it the civility of Cities to interrupt good
company by passing by them, and saying nothing? The Shepherd smiled and
answered; Since I have sinned in interrupting you, the less will I stay in my
sin. That Is not it, said Diana, which makes you so soon gone, but rather
because you think there is not merit enough amongst us to stay you; yet if you
do but cast your eye upon this Nymph, I am confident that if your eyes have
any judgment you will find more merit than any where else That which draws
another thing unto it self (replied Silvander) must have some attractive
sympathy with that which it does draw; but since there is no such sympathy
betwixt your high merits Great Nymph, and my poor imperfections, you need not
wonder if your perfections did not attract me unto you.

Your modesty, Sir (said Lemida) does only make the dissimilitude betwixt us:
Do you think it is in your body, or your soul? If in your body, your face and
the rest of your parts argues the contrary: if in the soul, me thinks, if you
have one that is reasonable, it is not different from ours Silvander found that
now he had not to deal with Shepheardesses, but with one of a higher strain and
therefore he resolved to answer her with more solid reasons than he used
amongst Shepheardesses, therefore thus replied: Every thing in the whole
universe, fair Nymph, must be valued according to its own proper quality; for
otherwise, Man who is of highest esteem, would be the lowest, since every
animal excels him in some particular thing or other; one in strength, another
in swiftness, another in sight, another in hearing, another in smelling: and so
in many privileges of body. But when it is considered, that the gods have made
all these Animals for the service of Man, and man for the service of the gods,
it must needs be confessed that the gods are above all; from hence I argue,
that to know the true value of every thing, it must be looked into, to what
service the gods did make them, and it is they that set the value upon things:
nor surely the gods could never be so much mistaken, as to equal your merit
and mine, and yet make you a great Nymph, and me but a poor silly shepherd.
Leonida did in her mind much commend the wit of this Shepherd, who could put
so good a gloss upon a bad matter. And therefore to give him more subject to
continue, she said thus unto him. But allow all this in regard of me, yet why
could not these shepheardesses invite you, since according to your own
argument, there is the same proportion and simpathy betwixt you and them? Sage
Nymph, answered Silvander, the less does always submit unto the greater part
and where you are, these sherheardesses must do the same why disdainful
Shepherd (said Diana) do you so little esteem of us? I did say so, said
Silvander, because I did esteem you so much: for if I had an ill opinion of
you, I should never have said that you were a part of that great Nymph, since
thereby I do not make you her inferior. Only in that she deserves to be loved,
for her merits, for her beauty, and for her quality and you only for your
merits and for your beauty. I should be glad Silvander (said Diana) that I had
so much merit or beauty either, as to obtain the Love of so well an accomplished
Shepherd as you are. She spoke this, because he was so far from any thoughts
of Love that he was called amongst them The insensible man: and she was very
desirous to make him speak of it. Unto whom he answered, think and believe
what you please, so you will confess you want one of your principal parts.
And, which is that? (said Diana): Your will, replied he, for it and the effects
of it are contrary. No no (said Phillis and interrupted him) for I believe
Silvander loves her as much as her will would have him. The Shepherd hearing
her say so, turned toward Astrea, and said that they did him wrong to be two
to one. The wrong, said Diana, is offered unto me, for this shepherdess
seeing me in combat with a strong enemy; and suspecting my courage and
strength, would needs aid me.

That is not it which does offend you, fair Shepherdess said he, for she has
more judgment then to make any doubt of your victory; but that which does
offend you is, that she seeing me already vanquished, she must needs steal the
victory, and the honor of it in offering to give me a blow at the latter end
of the combat: but I do not know how she did intend it; for I assure you, if
you had not meddled, she had not so easily gotten the glory as she thought.
Phillis who had a good natural and pleasant wit, and who resolved to spend that
day with Leonida, as pleasantly as she could, did answer him in a haughty
manner, It Is very well Silvander (said she) that you think it a thing so
desirable and honorable to me, to vanquish you; but let me tell you, I rank the
victory amongst the meanest, that ever I got. Neither ought you to despise it
(said the Shepherd) since it is the first you ever got of me. As it is
honorable, replied Phillis, to be the first, where there is merit; so it is a
shame, where there is none Ah Shepherdess, (said Diana) never say so of
Silvander: for if all Shepherds who are inferior to him in merit, should be
scorned, I know not who should be loved. This, this is the very blow that will
overcome him, (said Phillis) nay doubtless he is yours: Uncivilized and wild
spirits are to surprised at the very first attracts: for not being accustomed
to such favors, they recieve them with such a gust, as they are not able to
make any resistance. Phillis spoke thus in way of mockery; but the gracious
defense of Diana had such an influence upon this Shepherd, that he thought
himself obliged by the Laws of courtesy to serve her and in that opinion,
the perfections of Diana had so much power over him, that he conceived such
seeds of love, as time and practice did increase to a great heights; as
afterward I shall tell you. This dispute passed amongst these Shepheardesses
with much delight unto Leonida who admired their quaint wits. then Phillis
turning toward the Shepherd, said unto him: Come, come Shepherd, words are
but wind; come to the test, and tell me truly, Who is the Shepherdess which
particularly is your adored Saint? Even she, answered he, whom you see me
adore. That is as much to say, said Phillis, that you adore none but that
proceeds, alas from want of courrage. Rather, replied Sylvander, from want of
will. But you, fair one, who do so much despise me, I pray tell me, Who is the
Shepherd whom you do particularly Love? All such, answered she, as have any
wit or courage: And he that sees a perfect beauty, and cannot love; certainly
wants wit or courage or both.

This is an answer too general said Silvander, pray come to particulars, and
tell us that one whom you do love? I wish, said she, there were any so forward
as to attempt it. Then, added Silvander, it is for want of courage. Then
Silvander, said she it is for want of will. Why said Silvander, would you have
any to think that it is more want of will in you then me I would those actions
which are decent in you, (said the shepherdess) were permitted me, do you
think it handsome in me to leap and run as you do? But let us dispute no longer
let Diana be Judge in the business and thereby you may see what confidence I
have in my cause, since I make choice of a partial Judge. I shall judge
according to reason (said Diana). Then said Phillis, since words cannot
justify a business, is it not requisite to come to proofs? Doubtless it is
(said Diana). Condemn then this shepherd, replied Phillis, to render some
proofs of that merit which he says is in him; and that he undertake to serve
and love a shepherdess, in such a manner as she be constrained to confess
that he merits to be loved again; and if he cannot do that, then, that he
ingenuously acknowledge his unworthiness. Leonida and the shepheardesses
thought this proposition so agreeable to reason that with one common voice he
was condemned: Not, said Diana, that he should be constrained to love, for that
must ever proceed from a free voluntary genius and not from constraint, but I
do ordain that he do serve and honor, as you do say. My Judge answered
Silvander, though you have condemned me without hearing me, yet I will not
appeal from your sentence; only I require that she whom I must serve, do merit
and ackowledge my service.

Silvander, Silvander, said Phillis because you want courage, you fly unto
evasions: but I shall prevent you by a proposition which I shall make. I do
propound unto you one, against whom there is no exceptions, either in matter of
wit, courage, or beauty, and that is Diana. For my part, said Silvander, I do
accept of the motion, provided it be with the approbation of all these
beauties. Diana would liave answered, and made some excuse but at the request
of Leonida and Astrea, she consented upon condition that this essay should not
last above three months.

This courtship being Silvanders sentence, he kneeled down and kissed the hand
of his new Mistrisse, as if he had taken his oath of fidelity, and afterward
rising up, he said thus; Fairest Mistress; I do in all humility submit unto
your ordinance, but I do most humbly beseech you to let me make one
proposition. And when Diana said that he had free liberty, he went on. As I
have been justly condemned to make this proof of my self for speaking too
highly of my own merits, against a person who despised me: So, I beseech you
why should this vain glorious Phillis who infinitely outswells me in vanity,
and who was the first cause of this dispute, why I say should not she be
sentenced to render the like testimony? Astrea not staying for Dianas answer,
said, that she thought the motion so just as she was consident it would be
granted, and Diana asking the Nymphs opinion, who was of the same mind, she
condemned the shepherdess as was requested. I did never expect a more
favorable doom said Phillis; but well, what must I do? You must get the favor
of some shepherdess, (said Silvander.) That, said Diana is not reasonable,
She must do more then that: For I do ordain that she do love and serve a
shepherdess; and so as she do cause her self to be loved, and, he or she of
you two, who shall be least unto her you serve, shall be constrained to yield
unto the other. Then my desire is, said Phillis that I may serve Astrea.
Sister, said she, you are about a work which is already done to your hand: but
it were much better you made choice of Diana, not only for the two reasons
which you alleged unto Silvander, which was, her merits and wit, but also
because she is best able to judge of both your services, if they be both
addressed unto her; This did carry such a sound of reason with it, that it was
immediately consented unto: then after Diana had taken an oath, that without
any regard but truth, the should do equal justice at the three months end, It
was very pleasant to observe the passages of this new love. For Phillis was a
very excellent servant, and Silvander feigning to be one, became one in good
earnest, as afterward you shall hear. Diana on the other side did so well
know how to play the Mistrisse that any would have thought it to be in real
earnest. As they were thus discoursing, and Leonida thinking this kind of life
to enjoy more happiness then any other, they saw two Shepheardesses and two
Shepherds, coming along the meadow, who by their habits seemed to be
strangers; and when they were a little nearer, Leonida who was very inquisitive
to know the names of the Shepherds and Shepheardesses of Lignon, did ask who
they were? To which Phillis answered that they were strangers, to which
Silvander said, that surely he should know one of them particulary, whose name
is Hylas, a merry shepherd, and one that loves all he looks upon; but the
best is, he who receives the blow has the plaster; for as he can soon love, so
he can soon forget; and he has the maddest and most extravagant arguments, to
prove his inconstant humor to be the best, as it is impossible to hear them
and not laugh: truly said Leonida, his company will be very good, and let us
put him upon that discourse as soon as he comes. That Is easily don, said
Silvander, for he will always be talking of it: but as this is his humor, so
there is one with him of a quite contrary disposition, for he does nothing but
pule and grieve for the death of a Shepherdess whom he loved; he is a s^ber
and discreet man, but so sad and lumpish, as nothing proceeds from him but
expressions of a melancholy soul is he this country man said Leonida? Fair
Nymph, said Silvander, I do not know, but if you please I will ask them: at
this word, they were come so near that they heard Hylas chanting out these
verses.

Hylas his catch upon Inconstancy.
IF any beauty constant make me,
It Is more her honor, so to take me.
I love to change by Jove, and must
Unto my liberty be just:
And why should any be so shy
To shun me for Inconstancy?
Since if a beauty constant make me,
It Is more her honor so to take me.
It argues beauty in the height
To make a crooked Lover straight,
And it is a miracle more high
To make my heart all Constancy:
Therefore if any Constant make me,
'^ie more her honor so to take me.
To stay a stone that still does stand
Is easy work for any hand:
But it is a matter much more high
To stop an Eagle in the sky.
Therefore if any constant make me
It Is more her honor so to take me.
But why should any think it strange,
That I should for the better change?
Will any that have wit, or eyes,
Not after for a better prize?
Then if a beauty constant make me
It Is more her honor so to take me,
Come then, dear Mistrisses, that feign*
The prize of beauty would obtain,
Settle my wanton wavering mind
By Carrassing and being kind.
For she that can ere constant make me
Has got the honor; Let her take me.
Leonida smiled at Silvander and told him, That this Shepherd was none of
those deluders that use to disemble their in perfections, since he did put them
into a Ballet. The reason is, answered Silvander, because he does not think it
any vice, but glories in it. As Soon as they were come, and all saluting
complements performed, Silvander remembered the Nymphs question concerning these
Shepherds, and therefore he addressed himself unto Tircis, for so was the
mourning Shepherd called, and said thus unto him, Tircis, if it be not
troublesome to you, I beseech you tell us, what inducements brought you into
this Country of Forests, and who it is which stays you here? Tircis then
kneeling down upon the ground, and holding up his hands and eyes toward
heaven, he thus said, Oh infinite goodness, who by thy wise providence, does
govern the whole Universe, be thou for ever praised, for what thou have been
pleased to take from me. Then rising up, and admiring the Nymph and the rest of
the company, he addressed himself by way of answer unto Silvander, Worthy
Shepherd (said he unto him) you asked me what it was which brought and
retained me in this Country; and I must answer you, that it is your self it is
you only that I have so long looked for Me? said Silvander, how can that
possibly be, since I do not know you? That Is partly the reason, said Tircis,
why I have looked for you. Since it is so, said Silvander, and since you have
been long amongst us, why would you never speak unto me? Because, answered
Tircis, I had no acquaintance with you; but, to give you a fuller satisfaction,
when you are all set down, because the discourse will be long, I will, if you
please, give you a full relation.

Mistr^sse said Silvander is it your pleasure to sit down under these shady
trees? You ought to address your self with that question unto Leonida, said
Diana. I do know very well, fairest Mistress, said he, that civility commands
it so, but love does enforce me unto you. Then Leonida taking Diana by her
hand, and Astrea in the other, she did sit down betwixt them, telling
Silvander, that he was in the right; because that love, which has any
consideration of respect above it self, is not right love. And after all the
rest of the Shepheardesses and Shepherds were set round, Tircis turned toward
the Shepherdess which came with him and said unto her: Now, Laonice is the
happy and so much desired time, which we have with so much impatience expected,
ever since we came into this Country It rests only upon you to do according to
the Oracle Then the Shepherdess, without any reply unto him, addressed her
self unto Silvander, in this manner.

The History of Tircis and Laonice.
I Have heard say, and I think truly, that of all amities, there is none more
affectionate, than that which begins in Infancy because, that custom which is
taken in that age, does by degrees become a nature which growing up with years,
grows solid and unalterable. This Prologue, generous Shepherd, must plead for
an excuse, since I am forced to tell you that I do love Tircis: I sucked in
this affection almost with my milk, and my soul being ever since nourished with
this food, did receive, as its own, the accidents of this passion Neighbors we
always were the amity of our Parents, the equality of our ages, and the sweet
disposition in Tircis his younger years, were so many sweet allurements, to
make me his. But, cursed Fate would have it so, that almost at the same time
Cleon was born, and perhaps with more graces than I, but certainly, with much
better fortune for, as soon as she began to open her eyes, the heart of Tircis
was inflamed by them, for h^ began to love her in the Cradle About that time I
was some six years of age, he ten But see how the heaven disposed of us against
our wills; as soon as ever I saw him I loved him, and as soon as ever he saw
Cleon, he loved her: And though these were yet but green affections, such as
the age was capable of yet, were they not so small, but they knew how to make a
difference amongst us: Afterward, growing up with time, they came to such a
height, that, I believe never any exceeded them.

In the Infancy of my Love, you may think, I took no great notice of his
actions; but, being grown unto a more observing age, I found such coldness of
good will toward me, tha^ I resolved to divert my self some other way; A
resolution, which many malecon^ented persons may fancy, but never any true
Lover could execute, as afterward I found by a long and sad experience:
However, my offended spirit had power enough to make me dissemble; and if I
could not by any means attract him, then to try at the least if I could take my
leave of him My greatest wonder was, that I could never find, that Tircis
affected any other Shepherdess; and as for Cleon, she raised no suspicion, by
reason of her youth, since then not above nine years old* but when she was
grown, and could be sensible of Loves Arrows; she could so withdraw her self
from him, as any would think, such a separation were enough to heal up all
wounds: But Love more subtle then she, did still so wound her heart with the
merits, affection and services of Tircis that she had no other remedy to run
unto, but dissimulation; not that she hoped thereby to avoid the blows of
Love, but only to hide them so, as neither her enemy, nor any other, should see
them. This disguise was arms indifferent, as long as her skin was only a
little scratched; but, when the wound was great, then no way, but to throw them
away, and acknowledge her self vanquished Thus was Tircis happy in the love of
his Cleon, and enjoyed all the pleasant fruits of it, though at the beginning
he hardly knew what his disease was, as appeared by some Verses which he
composed at that time.

A Sonnet.
WHat new distempers does disturb my soul,
My heart, and all my faculties control?
Fevers have intervalls, and sometimes burns,
And sometimes cold, and have their fits by turns.
But min's an ague of that strange condition,
As never meets with any intermission.
Cleon so fair, so full of flaming fire
Has kindled in my soul such hot desire
As cannot die, nor live in any rest;
My heart, my mind, and all is so possessed
With her, who, though the Author of my pain,
I think a pleasure of the highest strain.
It Is strange, that pain and pleasure should subsist,
And harbored be within the selfsame breast
But this is true, this my distemper is,
To scorch in pain, and yet to think it bliss.
You cannot under stand it, it is above
The reach of any, that is not in Love.
As Soon as ever Tircis found out the good will of his happy Cleon, he received
it with so much contentment, as his heart was not able to contain his joys,
but his eyes also did share in the happiness, and were so much altered from
what they were, as they could not choose but send forth signs of their too much
joy. Cleon's discretion was such, that she conferred no more favors upon
Tircis, in the eye of the world, than ordinary; but, being jealous of her
honor, she desired him to counterfeit a love unto me, to the end all eyes
might be upon me, and off her; and me sooner than any other, it being long
observed that I loved him. He, who was all obedience unto whatsoever Cleon
commanded, did accordingly apply himself unto me: Oh heavens! when I think upon
the sweetest expressions he used unto me, I cannot choose, though they were all
false, but cherish them, and wish, since I can be no otherwise happy, that I
were so deceived again. And certainly, Tircis had no hard task to persuade me,
that he loved me: For, I did not think my self so disagreeable, but that a
long continued practice, together with my endeavors to please him, might work
upon him; at which, the vainglorious Cleon, did often make her self sport with
Tircis: but, had Love been just, and turned the love of Tircis to me into
earnest, her mockery might have lightt upon her self. This life of
dissimulation was so tedious to him, that he was not able to endure it any
longer; and had not Love blinded the eyes of all Lovers, certainly I should
have perceived it, as well as most did who saw us together; but I would not
lend any believing ear unto them, no more, than unto my most mortal enemy. And
because Cleon and I were very familiar, this subtle Shepherdess was afraid,
lest time should discover my error unto me, which to prevent, she invented this
stratagem: Her design was, as I told you before, to conceal that affection
which Tircis bore unto her, under his cloak of seeming to love me; and it was
effected accordingly, for every one talked aloud of the love of Tircis unto me:
But Cleon as I told you before, fearing this stratagem would be discovered, did
invent another full as subtle as the other: She advised Tircis to make me
believe, that the world talked very broad of our amity, and put wrong
constructions upon it; and therefore it was necessary, to stop all scandalous
tongues by prudence: and in order to that, he would counterfeit a love unto
Cleon, and tell her (said she) that you make choice of me rather than any
other, because of your convenience, in being near me, and speaking to me. I,
who was all sincerity, and no subtletie, did think this counsel to be very
good, so as from thence forwards, with my permission, when we were all three
together, he talked with Cleon as he was wont, without any difficulty: And
certainly, it was good sport to them, and would have been to any other, that
had known the dissimulation: For, when I saw him so officious about Cleon, I
thought he had all that while but mocked her, and had much ado to forbear
laughing: On the other side, Cleon observing my actions, and knowing how I was
deluded; she could hardly contain her thoughts of mirth. But see how good
natured I was, I did extremely pity her, for the grief she would resent, when
she came to know the truth: But alas, afterward I found, that the pity
belonged unto my self; and who, as well as I, might not as well have been
deceived? for Love, as soon as ever he takes entire possession of a soul, does
presently expel all diffidence of the party loved. And this dissembling
Shepherd did personate his part so well, that had I been in Cleons room,
perhaps I should have doubted, whether he acted a fiction or a truth:
Sometimes, when he was betwixt us both, and had given Cleon some notable
demonstration of affection, presently he would turn to me, and ask me in my
ear, whether he did not act his part well: but, his grand craft rested not in
such a trifle; I beseech you hear what an Arts-Master he was in his Art, he
talked with Cleon in private more often then with me, he would kiss her hand,
be down upon his knees two hours together before her, and never hid any
passage from me, for the reasons aforesaid: But in public, he never stirred
from me and courted me with so much dissimulation, that most had the same
opinion of our Loves: which he did upon design, desiring, that I only should
see his courtship unto Cleon, because he knew I did not believe it; but, would
not by any means, that any others should be witnesses. And when I told him,
that we could not remove that opinion which the people had of our amity and
that none would believe he loved Cleon; then would he answer me, Why, how
should they ever believe a thing which is not, no, nor well enough dissembled?
But, said, he, whatsoever we do, we must deceive Cleon, let others think what
they will; for, if she be but handsomely deluded, our design is almost
completed: Hereupon he desired me, that I would speak unto her in his behalf,
and become as it were, his confident: She, said he, who has that opinion
already, will the more gladly receive the messages, that you shall bring, and
so we shall live in more assurance, and freer from all suspicion. Oh! what a
miserable fortune do we often follow? For my part, I thought, that if Cleon did
believe I had loved this Shepherd, I should destroy that belief, by desiring
her to love him, and by speaking for him as his confident. But Cleon, knowing
the discourse between the Shepherd and me, and living in a kind of
constraint, she thought that by this means, she might most conveniently receive
all her Messages and Letters from him; and therefore she bade the proposition
which I made unto her very welcome, and after this treated me as one she loved:
And thus I was made use of, only as a Letter Carryer between them. Oh Love!
what a misery did thou put me upon? But, I am not the first who has done the
like offices for another in thinking to do it for themselves. At that time, the
Franks, the Romans, the Goths, and the Burgundians, being all up in Arms, we
were constrained to live in Towns; and there being a huge concourse of people
from all parts, also wanting their Country-accommodations, a pestilent disease
did so reign in the Town, as most of the people died of it: so it chanced, that
Cleons Mother was infected; and though the disease was so contagious, that
hardly either Parent or kindred, would stay with the party infected; yet, such
was the natural affection of Cleon to her Mother, that she would never part
from her, but would still stay, notwithstanding all the persuasion of friends,
who told her, that she offended the gods, in running into a wilful danger;
unto whom she still returned this answer, If you love me never use any more of
this discourse; for, do I not owe my life unto her, who gave me mine? and will
the gods be offended with me for helping her, who taught me to serve them? In
this pious and filial resolution, she would not forsake her Mother, but shut
her self up with her, and was as busy in helping her, as if the disease had
not been at all contagious. Tircis stood all the day at the door, and wooed to
come in; but Cleon would upon no terms permit him, lest if she had, it might
have been scandalous unto her: But still he waited at the door and caused all
manner of necessaries to be brought unto them: yet, so the heavens would have
it, that Cleon, notwithstanding all antidotes and preservatives which Tircis
brought unto her, was infected. When the Shepherd heard that, it was
impossible to keep him from entering into the house; since now it was not a time
to think upon dissimulations, or to fear any teeth of detractors; but he set
all things in order, disposed of his estate, and declared his Will; afterward,
putting it in the charge of a friend to help him, he entered, and shut himself
up with the Mother and the Daughter, resolving to run the same fortune with
Cleon. It is not material to relate unto you, what good offices he did them,
and how officious and servicable he was unto the Mother, for the Daughters
sake: But at last the Mother dyed, and when none was left in the house but he
and his Mistress, whose malady still increased, I do not think the poor
Shepherd got one minute of rest; he held her continually in his arms, and
dressed her. She, on the other side, always loving him did take this last
action for such an evident testimony of his love, that hers augmented much
more; and her greatest grief was the danger he was in for her sake. He, on the
other side, had so much satisfaction, as to rejoice as much as a sad occasion
would permit, that he had the means to testify his good will. so it happened
that this Shepheardess being in a condition to be cut, a Physician could not be
procured, that would venture to touch her, for fear of danger: Tircis, whose
affection prompted him unto any thing, being taught how to do it, he took the
Lancer, and lifting up her Arm, he did cut it, and dressed it when he had done.
To be brief, all things of most danger and difficulty, were easy and sweet
unto him, in hopes of doing her some good. But her malady still increased, and
brought his beloved Cleon into such a sad condition, that she had no more
strength left than to utter these words; I am very forry Tircis that the gods
are not pleased to draw the thread of my lamentable life a little longer, only
to testify my extreme gratitude: but though I should live as many years, as I
have already done days, I should never be able to satisfy you for the
abundance of your affection to me. These words were uttered with much pain; but
her affection to this Shepherd gave her power to utter them. Unto which Tircis
answered, My dearest Mistress, all I have done, and all I can ever do; is all
far short of my will to do any real service; believe me, dearest Cleon, my
obligations to you are greater than a thousand lives can pay. The heavens which
gave me a being only to be yours, would accuse me of mispending my time, should
I employ one minute of my life otherwise then in your service. He would have
continued longer but the Shepheardess finding her self extremely ill did
interrupt him: Cease my dear friend and leave talking to me, that I may employ
that little time I have to live, in assuring you that I can love you as much as
ever my soul is capable of: So seeing my time is very near, I bid thee eternal
adieu, and desire three things of you; To love thy Cleon for ever; to enterre
my corpse near my Mothers, and when you do pay the debt which is due unto
humanity, let your corpse be laid near mine, that though our bodies could not be
united alive, yet they may in death. To which he answered; The Gods would be
unjust, if after they have begun so perfect an amity as ours, they should so
soon destrov it: But I hope they will preserve you, at least take me away
before you: But if they will not, I will only beg as much life as to fulfill
those commands you have laid upon me, and then to let me follow you. Be
assured, dearest soul, that unless they always tie up my hands, I will not be
long after you. Friend, answered she, I command you to live as long as the Gods
have ordained, that so whilst I am chanting our perfect amity in the Elizian
Fields, you may publish it unto the living: And so both the dead, and they
living will honor ou^ memory. But, friend, I perceive my malady is forcing me
to leave you: Adieu, adieu, the most perfect Lover left amongst the living. At
these words she dyed, leaning her head in the bosom of her Shepherd. To repeat
his sorrows, would but open his wounds, and make them bleed afresh. Oh most
fatal death (cried out Tircis) that has robbed me of the better part of
myself, either restore that life which thou have taken from me, or else take
the rest. Then, to give way unto those tears and sighs which this remembrance
did revive in his heart, he stood silent until Silvander told him, that to
grieve for what there was no remedy, was but a testimony of weakness. Oh, said
Tircis, I do grieve because there is no remedy; for if there were, I should
not grieve. Laonice then continued on: This happy Shepheardess being dead, and
Tircis having performed the last office of amity, he procured her to be
interred next her Mother; but the carelessness of those who had it in charge was
such, as they laid her corpse in another place. As for him, his sorrows were
such, as he never stirred off his bed, as if he lived only to obey her
commandments. Some few days after, enquiring of those who came to see him,
where they had laid his beloved corpse, he understood that she was not enterred
by her Mother; at which he was infinitely displeased; and for a great sum of
money hired some to take it up again, and lay it by her Mother, which
accordingly was done: They went unto the place, uncovered the earth, and four
of them took up the corpse, but having carried it a little way, the Infection
was so violent that they were forced to leave it by the way, and could carry it
no further: whereof Tircis being advertised, after he had made great offers
unto them to go on, and seeing they would by no means undertake it; What Tircis
(said he) did thou think the love of gain could work more with them than thy
affection with thee? Fie, sie, Tircis, this is too great an affront offered
unto thy amity. So, as if he were transported, he ran to the place where the
corpse lay; and though it had layn in the earth three days, and smelt
extremely, he took it up in his arms, and carried it unto the Tomb of her
Mother, which was already covered. Then after this high testimony of affection,
he returned to the Town, and would not be seen of any. When all these passages
were known unto me, but yet only hearing Cleon was dead, I went unto his
chamber, to enquire of all particulars: When I came at the chamber door, which
stood half shut, and half open, me-thought I heard him sigh; and was not
mistaken, for looking in at a chink of the door, I saw him lying upon his bed
with eyes and hands lifted up to heaven, and his face swimming all in tears.
Judge generous Shepherd, whether or no I was astonished; for I did not think
he had loved her, but came rather with intentions to rejoice with him, than to
condole. Then, after I had seen him in this sad condition, I heard him utter
these words:

Upon the Death of CLEON.
Tears turn to Rivers; never hide
But swel your selves into a flowing tide:
She Is dead, who whilst she lived did luster give
To as much virtue as did ever live:
No faigning now my Love; my grief will show
No hopes are left for Lovers here below:
All that are left are lodged in her grave;
And he that has no hopes, no fears can have.
She lived in me, I lived in her; and both
So twisted were together by an oath
Of faithful Love, as both, though two, but one:
And now my Cleon dead is, I am none.
But stay; me thinks she is not dead; her heart
To live in me did from her self depart;
Her body's only dead; And now I see
My spirits died in her, hers live in me.
Oh heavens! what a weeping statue was I turned, when I heard him utter these
words! My astonishment was so great, as leaning against the door, it opened; at
which he turning his head, and seeing me, he put out his hand, and bade me sit
down upon the bed by him; and when he had wiped away some tears from his
swelled eyes, he spoke thus unto me: Alas, Laonice, poor Cleon is dead, and we
are left here below to lament her loss. And because my grief would not suffer
me to return an answer, he continued on. I know Shepheardess, that you seeing
me in this condition, do much wonder, that the feigned amity, which I
professed unto her, should make me mourn so excessively for her loss. But,
alas, remove your error, I beseech you; for I think it is too great a sin
against Love to continue any longer under the cover of dissimulation, which my
affection forced me to assume. And know Laonice, that all this while, I did
love Cleon, and all my addresses unto you were but coverings of that love. And
therefore if you did ever love me, for Gods sake Laonice, turn that love into
pity, and condole with me this sad disaster, which at one blow has cut off all
my hopes. If ever I did offend you, I beseech you, pardon me, since it was
committed only because I could not fail in my duty to my dearest Cleon. I was
so transported at these words, that I went out, and could hardly hit the way to
my own home, where I kept my chamber a long time, lamenting this sad disaster:
And I did with Tircis, whom I still loved, excuse all those Treasons he had
committed against me and pardoned the dissimulations whereby he offended me
thinking them no dissimulations nor treasons, but only violencies of love. I
was the more easily induced to pardon him, since Love, as a Consederate with
his faults, did flatter me with some hopes of succeeding Cleon in his
affection. As I was thus soothing my self in these thoughts one came to tell
me, that Tircis was gone, and none knew whither, or where he was. This
surcharge of sorrow, so surprised me as I did immediately resolve to follow him.
And to the end none might hinder me, I departed, so secretly at the beginning
of the night, as before morning I was gotten far off. Whether I was
astonished when I was alone in the dark, the heavens do know, unto whom my
complaints were addressed; but however, Love, who was my secret companion did
inspire me with courage enough to go through with my design: Following then on
my voyage, and taking the path my feet first trod upon; for I know not which
way Tircis went, nor my self neither; I went wandering like a Vagabond for
three months together, and never heard the least syllable of him. At the last,
passing over the Mount Dor, I met with this Shepheardess (said she, and pointed
unto Madonche) and with her this Shepherd called Thersander, sitting under a
shady Rock to pass away the heat of the day; And it being my custom to enquire
of all I met concerning Tircis, I understood by some signs which they gave me,
that he was in those deserts, and went wandering and lamenting the loss of
Cleon. Then I related unto them, all the same story which I have told unto you,
and conjured them to give me the best directions they could. Madonche moved
with pity, did give me such a sweet answer, as I judged her to be sick of the
same disease I was, and I was not mistaken; for I heard, since, the story of
her sorrows, by which I found, that Love wounds as well in the Court as
Country. And because there was much resemblance in our fortunes, she desired we
might both go together, since both were upon the same quest. I did with open
arms embrace the motion, and thought it better to enjoy such a sad companion,
than to be alone. But this discourse is impertinent, since I intend only to
relate the story of Tircis, and my self. Well, generous Shepherd, after three
months quest in this Country, I met with him; and so contrary to his
expectation, that he was extremely surprised. At the first, he looked upon me
with a loving eye; but afterward, when he saw the occasion of my voyage was my
Love to him, he openly declared the affection which he still bore unto Cleon,
and that it was not in his power to love me. Love, I beseech thee (and not this
ungrateful man) If there be any justice in thee, let me have some recompense
for all my pains.

Thus Laonice ended, and addressed her self in a sad posture unto Silvander, as
if she courted his favor for Justice in her cause. Then Tircis began to speak
in this manner; Though the story of my misfortunes be, as this Shepheardess
has related them, yet my sorrows are infinitely more pitiful, which I will
not relate, lest I should too much trouble you, and all this company; only
with this, that when we could not support our sorrows, we did with common
consent address ourselves unto the Oracle to know our dooms from it; and we
received this answer from the mouth of Arontine.

THE ORACLE.
Look, Lovers, amongst the Shepherds that abide
Where Lignon like a Serpent there does glide,
There shall you find one Learned in the Laws
Of Love, and Justice; he shall Judge your Cause.
And though we have long resided in these parts, yet you are the first that
asked us of the state of our fortunes: And therefore we do in all humility
submit our selves and fortunes unto your doom; beseeching you to determine the
difference between us. And to the end all things might be done according to the
will of the Gods, the old Matron who delivered the Oracle told us, that both of
us were to choose our Advocate amongst the company by Lot; the first Lot to
plead for Laonice, and the last for me. Upon this he entreated them all, that
they would be pleased to take these offices upon them, unto which they all
consented. The first Lot fell upon Hylas, and the last upon Phillis. Hylas he
smiled, and said thus; If I were now, as heretofore I was, a servant unto
Laonice, I should very hardly be persuaded to argue in her behalf, that Tircis
ought to love her; but now at this time, since I am all for Madonche, I am very
willing to obey that God who so ordained it. Shepherd, said Leonida, you may
by this observe the great Providence of this Divinity, who to move one unto
change, has committed the charge of it unto unconstant Hylas, as unto one who
best knows the way; and to move one to a faithful amity, has cast the Lot upon
a Shepherdess that is firm and constant in her actions: Also such a Judge is
chosen as will not be partial: For Silvander is the most fit, since he is
neither constant nor unconstant in his affection, because he never loved. Then
Silvander began to speak, and thus said unto them: Since, Tircis and Laonice,
you are both willing that I should be the Judge of your differences, I shall
require you both to swear, that you will inviolably observe my Sentence, for
otherwise the Gods may be the more incensed, and all our labors lost. Which
both consented unto, and then Hylas began in this manner.

The Oration of Hylas in behalf of Laonice.
Most wise and impartial Judge
WEre I to plead before some hard hearted and unnatural person, I should fear
lest perhaps the defects of my capacity, should prejudice the justice of my
Clients cause. But since I am to argue the business before you who has the
heart of a man (I mean, who knows the duties of a man well born) I cannot
choose but be confident of a favorable judgment, and take it for almost
certain, that if you were in the room of Tircis, you would be extremely
ashamed to be branded with such a crime. I will not strive for any far fetched
reasons, to approve that which is so abundantly clear in it self: only shall
hint thus much unto you, that the very name of man, does oblige him unto a
confession of his error. And the Laws and ordinances both of heaven and
nature, do all command him to dispute no further in the cause. Does not the
rules of courtesy and gratitude require, a retaliation for benefits received?
Does not heaven it self say, that all services ought to be remunerated with
some wages? And does not nature force him to love a fair woman who loves him
and to abhor rather then to dote upon dead corpse? But this man is a grand
offend eragainst all these sacred Laws: for in lieu of all the great favor he
has received from Laonice he has returned high discourtesies; in lieu of all
those services which he himself confesses she has done him, serving him so
long for a cloak of his amity to Cleon, he does pay her the wages of
ingratitude: and for that dear affection which she ever bore him even from her
cradle, he answers her only with scorn. If thou be a man Tircis, make it
appear thou do adore the gods, and recompense this fair shepherdess, who
has run so many hazards and miseries for thy sake. And if thou be a man,
then surely thou have the quality of one, which is, to love the living and not
the dead: If thou do acknowledge the gods, do thou not know they use to
punish such as despise their ordinances? and that Love never pardons crimes
betwixt a Lover and a Loved.

If thou do confess that she has served and loved thee even from her very
cradle, Oh heavens, is it ever possible such a long affection and agreeable
service should be paid with scorn?

But admit, and suppose that this affection and service being voluntary in
Laonice and not courted or desired by Tircis: yet surely I cannot believe, Oh
just and wise Silvander, but you will decree that a deceiver ought to make
satisfaction unto the party deceived; and so by consequence Tircis who has so
long deluded this fair Shepherdess by his dissimulations and tricks, ought
he not to repair the injury done her with a real and unfaigned affection? He
has long used lies and falsities, let him at last use truths and honesty; nor
can I ever think you will decree that Tircis should Love and live with a dead
person and not a living: but will rather doom his Love to be bestowed upon me
that can love him again, rather then upon a few could ashes in a coffin. But,
good Tircis, tell me what thy design is: when thou have drowned the sad
relics of poor Cleon in a flood of tears, do thou think that it and all
thy sighs and groans can ever raise her up again? Alas, Caron never wafts any
over but once, and is ever after deaf to all cries and calls; No no, Tircis,
it is flat impiety to trouble the tranquillity of those whom the gods have
called to themselves: Amity is ordained for the living, and coffins for the
dead: do not then so preposterously, give thy affection unto the dead Cleon,
and a coffin unto the living Laonice. This does not get thee the name of
constant, for Cleon now has no interest in thee: must one always go naked
because their first clothes are worn? And that is no more ridiculous then to
hear you say, that because Cleon your old Mistrisse is worn away, therefore
you will never have a new one. Fie fie; call your self to account: acknowledge
your error; cast your self at the feeet of this fair one, acknowledge unto her
your fault, and so avoid that sentence unto which our just Judge by this
sentence will doom you.

Hylas thus ended with much contentment unto every one, except Tircis, whose
tears did testify the grandeur of his grief. When Phillis by the command of
Silvander began to answer Hylas, thus.

The Answer of Phillis in the behalf of Tircis.
Oh Fair Cleon, who out of heaven hears the injury that is offered unto thee,
inspire me with thy Divinity, for so I may well esteem thee, if virtue couldever
make any humane person divine: and so furnish me with soliditie of reasons as I
may make it most apparent that Tircis ought never to love any but thy
perfections. And you, prudent Judge, whose wisdom is infinitely above my shallow
conceptions, I beseech you, let the abundance of reason which is in my cause,
supply those wants that are in me. And, to begin, Let me tell you Hylas, that
all those reasons which you have instanced for a proof that the loving party
ought to be loved again, though they be falls, yet shall be allowed as good. But
how can you conclude from them, that Tircis ought to betray the amity of
Cleon, by beginning a new love of Laonice? These are impossibilities, and
contradictions: Impossible, because none is obliged unto more then they can do.
How would you have this Shepherd love when he has no will? You laugh Hylas,
when you hear me say he has none. Faith, I do so, said Hylas, I pray what has
he done with it? He that loves answered Phillis does give his soul, it self and
all its faculties unto the party loved; and so by con; equenee his will is not
in his power. But this Cleon, replied Hylas, being dead has nothing, and
therefore Tircis ought to to take his own again.

Ah Hylas, Hylas, answered Phillis, you talk like an ignorant in Love; for
such gifts as are disposed on by Loves authority are for ever irrevocable.
Pray then, said Hylas, what is become of this will, since the death of Cleon?
The less follows the greater, replied Phillis, if pleasure be the object of
the will, if that cease to be a pleasure, where is the will? And so it has
followed Cleon: if Cleon be not, then there is no will; for he had never had it
but for her. But if Cleon be in some certain place, as our Druids hold, that
she is, then this will is in her hands, so contented in the place where she is,
that if she her self would chase it away, she cannot return it to Tircis, as
knowing well it would be in vain, but it goes into the grave, and rests with
her beloved Ashes: this being so, why do you tax the faithful Tircis with
ingratitude, if it be in his power to love any other? Also you do not only
require things impossible, but also things in themselves contraries; for if
every one ought to love the party that loves, why should he not then love
Cleon, who never failed him in amity? And as for the recompenses which you
demand, for the Services and Letters which Laonice carried: pray let her
remember the contentment she received by them, and how merry she made herself
as long as this fallacy lasted, who otherwise would have droned out a dull and
melancholy life. So as if she balance the payment which the service, I assure
my self she will think her self very well paid* You say, Hylas that Tircis
deceived her; but I say it was no deceit, but a just punishment of love, who
returned her own blows upon her self, for her intention was not to serve him,
but to delude Cleon. Thus Silvander have I briefly answered the false reasons
of this Sheapheard: and there remains no more, but to make Laonice confess,
that she injured Tircis in her unjust pursuing of him; which I shall easily do,
if she will be but pleased to answer me. Fair Shepherdess, pray tell me, do
you love Tircis? Shepherdess, answered she all that knows me knows I do. If
he were forced to be absent, replied Phillis, and another in the mean time
should court you, would you not change affection? No, answered she, for I would
still hope he would return. If you heard that he would never return (said
Phillis) would you then cease to love him?

No certainly, answered she. Then, Fair Laonice answered Phillis, think it not
strange that Tircis who knows that his Cleon is in heaven, that she sees all
his actions, and rejoices in his fidelity, should not change the affection he
bore unto her: nor let this distance of place separate their loves, since all
the hindrances of life could never do it. Do not believe what Hylas said, that
none ever returns over the River Acheron; many that have been beloved of the
gods, have both gone and come; and who knows, but Cleon who was adorned with
so many excellencies of soul, may find the same favor from Love: Oh Laonice!
were but your eyes permitted to look upon Divinity; you would see that Cleon
to defend her own cause is in this place, and whispers these words into my
ears, which I utter in her defense. Then would you confess, that Hylas was in
the wrong when he said, that Tircis was mad to love her cold ashes. Me thinks I
see her in the midst of us, and in lieu of a fragile body, subject unto humane
accidents, she is clothed with glorious imortality; and chiding Hylas for the
blasphemies he had breathed against her. What would thou answer, Hylas, if
thy happy Cleon should say thus unto thee? Will thou offer, O thou inconstant
wretch, to stain my Tircis with thy own insidelity? If he did heretofore love
me, do thou think it was my Body? If thou should answer, Yes, I would then
reply, that then he ought to be condemned to love the ashes which I have left
in my Coffin, as long as they will last: For, a Lover never ought to retreat
from a Love once begun. If thou do confess that it was my Soul he loved,
which was my principal part: then, Oh thou fond and unconstant sinner, why
should he now change his will, since she is now more perfectly glorious than
ever she was? Otherwise, (such is the misery of the living) I should be jealous
I should be vexed, and I should be seen by many eyes as I am by his: But now I
am delivered from such mortal imperfections, and am no more capable of any
infirmities. And would thou, Hylas, with thy sacrilegious persuasions, divert
him from me, in whom I only lived upon earth? and, by a most barbarous cruelty,
endeavor to give me a second death? Oh! most horrid to hear: These words, wise
Silvander, do make such a Turring sound in my ears, as, I do believe, they will
make your heart resent them as well as mine. And therefore, to let this
divinity argue the cause in your soul, I will be silent only let me hint thus
much unto you, that Love is so just, as you your self ought to stand in awe of
his punishing hand, if Laonice's pity, rather then Cleon's reasons, should
move you.

At this word Phillis made a low congee, intimating thereby, that she had no
more to say in the behalf of Tircis. Laonice offered to answer further, but
Silvander would not suffer her, saying, that now she was to hear the sentence,
which the gods would pronounce by his mouth. Then after he had weighed the
reasons on both sides, he pronounced this Doom.

The Judgment of Silvander.
THe principal point in the cause debated before us, is, to know whether Love
can die, by the death of the party loved Unto which I say, that the Love which
is perishable is not right Love; for, it ought to follow the subject which gave
it life; and therefore those who love only the Body, ought to enclose their
love of that body in the same Coffin where it is; but, such as love the Soul,
ought, with their love, to fly after this loved Soul, as far as the highest
heavens, and no distance ought to separate them. All these things therefore
well considered, I do ordain, that Tircis do love his Cleon still; and that the
two Loves which are in us, the one do follow the Body into the grave, and the
other the Soul into heaven. That Tircis do not any more disturb the rest of
Cleon's Soul, by any compliance unto the importunities of Laonice. This is the
Will of the gods pronounced by me.

Having thus given Sentence, not staying to hear the complaints of Laonice and
Hylas, he made a low congie unto Leonida and the rest of the company, and went
away without any company, but Phillis, who would not tarry to hear the sad
resentments of this Shepherdess. And because it was late, Leonida went that
night unto Diana's house, with all the rest of the Shepherds and
Shepheardesses, except Laonice, who was so extremely offended at Silvander and
Phillis, as she swore, she would not go out of that Country before she had done
them some remarkable displeasure. It seems fortune did conduct her as she
desired; for having left the company, and sitting down in the wood where she
might with more liberty lament her disasters, her better Genius did represent
before the eyes of her fancy, the insupportable disdain of Tircis, how he was
unworthy of her Love, and was so ashamed of his fault, as she vowed a thousand
times to hate him, and, for his sake, both Silvander and Phillis. Whilst these
things thus passed in her memory, it happened, that Lycidas, who, of late, was
displeased with Phillis, for some coldness toward him, espied Silvander and
her talking together. It Is true, this Shepherdess was not altogether so full
of trivial expressions of Love to him, as 'she was before her frequent
association with Diana for that new amity together with the delight which
Astrea, Diana, and she took in being together, did so much take her up, as she
minded not those fond trifles of affection, which nourished the love of
Lycidas; so as he had a conceit, that the reason why she was not so conversant
with him as before, was some new Love which had diverted her from him: and not
being able to imagine who it should be, that she now loved, he went wandering up
and down in places most melancholy and unfrequented, that he might with more
freedom lament his miseries: And as ill luck was, he spied, as I told you
before, Silvander and Phillis in discourse together, which sight did not a
little increase his jealousy; for, knowing the merits of the Shepherd and
Shepherdess, he easily believed, that Silvander, who never yet loved any, had
bestowed himself upon her; and that she, according to the humor of her Sex,
did willingly accept of the gift.

These considerations did much stir up his suspicion; but much more, when they
passing by him, and not seeing him, be heard, or thought he heard, the words of
a Lover; and those perhaps were only some repetition of Silvander's sentence.
But, to put himself out of all patience, it happened, that having let them
pass by, he did rise out of the place where he was, and because he would not
follow them, took the contrary way, and as fortune would have it, he did sit
down near the place where Laonice was, who all this while never saw him. After
he had a while nursed upon his mishaps, and being transported with the thoughts
of them, he cried out aloud, Oh Love! is it possible thou should suffer such
an injury to pass unpunished? Will thou recompense wrongs and services with
equal favors? Afterward, being a while silent, with crossed arms, and eyes
turned up to the skies, he breathed out many a sad sigh, and then began again.

I plainly see, that there is not any constancy in any woman: Phillis, because
she will show that she is of the same Sex, and though otherwise full of
perfection, yet in this she is subject to her Sexes natural inconstancy.
Phillis, I say, of whose affection I have been heretofore more assured, than of
my own will. But Oh, my Shepherdess, am I not the very selfsame Lycidas that
I was before, and whose affection has been so welcome unto you? Must I now be
cast off, and Silvander succed in my happiness? a stranger a vagabond, a man
that all the world despises, and cannot own him for any possessor of any part
in it. Laonice, who overheard, hearing him name Phillis and Silvander, and
being desirous to know more, she began to hearken more attentively, so as she
heard him utter the most secret thoughts, both of himself and Phillis: and
from thence she resolved to sooth him up in his opinion, assuring her self,
that if Phillis loved Lycidas, she should make him jealous; and if she loved
Silvander, she would so divulge it to the world, that every one should know it.
So when Lycidas was gone, for his tormented mind would not let him belong in
one place, she came out of her lurking place, and following after, she overtook
him as he was talking to Corilas, whom he met upon the way; and faigning to
enquire some news of a disconsolate Shepherd, they answered, that they knew
of no such. He is a Shepherd, said she, who wanders up and down lamenting a
dead Shepherdess; and I am told he uses to be every afternoon in the company
of the fair Shepherdess, Phillis, and her Servant. Her Servant, answered
Lycidas, who is that? I know not, said she, but it is such a name as Silander
or Silvander, or some such like; he is of a middle stature, his face something
long, and of a very pleasing humor when he will. But who told you, replied
Lycidas, that he was her Servant? Both their actions, answered she; for I know
what I have both seen and heard of them: But, I pray tell me, if you know any
way how I should meet with him I look for? Lycidas was so surprised, that he
could not answer a word; but Corilas told her, that if she followed on that
path, it would bring her through the wood into a Meadow, where they used to
assemble; and lest she should lose her way, he would be her companion if she
pleased. She seemed as if she did not know the way, and was very glad of his
courteous offer: So bidding goodnight unto Lycidas, went along with her
companion. But Lycidas was so much out of himself, that he stood still
immovable a long while; but at last, recollecting himself, he ruminated upon
the words of this Shepherdess, unto which he could not choose but give much
credit. It would be too long to relate his doleful expressions and injuries he
did unto the faithful Phillis. But all the night long he wandered in the thick
wood, and in the morning he was so tired out with his woes and walking, that he
was forced to lie down under a tree, and with eyes swelled with tears, at the
last he fell asleep.

As Soon as day did break Diana, Astrea, and Phillis did rise, to the end they
might be ready to wait upon Leonida, as soon as she was up; but she was so much
taken with their sweetness and courtesy, that she had dressed her self by the
first dawning of the day, that she might not miss a minute of their company,
whilst she stayed with them; so as these Shepheardesses, when they opened her
Chamber door, did all wonder at her earliness; and after all had done their
morning complement, they went out of the house, to begin the same exercises
which they had the day before; and as soon as ever they came into the meadow,
they espied Silvander, who, under the color of a feigned courtship of Diana,
began to be really in earnest, and in love with her: He was so intent upon this
new growing love, that he had not closed an eye all the night, but still passed
away the time in thinking upon the discourse and gestures of Diana, which he
had seen and heard the day before; so as Aurora no sooner began to visit his
window, but he was up, and waited for the coming of his new Mistress; and as
soon as he saw her, he sung these Verses as he met her.

Upon High Desires and Hopes.
HOpes, that Ixion like do swell so high,
As level at the heavens supremacy,
Are too audacious, and do aim much higher,
Than does become their duty to aspire.
Prometheus when he filch'd Celestial fire,
And so provoked all the gods to ire:
My joys (said he) amidst my torments are,
That I have done what none before did dare.
Fond Icarus, with his faint feathers plumed,
Like Eagles in the air, to stie presumed:
But yet in spite of danger, he did aim
At Altitudes, and did attempt the same:
As Echo for the love of fair Narcisse,
Did tell the Rocks how great his torment is:
He cheered up himself, and said, if she
Do not me love, no other loved shall be.
Although she be all sovereignty,
As high as heaven, and be a deity:
Yet still my high-blown hopes will have the glory,
To enterprise an Act beyond all story.
Phillis being of a very merry and pleasant humor, resolved to undertake the
task that was imposed upon her; therefore turning off toward Diana, Mistress
(said she) you must take heed what this Shepherd says unto you; for,
yesterday he did not love you, but to day he is ready to die for love of you:
he should have begun sooner to serve you, or else have stayed longer, before he
used any such language as this. Silvander was so near as to hear this: and
therefore said, I beseech you fairest Mistress, stop your ears from the
detracting language of my enemy. Must you needs, Phillis, build up your own
happiness by the ruin of mine? Dare you, Silvander, (answered Phillis) be so
bold, as to speak of happiness before Diana's face? I wonder what impudent
phrases you will use behind her back, who assume to your self so much before
her face? Would you have my Mistress to think, that it is not my happiness to
serve her (said Silvander)? and why, I pray, should I not tell it is so, since
it is nothing but a most certain truth? You may as well say, said Phillis, that
she does love you, and cannot live out of your sight. I do not say so, answered
Silvander; but, let me say unto you by way of answer, that I wish with all my
heart, it were so: But, do you think it so strange, I should say, that I think
it a happiness to serve my Mistress? If you do, I pray let me ask, what
happiness do you find in serving her? Though I should think it a happiness,
replied Phillis, yet surely, I would not brag of it. It is ingratitude, replied
Silvander, to receive a benefit and not to give thanks for it; and how is it
possible to love a person that is ungrateful? From hence I judge (said
Leonida, and interrupted) that Phillis does not love Diana. Most will concur in
that judgment, answered Silvander, and I believe, Diana her self does think so.
I beseech you, show your reason for this opinion, said Phillis, if you think to
bring me into it. The Affirmative part, said Silvander, must always be proved,
and not the Negative: The question is, whether or no you do love Diana? You
affirm, and I deny it; and therefore it is your part to prove it. Phillis was
at a stand for an answer, when Astrea said, Sister, do you hear and allow of
what the Shepherd says? I do hear, but not allow of it, answered she, for I
should be put upon a hard task to prove it. If so (said Diana) I must think you
do not love me: for, Silvander demands nothing but what is reason. Upon this,
the Shepherd addressed himself unto Diana, and said unto her, Most fair, and
no less just, Mistesse, it is now impossible my enemy can be so impudent as to
say, that I have not an infinite happiness in serving you, you are pleased to
give such a favorable answer in my behalf. By Diana's saying, that Phillis
does not love her, said Astrea, she does not thereby say, that you do love her,
or that she loves you. Should I but hear such heavenly words, answered he, come
from the mouth of my Mistress, as, I do love you, or, You do love me, I should
not only think this a happiness, but be ravished with joy, and yet since she
is silent, it argues a consent unto what she hears: Why therefore may I not
say, that she confesses she loves me? Did Love consist in words, replied
Phillis, you are more in love than all men I know, put together; and you can
argue a bad Cause better than any Lawyer. Leonida was so delighted with the
discourse of these Shepheardesses, that had she not been troubled for Celadon,
she could have stayed amongst them as long as she had lived: And that was the
reason she desired them to walk with her toward the Riverside, homewards; and
they were very ready to wait upon her: for, besides the complement of common
courtesy, they were much delighted in her company.

So then, she taking Diana on the one side and Astrea on the other, they walked
along; but Silvander was further from Diana than Phillis, she having taken that
place which he desired; at which the vainglorious Phillis was not a little
glad, and laughed at the Shepherd, saying, that her Mistress might easily
judge which of them was most ready to serve her, since she had applied her
self so officiously to be near her, and he never cared. My Mistress, answered
he, did admit you to the honor of that place, for your importunities sake, and
not your affection for had you loved her, you would have suffered me to enjoy
that place which you do. Nay rather the contrary, answered Phillis, if I had
let any come nearer her than my self: For, a Lover thinks he can never be near
enough the person Loved. That Lover, answered Silvander, who regards his own
particular contentment more, then the contentment of the party Loved, does not
deserve the title of a Lover so as you regarding your own delight, in being so
near your Mistress, more then her satisfaction, it cannot be said you do love
her, but your self only; for, were I in your room, I should lead her, and help
her to walk, whereas you do only trouble her. Did my Mistress scold with me as
you do, replied Phillis, I know not whether I should love her or no. I am most
certain, said the Shepherd, that, were I in lieu of your Mistress, I should
never love you. How dare you offer such an affront, as to say, you think you
should not love her upon any condition? This, Phillis, is a grand maxim in the
Law of Love, that those who can think they cannot love upon any conditions, are
no Lovers: for, Love does not admit of any Ifs or Conditions, but is always
absolute.

Mistress, I demand justice, and require it on the part of Love, that you
punish this crime of so high a nature, and that you will remove her from that
place which is too honorable for her, that thinks she shall not love; and
place me in the room, who lives only to love you. Mistress, said Phillis, I
perceive, that this envier at my happiness will never let me alone, until I
quit the place; and I fear he will, with his smooth language, move you to
consent unto it: and therefore, with your favor, I will leave it unto him,
upon condition, that he tell you one thing which I shall ask him. Silvander
never staying for the answer of Diana, said unto Phillis, The condition is
easy, and I will never refuse it; since without it, I should never conceal any
thing which she desires to know. Then Phillis did yield him the place, and said
unto him, Envious Shepherd, though the place is not to be bought and sold,
yet, you have promised more for it than you are aware; for, you are obliged to
tell us who you are, and what occasion brought you into this Country: for, you
have been long amongst us, and we are all ignorant of what you are. Leonida,
who was very desirous to know who Silvander was, said unto Phillis thus,
Believe me, Phillis, you have showed much prudence in this proposition; for I
believe none here, but does much desire the same satisfaction. I wish, said
Silvander, that I could satisfy your desires; but Fortune has so denied it
unto me, as I may well say, that I am more desirous, and almost as ignorant of
it as you are: For, Fate only sent me into the world, lets me know that I do
live, but conceals from me all other knowledge of my self: And that you should
not believe that I am any thing unwilling to perform my promise, I do swear
unto you by all the gods, and by the beauty of Diana, that I will truly tell
you all that I know of my self.

The History of Silvander.
WHen Aetius was Lieutenant General in Gaul unto the Emperor Valentinian, he
thought it very dangerous unto the Romans, that Gondeoch the first King of the
Burgundians should be possessed of the greatest part, and therefore resolved to
drive him out, and drive him on the other side of the Rhine, from whence he
came a little before, when Stilico, for the good service he had done the Romans
against Radagrise the Goth, gave him the ancient Provinces of the Authunois,
and Seguinois, and Allobroges, whom he named Burgundy, without the command of
Valentinian: and it is to be thought he did it, only to get all the Forces of
the Empire into his own hands: But the Emperor, having his hands full of many
enemies, as the Goths, the Huns, the Vandals, and the Franks, who were ready to
fall upon him in several places, he commanded Aetius to let them alone in peace
which was not so soon put into execution, but first the Burgundians had already
received great routs, and their enemies made such ravage and waste, as they
carried away with them all they found.

I then being some five or six years of age, was with many others carried away
unto the utmost Town of the Allobroges, by some Burgundians, who out of revenge
went into those Countries that were confederate with their enemies, and
committed the same disorders which they had received. I cannot tell you why
they took me, unless in some hopes of money for a ransom; but my fortune was
so kind unto me, as I fell into the hands of an Helvetian, who had an old and
very rich Father, and who taking a liking to me, either for my physiognomy, or
some pleasing answer which my young Genius gave him, did take me unto himself,
with intention to educate me in Literature: And though the Son was much against
it, yet the Father continued his design, and spared no cost or care to instruct
me in all Learning, sending me unto the Universities of the Mussilians, in the
Province of the Romans. So as I may very well say, that I had been lost if I
had not been lost. However though nothing was more suitable to my Genius than
Learning, yet was it a continual torment unto me, to be ignorant from whence
and who I was; thinking still this to be a greater misfortune than happened unto
any other. And being much troubled at it, a friend advised me to enquire the
truth from the Oracle, for I was so young when I was first taken, that my
memory could not inform me any thing of my birth, or parents, or place from
whence I came; but this friend had such a persuasive power over me, that both
of us went together unto the Oracle, and the answer which we received was this.

THE ORACLE.
Born thou were within a Land
Where Neptune lately did command.
To know the place which gave thee birth
Thou can not, till Silvanders death.
This from thy cradle is thy Fate,
To which thou art Predestinate.
Judge (fair Diana) what satisfaction I received from this answer. For my part,
I resolved to sit still and enquire no further, since it was impossible to know
any more, unless I dyed; but lived afterward in much more tranquillity of
mind, referring my self unto the conduct of heaven, and applying my self unto
my studies, in which I was so good a proficient, that old Abariel (for that was
the name of his Father who took me away) had a longing desire to see me before
he dyed. Being come unto him, and entertained as well as I could wish, one day
when I was alone with him in his chamber, he spoke thus unto me.

My Son (for so have I ever esteemed you, since the rigor of War brought you
into my hands) I do not think you to be so ignorant of what I have done for
you, as to make any doubt of my good will toward you. Yet if my cares to
instruct your youth have not given you a knowledge of it, I will; because I do
intend very well toward you. You know that my Son Ahazides, who took you, and
brought you to me, has a Daughter as dear unto me as my self: And because I
desire to spend those few days I have to live, in rest and tranquillity, I do
intend to (...) you unto her, and to bestow upon you such a portion of my
estate, as I may live with you as long as it shall please the Gods. Do not
think, that this is a leight and random design, but a thing of mature and long
deliberation; for having by a well experienced knowledge found, your
inclinations suitable unto my mind, I resolved to establish the tranquillity of
my old age in you, and therefore sent you to the Universities, knowing that
nothing renders a soul more capable of reason than learning and knowledge does:
And in your absence I have so disposed my Grandchild to marry you, as she out
of her complacency to me, is contented, and desires it as much as my self. It Is
very true, she much desires to know, what, and from whence you are; and for her
satisfaction. I have often enquired of Azahides who took you, but he could give
no other answer, but that he found you about the River Rosne and out of the
Province of Vienoise; but perhaps you might better remember, since you were
then some five or six years old: And asking him, whether your habit could not
give him any knowledge of your Parents, he answered, No; and that you were so
young, that there was no ghessing at your Quality by your habit. So as, my Son,
if your own memory cannot give you any light unto our knowledge, none else can.

Then the good old Abariel took me by the hand, and prayed me to tell him, all
that I knew, or could remember of my self. To whom, after many expressions of
gratitude and obligations to him for my education, and this proposal of
Marriage, I answered him, that truly I was so very young when I was taken, as I
could not remember any thing either of my Parents or Quality. I am extremely
sorry for it (replied the good old man); but since it cannot be helped, I will
not so much as mention my design unto Azahides, until I know how you approve of
this my design. And I answering him, that I should be too ungrateful if I did
not wholly obey him in all things, he caused me to retire, and sent for his
Son, to acquaint him with his intentions, who did absolutely reject the motion,
and would by no means hear of it. Afterward, the good old man, since he could
not obtain his consent freely told him thus much; Ahazides (said he unto him)
if you will not bestow your Daughter upon whom I would, I will bestow my estate
upon whom you would not: Therefore either marry her unto Silvander, or else I
will make him my heir. Ahazides, who was of a very covetous disposition, and
feared to lose the estate, seeing his Father so peremptory, did seem to bend a
little, and desired some days of consideration, which the good old man did
consent unto, desiring to do all things by sweetness and lenity, and
afterward to acquaint me, but he needed not; for I found it by the eyes and
discourse of his Son, who begun to chide and use me so ill as I was not able to
endure it. Then during the time of consideration which was prefixed, he
commanded his daughter, who was much better than her father, upon pain of death
(for he was a man of a bloody and murtherous temper) to seem unto the good old
man, as if she were very sorry her father was not conformable unto his will,
and that she therefore would obey him, and would be ready to marry me
privately: And all this was only a design to murder me. The poor Grandchild was
extremely perplexed; for on the one side the menaces of her cruel father did
terrify her; on the other side, her affection unto me would not permit her
tender years to such a piece of cruelty, so as in a trembling manner she came
to the good old man, and told him, that she would marry me secretly: And then
it was so concluded upon. So as the good man did absolutely command me to be
ready, and I, notwithstanding all my doubts, durst not disobey.

The Plot was so laid, that I should climb up to the window of her chamber, and
there marry her secretly. The house was seated upon the Lake Lemane, where the
waves did beat against it, and then fell into the Rosne, which runs through the
middle of it. The design of Azahides was to draw me up with a rope to the
middle of the wall, and afterward to let me fall into the Lake: where being
drowned, no news would be heard of me: for, the Rosne, which runs with a
monstrous impetuosity, would have carried me quite away. A thousand to one, but
his design had been executed; for I was fully resolved to obey the good old
Abariel, had not his poor Grandchild moved with compassion, and horror of the
fact, acquainted me with it, the very day before it should have been done: And
in a trembling manner said thus unto me: You see, Silvander, that in saving
your life, I do run the hazard of my own death; for I know that Ahazides will
never pardon me, but however, I had rather die innocent, than live guilty of
your death. After my many thanks, I told her, that she needed not to fear the
fury of Ahazides; for I would take a course both for her safety and my own, but
told her that she must be sure to be secret. Against the appointed night I
provided my self (...) the money I could get, unknown to Abariel: And when the
appointed hour was come* (...) had taken my leave of the good old man, who came
with me to the water side, I went into the little Boat which he had provided
for me. Then going under the window, I made a show as if I had tied my self
unto the rope, but it was only my clothes stuffed full of Sand; then pushing my
self a little on one side to see what would be done, I heard it presently fall
into the Lake, where, with my Our I beat the water, that they hearing the
noise, might think it was I who was fluttering in the water: But I was quickly
forced to put further off; for they cast down so many stories, as I came hardly
off with my life. Presently after I saw a light in the window, and fearing to
be discovered, I laid my self all along in the Boat; and so they did not see
me, but thought the Boat floated away of it self. Then, when every one was gone
from the window. I heard a great noise by the water side where I left Abariel:
and as I thought, I heard his cry, caused by my fall into the water, and
fearing I was drowned; but I did resolve not to return, though extremely sorry
that I should not serve the good old Abariel in his old age: But being assured
of Ahazides his ill will unto me, I knew that though not at this time, yet at
some other he would execute his murtherous intention: So as coming to Land at
the place where I had laid other clothes, and the best of my things, I took
them, and leaving my Boat. I betook my self to Land, and traveled so long,
that, extremely weary, I arrived at Evians at the break of day, and was forced
there to rest my tired limbs all the day; where not being known, I went, as
many others did upon urgent occasions to ask advice of the sage Belinda, who
was Mistress of all the Vestals about the Lake; and who, as since I understand,
is Mother unto my fair Mistress. Having acquainted her with all my disasters,
she consulted with the Oracle, and the next day told me, that the gods did
command me not to wonder at my afflictions, and that if I would ever come out
of them, it was necessary I should look into the Fountain of the Verity of
Love, because in that water was my only remedy. And that as soon as I saw my
self in it, I should know my Father and my Country. And asking her in what
place that Fountain was, she told me it was in this Country of Forests. Then
she told me the property and enchantments of it, so courteously, as I thought
my self infinitely obliged unto her.

Upon this, I resolved to come hither, where at my first coming I met with
Celadon, from whom I had information where this admirable Fountain was: But as
I was in my way to it, I fell so sick, as I was forced to keep my chamber six
months: And when I was well, I understood from some about that place, how a
Magician, at the instance of Clidamas, had set two Lions and two Unicorns to
guard it, and that the Enchantment could not be disinchanted but by the death
of two of the most perfect Lovers that ever came into this Country.

Heavens know how much I was grieved at this news, since it had so prevented me
in my so much desired hopes. However, since this was the Country which the
Heavens had designed to give me knowledge of my Parents, I thought it best for
me to stay in it; hoping that at last these two Lovers so faithful, might be
found out: But certainly it was so rare a thing to be found, as I had little
reason for my hopes. But with this design I put my self into the garb of a
Shepherd, that I might more freely enjoy the company of those about the River
Lignon: And to be the more acceptable unto them, I bestowed the rest of my money
in a flock of Sheep, and building a little Cabin.

This, fair Leonida, is all I do know of my self: And this is the price of
that Room which I have bought of Phillis. I am very glad to know so much
(answered Leonida) and do hope your fortune will be good, since the gods do
seem to have a care of it by their Oracles: and for my part, I am a very
zealous wisher of it. So am not I (said Phillis) nor do I wish he may ever come
to the knowledge of his Parents: For if he should perhaps their merits might
work much upon my Mistress: For matter of Estate and Alliance, is more
considered in Marriages, than the love or merit of the party. See said
Silvander, how you understand it; you are not so much against me, but that I
hope by your means to come unto the knowledge of that which I so much desire.
By my means, said she, how can that be? Yes by your means, said Silvander; for
since the Lions must be quelled by the blood of two faithful Lovers, why should
not I believe that you and I are they? Well may I be faithful, answered
Phillis, but I am sure I am not valiant, I shall love my Mistrisse as much as
any in the world; but as for matter of life, I pray you pardon me; for what
service could I do unto her if I were dead. I assure you, answered Diana, I do
value both your lives infinitely above your deaths, and had rather be my self
in dainger of death, then to see either of you so for my sake.

Whilst they were thus discoursing and coming near to the bridge of Boutresse,
they espied a man a far off coming very fast; and when he was nearer, Leonida
knew him to be Paris, Son to the great Druide, Adamas, who being returned from
Feurs, and hearing that his Niece was to look for him, did send his Son to
acquaint her that he was returned: also to know what occasion moved her to come
so alone, it not being her custom to go with out company. As soon as she knew
Paris, she named him unto the Fair Shepheardesses, and they according to their
habitual civility, when he came near them did salute him with abundance of
courtesy so as had not the carresses of Leonida a little diverted him, he
could hardly have concealed his sudden surprise. Yet after the first
complements were past, and after he had delivered his Message unto her. But
Sister (said he for so Adamas would have them call one another) how came you to
meet with such Fair and good company? Truly Brother, answered she, A good fate
brought me to them and I have been two days together, neverlesse weary in my
life then with them. This said she, and pointed to Astrea, is the Fair
Shepherdess so famed, and deservedly for her beauty. Her name is Astrea: and
that, poynting at Diana, is the Daughter of Belinda and Celion: The other is
called Phillis: and This Shepherd is the unknown Silvander, whose merits yet
are so known as all the Country does love him. I swear, said Paris, my Father
fears of your falling into ill company, were groundless and had he known you
had been so well, I am sure he would not have been so much disquieted as he is.

Generous Paris, said Silvander a person that is owner of so much virtue as
this Fair Nymph is, can never be ill accompanied especially being amongst so
many wise and fair Shepheardesses as these. Upon these words he looked upon
Diana, who conceiving her self invited to it, answered; it is impossible,
noble Paris, to add any thing unto that which is already complete, but yet,
said Paris, I had much rather be with her, when she is with you, than when she
is alone. This, Sir, proceeds from the fluency of your courtesy, answered she
that are pleased to use such language unto strangers: You cannot say that you
are strangers unto me, said Paris, unless you say that I am a stranger unto
you, which indeed is a shame unto me, that I should be so near a neighbor unto
so many beauties of so much merit, and yet should scarcely know them: but I am
most extremely sorry for my fault and shall for the future endeavor to repair
it: As he said so, he turned toward the Nymph, and, you Sister, said he,
though I came alone, and intended to wait upon you from hence to Adamas, yet I
must needs stay here until night. I should be glad, said she if I could do the
like: but I am now forced to go about my business, yet I am resolved so to
settle all my affairs, as to live amongst these wise and fair Shepheardesses:
for I cannot think any life upon earth, so happy as theirs. With such
expressions as these she took leave of the fair Shepheardesses, after a hundred
embraces and promises to return again very shortly; and went away so very well
contented, as she resolved to quit the vanity of the Court, for the simplicity
of this life: but her greatest inducement unto it, was her design of getting
Celadon out of Galatheas hand, and because she thought he would presently
return unto this town, where she intended to work upon him under the shadow of
these Shepheardesses.

This was the voyage of Leonida, who in her progress, saw the beginning of two
great loves; that of Silvander under the umbrage of a wager, and that of Paris
both unto Diana: for Paris did ever since this day, fall so extremely in love
with her, that to get more familiarity with her, he quitted his accustomed
life, and put on the habit of a Shepherd, and would be called so purposely to
render himself more amiable in the eye of his Mistress, who for her part did
honor him, as his merits and good inclination to her did oblige her: but
because we have much to say of them, in the sequel of our discourse, therefore
we will say no more of them now.

Returning then unto the Town as they passed through the plain where commonly
their flocks did feed, they espied a far off Tircis, Hylas, and Lycidas, the
two first of which seemed by their actions to be in a very earnest argument:
for the head, the arms, and every part of Hylas did speak as much: As for
Lycidas, he was all in himself, his hat pulled down over his eyes; his arms
foulded, and looking upon his feet, did show there was something which much
affected his soul. And when they were within the ken of each other, Hylas
espying Phillis amongst the Shepheardesses; he left Tircis and went to her,
then without any salute unto the rest of the company, he took her by the hand,
and according to the usual freedom of his humor; in plain terms he told
her, how great a desire he had to serve her. Phillis being glad to pass away
the time with him, said thus, I do not know Hylas, from whence this desire of
yours should grow. For there is nothing in me which can invite it: if you do
believe what you say, answered he, then you are so much the more beholding to
me; and if you do not believe it, then you must think me to be a man of
judgment, and knows who deserves my service, and so you must the more esteem
me for it. Never doubt, said she, but however I shall esteem you, and accept of
your amity according to the merits of its desert, were it for no other
consideration, but because you are the first that ever loved me.

As fortune was, Lycidas came in, just as these words were spoken, whose
jealousy was already grown to such a height, as it did surpass his affection;
and as ill luck was, he came time enough to hear the answer which Hylas
returned unto Phillis, which was this: I know not, Fair Shepherdess, whether
you will continue unto me the same goodness you have begun; but if you do, I
am sure Silvander will forbid the banes; and, if to please you, he do not, yet
I am sure, that all those who saw him yesterday with you, will testify, that
he is your servant: I cannot tell whether or no he left his love under his
Pillow, but if he did not, you are his Mistress. Silvander never thought of
Lycidas his love unto Phillis, but thinking it were a shame for him to disavow
what Hylas said, also conceiving he should offend Phillis if he should;
especially before her face; he answered thus unto him: Shepherd, you need not
seek for any other testimony in this matter, but my self: Never think, that the
Shepherds of Lignon can so soon put on and off their affection they are dull
and gross, and slow in all they do; but, as the bigger the Nail is the
greater weight it supports, and is harder to be pulled out, so the more gross
we are in our affections, the longer do they stay in our souls So as if you
have seen me the Servant of this fair Shepheardess, very likely you shall see
me so again; for, we do not use to change every time we sleep; but, if you use
to do so, who have a hot brain, as the baldness of your head, and curling of
your hair does show, you must not judge of us, by your own more nimble and
stirring inclination. Hylas hearing this Shepheard's freedom of language, and
so pat to his own humor, did think, that either Tircis had told him something,
or else, that he had known him formerly: And therefore, Shepherd, said he,
have you heretofore seen me, or do you speak this of me by hearesay? I did
never see you before, said Silvander; but your physiognomie and discourse does
prompt me unto what I say: For, one shall hardly suspect another of that fault,
whereof themselves are clear. Therefore, said Hylas, you cannot be exempt from
unconstancy, since you do suspect me. Suspicion, replied Silvander, proceeds
either from some little appearance, or from no appearance but our own
imagination: but, what I say of you is not upon any suspicion, but upon a
certain assurance. Do you call it suspicion, when I heard you say that you once
loved Laonice, and then quitted her for another, that other for a third, and
that third for Phillis, who doubtless you will quit upon the first sight of
any new commer? Tircis hearing this discourse, and seeing Hylas at a nonplus,
began to fall thus upon him: Hylas said he, you are now plainly discovered, and
it boots you not to conceal your self any longer; the discerning eyes of this
Shepherd can find out your inconstancy; and therefore your best way is, to
confess the truth, against which, if you contend, you will find, that she
will prove you a liar, and so you will quite lose your reputation: Confess it
therefore freely and to encourage you, I will break the Ice and begin; Know,
generous Shepherd, that this Hylas is the most inconstant, the most disloyal,
and the most perfidious Shepherd that ever promised affection. Then added
Phillis He does much oblige those whom he does not love. What Mistress,
answered Hylas, will you be also against me? Can you give any credit to the
impostures of this malicious man? Do you not see, that Tircis, thinking
himself obliged unto Silvander, for the sentence which he gave on his side,
does think to repay it back, by infusing an ill opinion of me into you? What
does that argue, (said Phillis unto Silvander)? What does it argue, said the
inconstant Shepherd? do you not know, that it is a greater difficulty to take
a place which is already possessed, than one which is not taken up by any? His
meaning is, added Silvander, that as long as you love him, it will be hard for
me to get into your favor. But, my friend Hylas, I believe you are much
mistaken; for, though I see, she daignes to cast her eye a little upon you,
yet, am I very confident of her amity; for, out of a sound judgment I do know,
that she will always make choice of the better. To which Hylas answered,
Perhaps you think, vainglorious Shepherd, that you have some advantage of me;
but, I pray, where does it lie? none can see it, nor does my Mistress believe
it. What kind of a silly thing is he, that never had the courage or
confidence, to love and serve above one Mistress? and that too, so faintly and
simply, as you would swear he mocked her: whereas I, that have loved as many
Beauties as I have seen, I have been bid welcome by them all. What pitiful
service is to be expected from him, that knows not where to begin? But I, that
have courted and served all sorts, of all ages, conditions and humors, I can
turn, and wind, and do any thing to please or displease: And, for a proof of
what I say, I pray give me leave to catechize him a little, that you may see
his silliness. Then turning toward Silvander, he asked him, what that was,
which would most oblige a fair Shepherdess to love? It is, said Silvander, to
love only her. And what is it, said Hylas, which will most please her? It is,
answered Silvander, to love her extremely. Do you see (said Hylas) what a
simplician this is: Why, this is the way together scorn and hatred; for, to
love her only gives her an occasion to think, that it is for want of courage
that you dare not attempt to love any else, and therefore she will scorn such a
faint hearted Lover: whereas, did you love all you look upon, she would not
think you come to her, because you knew not whither to go else; but, she will
then prise you the higher, and will be obliged to love you, especially, if you
particularize her above any other, and tell her some stories which you have
gleaned from others; then, once a week come and profess your service, or may
be oftener, if a good occasion require, this will render you more pleasing, and
invite her to cherish your company. This is the way, fond Novice, to oblige her
unto love; but, to pule and please her continually, is the only way to make her
look asquint at you: Nothing is so tiring and tedious, as these huge and
extreme affections; such as love, so, must needs be perpetually imprisoned,
never at liberty, always present, continually talking to her; she cannot stir
a foot but you must do the like. To be brief, you are abominably troublesome
to her. But, the Devil of all is, if she chance to be at any time ill, and do
not smile upon you, nor please you forsooth, then must you put the finger to
eye and cry; cry tears, insomuch as you force her to fly you. Do you think
this to be the way to make her love you: No, no, it is in Love as in all things
else, the Mean is the best Measure; so as to avoid all these frivolous follies,
the only way is to love but indifferently; and the best way to please her, is
to be pleasant, merry, and jocund; and, above all, never to be mute before her.
This, Silvander, is the way to make a Shepherdess love you, and to get her
favor. And you, fairest Mistrasse, may by this see how to value my affection.
She would have answered, but Silvander beseeched her to give him leave to
speak* And then he did examine Hylas upon these Interrogatories. What is it,
Shepherd, that you desire most when you do love? To be loved again, answered
Hylas. But when you are loved, replied Silvander, what do you desire or expect
from this amity? that the person whom I love, answered Hylas, do prize me above
all others, that she trust me, and endeavor to please me. Do you use poison to
preserve your life, said Silvander? how can you ever expect she should trust
you, when you are not faithful unto her? Oh, said Hylas, she shall never know
it. Then I see, said Silvander, that you will do that by treachery, which ought
to be done with sincerity: As long as she does not know that you love another,
she thinks you faithful, and so you shrond your self under this false shadow:
You talk of scorn, can any thing provoke a generous spirit more unto it, than
to imagine, that this man whom I see so submisse at your feet, adoring you,
should have his lips blistered with the kisses of others; and those eyes which
seem to adore you, ready to sparkle love at every woman they look upon? What
should any woman of any Soul, have any thing to do with a thing common? He will
do no more for you, than he will for any one that has the resemblance of a
woman; when he speaks to you, his mind is a hundred Leagues off, and is
thinking of such a one, that a thousand to one is ten thousand degrees your
inferior; the words he makes use of are some fragments gleaned from another,
such as his heart never ownes: Oh! how horrid a scorn deserves such a man! As
to the next point, which he urged to obtain love by, which is, To be jolly, and
galliard, and always laughing: Truly, that is a principal quality for a
Buffon, or one that has nothing at his heart; but, for a Lover to be of that
temper, is absurd, unless, Hylas, such a Lover as your self. Again, you say
that a mean in Love is the best; but let me tell you, that he who is but half
faithful, is not faithful at all; and he that loves not in the highest point
of extremity, does not love one jot, he who can be indifferent, and love all
alike, cannot love one as he ought to do. Valourand Love are resemblant, and he
that can measure them, or thinks any greater than his own, is neither valiant,
nor a lover worth a Rush. So, Hylas, you see, that to enjoin a mediocrity in
Love, is to impose an impossibility: And when you love so, you do as those
melancholy fools do, that think they are expert in all Sciences, and know
nothing: It Is just your case, in thinking you love, when you do not. But be it
so, that one can love a little; Do you not know, that Amity has no other
Harvest but Amity, and all that is sowed, is only to reap some fruit? How can
you, that sow but a little, ever expect to reap much? Ah, Hylas, you little
know what belongs to Love: For those effects which belong to an extreme love,
and which you call Troubles, are so indeed, to such as you, who know not how to
love; but such as are really, and in good earnest in love, and know what
sacrifices and duties belong unto the Altars of Love, they are so far from
calling those effects, troubles, as they think them felicities, and perfect
contentments. But, Hylas, I will tell you what it is to love; It is to dye in
ones self, that he may live in another: Never to love any thing but what is
pleasing and agreeable unto the party loved. The will must be absolutely
transformed into a Mistress: And can you think, that one who loves thus, will
ever be troubled with the presence of her whom he loves? The knowledge she has
of being loved, is a thing so infinitely pleasing, as all things else in
comparison of that, have no relish. And if you do but know what it is to love,
you will never think that he who loves, can do any thing to displease. All his
actions are marked with the sweet character of love, and cannot be displeasing.
If he chance to commit any fault the fault it self pleases, considering with
what intention it was committed. The very desire of being amiable has such
vigor in a right Lover, as though he cannot choose but be rough to all the
world in general, yet will he be sure to smooth and spruce up himself toward
her he loves. And from hence is the reason, that many, who are not at all
rellished by most in general, are yet loved and esteemed by some one in
particular.

Do you see, Hylas, that hitherto you have been ignorant in the Laws of Love,
and have only abused the Name of it, and deceived those whom you thought you
had loved? How, said Hylas, Have I not loved all this while? What then have I
done unto Carles, Amuranthe, Laonice, and a hundred more? You must know, said
Silvander, that in all sorts of Arts, there are both good and bad proficients
in them: And so in Love; for some do love well as I do, and some ill as you: So
as I may be termed the Master, and you the Changling of Love.

At this every one smiled, except Lycidas, who hearing all this discourse grew
higher in his jealous apprehensions, which Phillis did not observe, thinking it
rather an effect of his affection to her, since in reason he could never doubt
her. One that is ignorant, and knows not that Jealousy in Love is a sucker
which draws unto it self that nutriment which should go into the branches and
good fruit, does not know that the greater it is, the more does it argue the
kindness of the place, and vigor of the plant.

Paris, who admired the neat wit of Silvander, did not know how to judge of
him, but thought, that were he more conversant amongst civilized people, he
would be unparaleld; since living amongst Shepherds, he was such as he found
him: And therefore he resolved to contract friendship with him, to the end he
might more freely enjoy his company; and to make them proceed in their
disputation, he addressed himself unto Hylas, and said unto him, It seems,
Hylas, your cause is naught, since you are so mute, and has not a word more to
say in the defense of it. No wonder, said Diana; for I believe he is pricked in
conscience. Hylas knowing that he argued all this while against the truth, and
only to put a handsome gloss upon his fault, he would not reply a word, but
looked very attentively upon Phillis, who was got near unto Lycidas, and talked
with him in a low voice; and because Astrea would not have him hear what she
said, she did often interrupt him, and so often, as she forced him to say, that
if Phillis were as troublesome as she was, he should not love her. Truly
Shepherd, said she, purposely to keep him from hearing, If you should be as
uncivil to her, as you are to us, she will make no great account of you. And
because Phillis never heeding this talk, continued on her discourse, Diana said
unto her, what Phillis is this all the duty you will pay unto me? Will you let
me go, and entertain a Shepherd in discourse? To which Phillis upon a sudden
answered, No, no, I beseech you, Mistress, but pardon my error; for I thought
that the jolly discourse of Hylas would have kept you from taking any notice of
me, who in the mean time, was talking of a business which this Shepherd
desired some satisfaction in. And indeed, she spoke but truth; for she was much
troubled at the faint and cold behavior of Lycidas. Well, well Phillis
(answered Diana, in the language of a real Mistress) you always think to cover
your faults with excuses; but pray take notice, that these frequent negligences
are so many testimonies of your small affection, and that when time and place
serves, I shall remember how you use me. Hylas had the hand of Phillis in his,
and not knowing how things were betwixt Silvander and her, he wondered to hear
Diana say so; and therefore seeing her ready to begin an excuse, he interrupted
her, saying, What does my fairest Mistress say unto this imperious Shepheardess
who treats you in such coorse language? Will you yield unto her in any thing?
Commit no such sin, I beseech you; for though she be indeed fair, yet you have
beauty enough to make your party good enough with her, if not excel her. Oh
Hylas, said Phillis, did you but know against whom you use this language, you
would rather be dumb all your days, than displease this fair Shepheardess
who, did you love her, were able with the least glimpse of her eye to make you
the most wretched thing that ever loved. Make me so, said the Shepherd; No,
no, she may do what she will with her eyes, open or shut them, and never hurt
me; my misery or happiness depends not upon her flames, neither in her eyes,
face, nor any part else, but I do love you, and more than that, inspite of her
will love you. If you do love me, said Phillis, and I have any power of you,
then surely she has much more. I may be moved by your affection and services
not to treat you ill: But this fair Shepheardess having no services or love
from you, will have no pity upon you. What have I to do with her pity? said
Hylas, am I at her mercy? Yes certainly, said Phillis, you are at her mercy;
for my will is her will, and I can do nothing but what she is pleased to
command. She is the Mistress whom I do love, serve, and adore. So as she; and
she only is all my affection, all my service, and all my devotion. See
therefore, Hylas, how you have offended her, and what mercy and pardon you
stand in need of. Then Hylas, throwing himself at Diana's feet, after a little
time of consideration, thus said unto her: Fair Mistress ormine, if he that
loves could have eyes to see any thing but the thing loved, certainly, I had
seen that it is the duty of every one to honor and reverence your merits. But
since my eyes were shut against all but my fair Phillis, I shall think you too
full of cruelty, if you do not pardon a crime, which I confess, and beg a
mercy for. Phillis, who had a mind to be rid of this man, that she might talk
unto Lycidas, did interrupt Diana in her answer, and told him, that Diana would
not pardon him, unless upon condition to relate all his Courtships and
Adventures which he had ever since he first loved: For it was impossible but
that discourse should be very delightful, since he had such variety of
Mistresses. Certainly Phillis, said Diana, you can divine my thoughts; for I
did intend not to pardon, but upon the same condition: And therefore Hylas, if
you expect any mercy from me, resolve upon it. How, said Hylas, will you force
me upon such a Rock, as may chance to split me; and constrain me to relate the
story of my life before my Mistress? What opinion will she have of me when she
hears, that I have had above a hundred; some of one complexion and humor, and
some of another; what will she think of me? No worse than she does, answered
Silvander; for she knows you to be an extravagant piece, and light as the wind.
It Is very true, said Phillis, but because I will not spoil any sport, I shall
desire that I may go about some business which I have with Astrea, whilst Hylas
is obeying the commands of Diana. So upon this she took Astrea by the Arm, and
did lead her to the side of the Wood, where Lycidas was gone before; and
because Silvander overheard her answer, he followed at a distance to see what
his design was, and the evening was very favorable to him; for it began to be
dark, so as he might follow unseen, and stole from tree to tree so near them,
as he heard Astrea say unto Phillis, what strange humor is this in Lycidas,
that he should desire to speak with you at such a time, in such a place as
this? I cannot tell, answered Phillis, but he has been very sad all this
evening, and conjured me to come hither; let me entreat you to walk here a
little whilst we are together: But it was his special charge that I should be
alone. I shall do what you please, said Astrea, but take heed that he be not
more displeased at you for meeting him at such undue hours, and alone in such a
dark place. Upon that consideration, answered Phillis, I do entreat you to take
the pains of coming hither: And, I beseech you, walk so near us, that if any
chance to come, he may think we are all three together.

Whilst they were talking thus, Diana and Paris pressed Hylas to relate the
story of his life, and obey the commands of his Mistress: And though he seemed
to be very unwilling, yet at last he began thus.

The History of Hylas.
WILL you needs have it so, fair Mistress of my Mistress, and you noble Paris,
that I must tell all my fortune ever since I began first to Love? I pray do
not think that the refusal which I made, was because I had nothing to say: For,
believe me, I have loved too many to want subject; but it was because methinks
we want day. I do not mean to tell you all, but to tell you one of my
Adventures; for all would require a little Age before the story would be ended.
Yet in obedience to your commands, I will begin, and beseech you to consider,
that every one is subject unto some superior Power, against which there is no
resistance: That predominate Power unto which I am so violently devoted, is
Love: otherwise perhaps you will wonder, that there should be no chain, either
of duty or obligation strong enough to hold me. I must freely confess, that as
every one has a natural inclination, that mine is unto Inconstancy, for which I
ought not to be blamed, since it is the decree of Heaven upon me. Amongst all
the fine Scituations which the River Rosne does in his impetuous course visit,
after it has taken in Arar, Iseres, Durance, and several other Rivers, it
dasheth it self against the old walls of the Town of Arles, the Metropolis of
its Country, the best peopled, and richest of all the Roman Provinces: Near
unto this good Town did encamp (as I have heard our Druides say) the great
Commander, called Caius Marius, a little before that signal Victory which he
obtained against the Cimbres, the Cimmerians, and the Celts, at the foot of the
Alps, who being gone through the Scythique Ocean with intentions to sack Rome,
were so defeated by this great Captain, that not one of them came off with
life: And if the Roman Arms did spare any, the barbarous fury of their courage
did turn their own hands against themselves, and being ashamed to live, killed
one another. Then, the Roman Army, for the security of their Allies and
Friends, came to encamp before this Town; and according to the custom of that
Nation, did circle about their Camp with a most profound and deep Trench, which
extended to the very banks of Rosne, whose impetuous source was such, as
entering into those Trenches, did divide its chanel into two wales: The ancient
River ran its old course, and the new had such a pass by these Trenches, as did
equal the greatest Rivers, and made a most pleasant and fertile Island between
them: And because of the Trenches of Caius Marius, the people call it
corruptively, Carmargue; and these two Arms of Rosne running into the
Mediterranean Sea, they call the Isle between them Camargue. I should not have
derived the Pedigree of this place so high, had it not been the place which
gave me birth, and where my Ancestors have long continued: Where by reason of
the places abundant fertility, many Shepherds resort; and my Predecessors ever
held a considerable rank amongst them; always esteemed both rich and virtuous;
and when they dyed, left me enough to live upon; and indeed too soon for me did
my Father dye, since it was the very same day that I was born; and my Mother,
who had the education of me, did dote upon me as her only child, or rather
spoiled me. Judge what a fine Master of a house I was: Amongst the rest of my
young imperfections, I could not avoid that of Pride, thinking that all the
Shepherds in Camargue ought of duty to reverence me: And when I was grown to
riper years, I thought every Shepheardess was in love with me, and that any of
them would be beholding to me for my affection. I was most fortified in that
opinion by a fair and wise Shepheardess, my neighbor, called Carlis, who
carressed me extremely. I was yet so young, that the pangs of Love could not
much torment me, so as I did only resent the sweetness of her favors, and
that was all. My age did not permit me to know whether or no it was Love; but
however I was infinitely pleased in the company of this Shepheardess, and used
such courtship as they do who are in love: So as this continual practice made
many think that I knew more than my age permitted: And therefore when I arrived
at eighteen or nineteen years of age, I found my self deeply engaged to serve
her: But since I never affected that vainglorious humor which most Lovers use
to attribute to themselves, which is, to be reputed constant; the kind
treatment of Carlis obliged me much more than that imaginary duty. And
therefore, one of my chiefest and familiariest friends took an occasion to
divert me from her; his name was Hermantes, who, ere I was well aware, was so
deeply and desperately in love with Carlis, that he had no felicity or
contentment, but in being near her. I being but a Novice in Love, never
perceived this new affection, nor had I subtlety enough to find it out: He was
something older then I, and consequently more cunning, and knew so well how to
dissemble, as I did not think any suspected such a thing: But, his greatest
trouble was, that the Parents of this Shepherdess desired this match betwixt
her and I should proceed, because they thought it advantageous to her, of
which, Hermantes being advertised, and finding, by his discourse with the
Shepherdess, that she did love me, he conceived, that she would fall off from
me, if he could procure me to fall off from here He knew well enough, that I
would change as soon as a good occasion offered it self; and after he had well
considered with himself how he should begin his design, he thought, that if he
could infuse an opinion into me, that I deserved a better match, I should
easily disdain her And indeed, he found that no great piece of difficulty; for
first, I had a very good opinion of him as my dearest friend; and next I had a
conceit, that there was nere a Shepherdess in all Camargue, but would be glad
to entertain me. Upon these grounds, I dispossessed Carlis from any share in my
thoughts, and made choice of one whom I thought more deserving: and doubtless
I was not mistaken, for she was one that had beauty enough to make one love
her, and prudence enough to behave herself, her name was Still ana, esteemed
to be the fairest and wisest in all the Isle, and such a one as did draw me out
of my former error. But, see the fondness of my proud fancy, because she had
been courted by very many, and all of them bastled, I did the more willingly
fall on, to the end my merits might be the more noted. Carlis, who did really
love me, wondered at the alteration, not knowing what occasion I could have for
it; but to reduce me to her service, she began to cast about, and use all
manner of allurements she could devise; yet, I being now upon the main Ocean,
could not think upon any landing so soon. But, though she was much displeased
at this separation; yet, she was shortly after revenged, by the very same that
caused her misery. For, imagining with myself, that as soon as I gave Stilliana
any assurance of my love, she would freely resign herself unto me; therefore
the first time that I met her at a dancing meeting, I said thus unto her as we
danced together; Fairest Shepherdess, I cannot tell what power it is which
you have, nor what kind of charms they are which sparkle from your fair eyes:
but, I am sure Hylas is so much your servant, that no mortal can be more. She
thought I mocked her, knowing how I loved Carlis, and therefore in a smiling
manner, answered thus: Is this the language, Hylas, that you learned in the
School of Carlis? I would have answered, when by the order of the Ball we
parted, so as I was constrained to stay till the assembly parted; then seeing
her go out the first, I stepped to her and took her by the hand At the first
she smiled, afterward said thus unto me, Is it, Hylas, out of resolution, or
out of command, that you apply your self this night unto me? I beseech you,
said I, why do you ask that question? Because, said she I see so little reason
for it, as I must needs think it one of these occasions. It is, said I, out of
a resolution never to love any but the fair Stilliana, and your beauty commands
me never to love any other. I believe, answered she, that you are mistaken, and
does not think you speak unto me, or else you do not know me but, not to let
you run on any longer in your error know, that I am not Carlis, but my name is
Stilliana. He must be blind, answered I, that takes you for Carlis, she comes
infinitely too much short of you, to take her for you, or you for her: But I do
know, too well for my liberty, that you are Stilliana; and it would be more my
tranquillity if I knew it less. Thus I talked her to her lodging, not knowing
whether I was welcome to her or no. It was no sooner day the next morning, then
I went unto Hermantes, to tell him the passage of the last night. I found him
in Bed; and perceiving me to be netled at something, Well, said he, what news?
is the victory gotten before the combat? Ah friend, said I, I have been
pitifully bafled, she disdaines me mocks me, and at every word sends me to
Carlis she will treat me as a cruel Mistress, and laughs at me. But Hermantes
knowing my fleeting disposition, and fearing that indeed I would return to
Carlis, also that she would entertain me, he answered me thus, Why, friend, did
you ever expect any less from her? would you esteem her worthy of your love,
if she give herself unto you, before she knows whether you do really love
her? How could she possibly, at the very first, give any credit to you, since
all the Isle knows, you heretofore loved Carlis? Certainly, she were very
easily vanquished, if so small an attempt should win her. But friend, said I
unto him, is it not first requisite I acquaint her with my slighting of Carlis,
before I do declare my love unto her? It seems, answered Hermantes, that you
are ignorant in Love* I must tell you, Hylas, that when a declaration of Love
is made unto a Shepherdess, she never well believes it at the first, because
it is the common custom and garb of all Shepherds, to be courteous and
civil, and the weakness of their Sex, does oblige men to serve and honor
them in general. On the contrary, upon the least appearance of any hatred,
they do easily think themselves to be hated; because amity is natuturall, and
enmity the contrary. From hence I argue, Hylas, that it is much more easy to
make Carlis believe you hate her, than to persuade Stilliana, that you love
her. And because you find, that your affection unto Carlis does stick upon her
stomach, your best way is, to make her know that you do not love this Carlis,
which you must do by some action, made known, not only unto Carlis, but unto
Stilliana and many others. To be brief, fair Shepherdess, he knew so well
how to turn me any way he pleased, that I writ this Letter unto the poor Carlis.

Hylas his Letter unto Carlis.
I Do not write now, Carlis, to let you know, that I do love you, for you have
but too much believed that; but it is to assure you, that I will never love you
any more. I am sure you will wonder at this declaration, since you always
loved me more then ever I desired. I must be plain and tell you, that it is
your bad fortune, which cannot keep within the compass of our amity; and my
good, which will not let me stay any longer, where it is not worth the staying.
And to the end you may not complain of me, I bid you adieu, and give you free
liberty to make the best of your fortune you can, for of me there is no hopes.


When she received this Letter, she chanced to be in very good company; and as
fortune was, Stilliana her self was there amongst them, and did so much
disapprove of this action, as none in all the company more: which Carlis
perceiving, I beseech you all, said she unto the company, oblige me so far, as
to help me with an Answer for me. For my part, said Stelliana, I will be the
Secretary: Then taking Pen, Ink, and Paper, she writ, as altogether indicted,
in the name of Carlis.

The Answer of Carlis unto Hylas.
HYLAS, Too great a conceit of your self, is it which persuades you that I do
love you; and the knowledge I have of your humor, together with my own will,
which never relished you, is it which ever kept me from loving you: so as all
the affection I ever had, have, or shall have, to you, is only in your own
conceit. And therefore if you do think, that either my bad fortune, or your
good, did consist in any Love I had unto you, you were most grossly mistaken. I
do swear unto you, Hylas, by all those merits which you think you have, and
have not; that I never cared a straw for you. And this advantage I shall get by
all this, that for the future, I shall be freed from being troubled with you.
And because I will not be quite ungrateful, for the pleasure you have done me
in this, I shall wish the heavens will continue you in this resolution, to my
contentment, as before they put you upon me, to my trouble. In the mean time,
live contentedly; which if you do, as well as I shall, being delivered from
such a trouble, believe it, Hylas, you are happy, and so farewell.


This Letter, I must confess, did a little nettle me; for, my Conscience told
me, I had wronged this Shepherdess; but my new affection unto Stilliana would
not let me acknowledge it, but did prompt me to lay the fault upon her; for,
said I to my self, Since she is neither so fair nor pleasing as Stilliana, why
should I any longer love her? Am I to be blamed for her imperfections? For my
part, I cannot mend her; all I can do, is to condole with her, her poverty; but
yet, that shall not hinder me from desiring and adoring the riches of another.
Upon these motives, I endeavored to drive Carlis from my heart; and thinking,
that now I had nothing to do but to court Stilliana, whom I thought already
mine; I desired Hermantes to carry a Letter from me to her, and also to show
her a Copy of that I writ unto Carlis, to the end, she might not question my
love to her. Hermantes being truly my real friend, in any thing which related
not unto Carlis, did, without any difficulty, take it upon him, and choosing a
convenient time when she was alone in her lodging, presented my Letters unto
her, and smilingly said thus: Fair Stilliana, if the fire do burn him that
shall approach too near it, if the Sun do dazzle that eye, which dares look
upon its luster, and if the Sword do wound him that thrusts it to his heart,
you must not wonder, if the miserable Hylas, coming too near you, be scorched;
if, in beholding you, he be dazzled; and if, in receiving the fatal dart of
your fair eyes, he resent the mortal wound in his heart. He would have gone on
had not she, in a furious impatiency, interrupted him: No more, no more, good
Hermantes, (said she) you trouble your self in vain; Hylas has neither merit
enough, nor you eloquence sufficient, to persuade me unto any mind of changing
my contentment for his; nor do I wish my self so much ill, nor Hylas so much
good, as to believe your words: It Is well, Hermantes, that I am acquainted with
the humor of Hylas, at the cost of another, and not mine own; it is too much
that Carlis has been so basely deluded by him, and let him not make you
isntrumental in the ruin of another: As you do love Hylas, so I do love
Stilliana; and if you will advise him as a friend, counsel him as I do, never
to love Stilliana, nor Stilliana to love Hylas, and if he will not believe you
assure him, that all his labor will be lost: And as for this Letter which you
bring me from him, I care not if I do take it, for I am so well armed against
him, that I do not fear his charms. Upon this, she opened the Letter, and read
it aloud: It was only an assurance of my affection, that I had quitted Carlis
for her sake, and an earnest imploring her to love me. When she had read it,
she smiled, and turning toward Hermantes, asked him, whether he would have her
return an Answer; and he answering, that he did passionately desire it; she
said, she would; and did, in these Terms.

Stilliana's Answer unto Hylas.
SEe Hylas what a simple man you are, in thinking I should Love you, because
you have left Carlis; whereas there is nothing could more invite me to hate,
then that. You say you do love me: Truly, if any other more just then your
self, had said it, perhaps I should have believed him, because I do in some
sort deserve it: but I do assure you, and believe it, that I neither do nor
will Love you: for it would argue in me a most simple judgment, to love any
such contemptible humor as yours. If you think this Language a little too
ruff and harsh; consider, Hylas, that I am forced to it, to the end you may
never expect the least quittance of any love from me. Carlis has told me the
mind of Hylas; and Hylas may now tell her mine, if he please. If this answer
please you, thank the importunity of Hermantes for it: And if it do not, blame
your self that deserves no better.


Hermantes had not seen this Letter, when he gave it unto me: and though he
imagined that it would prove, some cold and faint denial: Yet he did not think
she would have been so sharp: but he did not wonder at it, so much as my self:
for I was almost stark mad tearing the Letter in pieces, and throwing it upon
the ground: then recollecting my self a little, I pulled my hat over my
brows, looked upon the ground, crossed my arms over my breast, and walked in
the chamber without speaking a word unto Hermantes. He stood all the while like
a stock, and still fixed his eyes upon me. Thus did we continue mute a long
while at last, I clapped my hands together upon a sudden and leaped into the
middle of the room. The Devil take her, said I aloud, let him love her that
will for me, there are Shepherds enough in Camargue as fair as she, that will
be glad Hylas would Love them. Afterward, addressing my self unto Hermantes.
Oh what a fool Stilliana is, (said I unto him) if she think that I will Love
her by force? Why should I be so silly as ever to think any more upon her? Does
she think there are none to love but she? I am sure, Hermantes, she twinkled
with her eyes, and bit her lips when she talked with you: but I cannot choose
but laugh at her simplicity, if she think I care for her more then I do for the
veryest stranger in all Gaul: She must needs twit me with Carlis; yes, I did
love her; and will love her again in spite of a thousand Stillianas, and I am
confident that ere long she will repent of her fillinesse: but its no matter,
let her repent her heart out for Hylas; he will be hanged before he ever love
her again As I used these expressions I observed that Hermantes changed color;
but then I was ignorant of the cause not imagining that it proceeded from his
fears of my reingratiating my self into the favor of his Mistress but however
he laughed it out, and said that he wondered at this alteration. Yet no sooner
was this course resolved upon but I thought of a speedy excecution: with this
intention I went to Carlis, of whom I begged a thousand pardons for the Letter
which I writ unto her, assuring her that it was not my fault, but only a
rapture of my affection. She who was highly offended as you may think, after a
patient hearing, gave me this answer. Hylas, if these assurances of your good
will to me were true, I should be satisfied: but if they be only lies, never
think I will renew with you, since I do find so much dainger in your humor:
she would have continued on, if Stilliana had not come to show her the Letter I
had written, and to visit her. When she saw me with Carlis, Do I wake or do I
dream? said she in a great amaze Is this Hylas that I see, or is it a Spirit?
Carlis being very glad of this encounter, thus answered; Yes yes dear companion
it is Hylas, you are not mistaken; and if you please to come a little nearer,
you may hear in what quaint Language he cries me mercy, and how he repents of
all he writ unto me, submitting himself unto what punishment I shall inflict
upon him. Let his punishment be, said Stilliana, to continue in his affection
unto me. To you? said Carlis, why he swore unto me, just as you entered, that
he loved only me I am sure, said Stilliana, that Hermantes brought a Letter to
me from him within this two hours. and to put all out of doubt, I pray read
this, and see whether or no I lie. I protest, Fair Shepherdess, I was not
able to open my mouth, or speak one syllable in my own defense And to dash me
the more out of countenance, many other Shepheardesses came in, at the same
time, who were all witnesses against me, so as I was not able to tarry any
longer: but slinking away without giving a syllable to any, I went unto
Hermantes, and acquainted him with my adventure, who laughed as long as he
could, as the subject did very well deserve. The noise of this was so spread
throughout all Camarque, that I could not open my lips unto any Shepherdess,
who did not hit me in the teeth with it of which I was so much ashamed that I
resolved to quit the isle for a certain time. You may see, I was but young when
I was ashamed to be called the Inconstant Lover: surely at this age I should
not move a foot for any such-reproaches: you see (said Paris) that one must be
an apprentice before he be a Master; it is very true, answered Hylas, and the
worst is, he often pays for his apprentiship. But to return to our discourse.
I not being able any longer to endure the perpetual clamours against me, I
gave order for my household as secretly as I could, and referred the managment
of it wholly unto Hermantes, and afterward took boat amongst many others. I
had then no other design but to travel, and passeway the time, not caring any
more for either Carlis or Stilliana, then if I had never seen them for I had so
lost the memory of them, in losing the sight of them, as I never gave one sigh
for them both. But see how difficult a thing it is to turn the tide of ones
inclination I had no sooner set my foot in the Boat, but I saw a new subject
for my Love. There was amongst other passingers, one old woman who was going
unto Lions, to pay some vows unto the Temple of Venus which she had made for
her Son: and brought along with her, her fair Daughter for the same occasion
and with reason had she the name of Fair, since she equalled Stilliana, and
transcended Carlis: her name was Aymea, who in age could not be above ninteen
or twenty: and though Camargue was her Country, yet she did not know me,
because her jealous Husband (as commonly all old men are that have young and
fair wives) did keep her in so close, as she never came into our public
assemblies. As soon as ever I saw her, she pleasedme, and do what I could, must
needs love her. But I suresaw it would be trouble enough unto me to delude the
Stepmother, and win the Stepdaughter. However, not to stick at any
difficulties. I summoned all the wit I had to my aid; and conceiving the best
way would be to begin by the Mother, I thought it most expedient to make my
self known unto her, and that some old love between our families, or
someoutient alliande or other, would beget me some familiarity with her: and I
was not deceived in this opinion: For as soon as I told her who I was, and had
given her some seurvy excuse or other for my being disguised, which she took
for good; also assured her, that I would never have discovered my self unto
her, but only that she might the more freely accept of my service: My Son,
answered she, I do not wonder at your good will to me for your father did love
me so well, as you should have degenerated too much, if you had not some
sparks of that affection remaining in you: Oh my dear Child, you are Son unto
a man that was the richest and most amiable man in all Camargue: As she spoke
these words, she took my head and closed it to her breast, and kissed my
forehead and her kiss did put me in memory of a chimney which yet retains a
little heat, after all the fire is taken away: for my Father, though he missed
marrying her, yet served her too much for her reputation, as as I have heard
since: but I, who cared not a rush for all her carresses, further then they
conduced to my design, seemed to receive them with much obligation, and
thanked her for her affection to my Father, beseeching her to let it descend
upon his Son: and since the heavens had made me heir unto all his estate, I
hope she would not disinherit me of that which I esteemed most, which was the
honor of her favor and that for my part I would succeed my Father in all
devotion and service to her. To be brief, Fair Shepherdess, I flattered up
this old woman with such candid language, that she loved me, none better; and
to gratify me, she did contrary to her custom, command her Daughter in Law to
Love me also. Oh that she had been so well advised as to follow her counsel?
But I never met with any so cold in all her actions; so I was several days
with her; and never had the confidence to break my design unto her in words;
for Stilliana had put me much out of conceit of my self: besides, she was
always at the old hagges elbow who twattled continually unto me, of old done
deeds, all the day long. It hap^ied, that this great company of passengers with
whom we went and most of them Merchants, they were to touch upon an Island
near Avignion, and take in some commodities; and we who were in their company
and unaccustomed to such voyages, being weary with sitting so long, whilst
these Merchants were about their business, we went a shore to walk and amongst
the rest this Stepmother unto Aymea was one of the troop. As soon as my
Shepherdess was in the Isle, she went along the water side with other women
of her age, and I thrust my self amongst them in hopes of an opportunity,
whilst the old Beldam was walking with some others of her own gang. By fortune,
Aymea, being parted from her companions and was gathering flowers by the water
side, I stepped to her, and took her by the hand: then after I had walked with
her a little further, I began thus to express my self; I should be ashamed
fair Shepherdess, to be so long mute, did I not fear my speech would more
offend you, then my silence. I do not know Hylas, said she unto me, what
occasion you should have either to be silent or to speak: Oh Fairest, said I,
my affection does so secretly burn me, and gives me such an occasion to
declare my pain, that I cannot be silent; on the other side my affection puts
me in such fear, of offending her I Love by declaring it unto her, that I dare
not speak: so as the same affection which should furnish me with words, denies
them, when I am with you: Me? (replied she presently) pray Hylas be well
advised what you say. Yes you, Fairest, replied I, I do very well know what I
say. Did I think this to be in earnest, said she, I should answer you after
another strain: If you make any doubt of my being in earnest, said I, I
beseech you consider your own perfections, and they will perfectly inform you.
Then, with a thousand protestations and oaths, I vented the whole thoughts of
my heart unto her: She, without any dismay, coldly answered, Hylas, never
charge me with any of your follies; if you do, I shall know how to remedy them,
and then you shall want a subject to work upon: If my Mothers affection to you,
nor the condition wherein I am, will not give a check unto your injurious
intentions, I assure you, what duty will not do in you, it shall in me, and I
will so take away all occasion from you, as you shall see, that I am what I
ought to be. You see how calmly I speak, not, but I do abominate your
indiscretion, but it is to let you see, that passion transports me not, but
that reason is the rule of my tongue, and makes me speak so mildly: And if I do
find, this moderate course will not divert you from your design, then will I
have recourse unto extreme remedies. These words uttered so calmly, did touch
me so to the quick, that I knew not what to say; not that I intended to give
over, for I knew that the first assaults are commonly thus repulsed: But, as
Aymea saw me thus mute and (...), and went away, there was one of her company,
that seeing me muse in that manner, came toward me, and making some kind of
amorous signs, looking at one through her fingers, she passed by, as if she
did invite me to follow: At the first I followed not, seeming to take no notice
but when she came the second time, I did: and after she had made two or three
turns toward her company, she seemed as if she were out of breach, and did sit
down upon a green tuft of grass: I, who followed without any design, seeing
her upon the ground, and in a place where none could see us, began to sport
with her, and she made little kind of resistance, but such as showed, that
this privacy was not displeasing unto her; for she did, as I think, purposely
uncover her neck, that the whiteness of her skin might be seen better than
could be in her face: At last, rising up, she said unto me; I did not think,
Hylas, you had been such a ruffling companion, for if I had, I should not have
left my company. If it do displease you, said I, I will beg your pardon; but,
if it do not, I was never in my life better paid for my indiscretion then now.
What do you mean said she unto me? I do mean, fair Floriante, said I, that I
did never see any so fair as now I do. See how you can lie, said she; and then
striking me gently upon the cheek, she ran to her company. This Floriante was
the daughter of a very brave Cavaller, who was then sick, and dwelt upon the
coast of Ara, and she hearing of his sickness, was going to him, having been
with one of her Sisters, who was married in Arles. For matter of beauty she was
well enough; but she was so full of gawderies, and of such a galliard humor,
as I must confess, all my good will to Aymea was forgotten, and so suddenly,
as I never at all resented any displeasure at parting from her; for, this new
commer furnished me with content enough, to cast away all care. Thus then I
left Aymea, as I thought, and was all for Floriante: I do say [as I thought]
for it was not entirely, since very often, when I saw her I took delight in
talking with her, though my affection to the other did draw me a little more
violently: But, the truth is, when I had well considered with my self, I
found, that in lieu of one, I loved both. Indeed it was no great trouble to me;
for when I was with Floriante, I never so much as remembered, whether any such
a woman as Aymea was in the world; and when I was with Aymea, Floriante was a
hundred miles out of my memory: Nothing troubled me so much, as when I was far
from them both, for then I grieved for both. Thus, generous Paris, did I spend
my time, till I came to Vienna, where being in our lodging, (for we landed
every night at some good Town or other) a Shepherdess came, and desired the
Master of the Ship or Boat, to give her room in it as far as Lions; pretending
that her Husband had been wounded in the Wars, and had sent for her. The
Master of the Boat being very civil, did very kindly receive her; and so the
next morning she went into the Boat with us: She was fair, and so modest and
discreet, as she was no less commendable for her virtue than her beauty; but,
so sad and melancholy, as she moved all the company to pity her: And I being
ever very compassionate toward the afflicted, I did, amongst the rest,
extremely pity her also, and cheered her up as much as possibly I could: at
which Floriante was nothing pleased, nor Aymea neither. Now, generous Paris,
you must consider, that though a woman do put a fained gloss upon it, yet, she
cannot for her life choose, but resent the loss of any Lover, as thinking it
an affront unto her beauty; and beauty being a thing most deer unto that Sex,
it is the most sensible thing that is in them. However, I, that began to blend
a little Love with my compassion, not seeming to regard these two
Shepheardesses, did continue on my discourse unto this; and amongst
otherthings, to the end we should not let down discourse, and also to have more
acquaintance with her, I did entreat her to tell me the occasion of her
sadness; and she being fluent in courtesy, began thus:

The compassion which you seem to have of my grief, obliges me, courteous
Shepherd, to give you that satisfaction which you desire; and I should think
it a great crime to refuse so small a thing: But yet, I do beseech you to
consider the condition I am in, and excuse me, if I do abbreviate my discourse
into as little room as possibly I can. Know then, Shepherd, that I was born
upon the coast of the River Loire, where I have been educated with as much
tender care, as possibly one of my quality could be, until the fifteenth year
of my age. My name is Cloris, my Father's Leonces, Brother to Gerestan, into
whose hands I was transferred after the death of my Father and Mother. And here
I began to resent the blows of fortune; for, my Uncle having more care of his
own Children than of me, did think himself overcharged with me. All the
comfort I had was in his Wife, whose name was Callirea, for she loved me, and
furnished me with all things that I wanted, unknown to her Husband. But the
heavens had decreed to afflict me; for, when Filander, Callirea's Brother, was
killed, she took his death so sadly, that within a few days after she died,
and I was left, with her two Daughters, so young, as could afford me no
contentment. It happened, that a Shepherd of the Province of Viennoise, called
Rosidon, came to visit the Temple of Hercules, which is upon the coast of
Furan, seated upon a high Rock, which elevates its head above all the rest of
the Mountains: That day on which he came thither, was a day of great
solemnity, and many Shepherds and Shepheardesses were there also. It would be
impertinent to relate all passages, and the manner how he declared his Love
unto me: but so it was, that ever since that day he has so devoted himself to
me, as he became wholly mine. He was young and handsome; and as for his Estate,
it was much better than ever I could hope for: Moreover, his Spirit and his
Body were so resemblant and suitable, as did make up a most perfect composure.
His courtship continued four years, in all which time, I cannot say, he ever
did or thought any thing, which he did not render me an account of, and asked
my advice This extreme submission and long continuance, did assure me of his
Love and merits, and obliged me to love him extremely. We lived and loved thus
above a year, in as much perfect amity, as could possibly be between two
Lovers, and at last, our joys were completed in our Marriage. Now were we as
happy as Mortals could be, conducted we were to the Temple, the Songs of Hymen
did sound on all sides; and being returned to our lodgings, nothing was to be
heard but Instruments of joy; and when we were in the height of felicity, we
were separated by the most averse fate that ever chanced unto any. We were then
at Vienna, where the greatest part of Rosidor's Estate did lie. It happened, that
some debauched young fellows of those Towns about Lions, where our Druides
use to keep the missltoe which they got in the great Forest of Mars, would
needs commit some disorders, which my Husband could not brook but after some
gentle disswasions, did hinder them in the execution; at which they were so
incensed, that (thinking they could not anger Rosidor worse, then to affront
me) one of them offered to throw a glass of Ink in my face: but, I seeing the
blow coming, turned aside my head, so as I had none of it light upon me but in
my neck, the marks whereof are yet very fresh. My Husband seeing my breast full
of Ink and blood, did think that I was wounded, and therefore drew his sword,
and ran it through the body of him that gave me this affront, and afterward,
with the help of some friends, did drive them away. Judge, Shepherd, how much
I was troubled; for, I thought my self worse wounded than I was, and when I
saw my husband all bloody, with a wound which he received on his shoulder. But,
after this first fray was parted, and his wound searched, he had no sooner
dressed himself, but Officers came to seize upon him, and carried him away
with such violence, that they would not permit me so much as to bid him adieu;
but, my affection was so much above their denial, that I did come unto him,
and held him about the neck so fast, that they could hardly pull me off. On the
other side, he seeing me in this condition and choosing rather to die, than to
part from me, did so show both his love and courage, that though wounded, yet
he broke from them, and got out of the Town: This kept him from an
Imprisonment, but it made his cause worse in the eye of Justice, which caused
several Proclamations to issue out against him: During all which time, his
greatest grief was, that he could not be with me; and his desire of seeing me
being very great; he disguised himself, and in the night came unto me, and
there stayed: God knows how great my joys were, and also how great my fears
for, I knew, that his pursuers, knowing his love to me, would have all eyes
about the house, and do all they could possible to apprehend him: And it happened
as I always feared: for there he was taken, and carried to Lions, whither
presently I followed, and very opportunely for him: for, the Judges, whom I
continually solicited, had so much pity of me, that they showed him favor:
and so, maugre all the pursuit of his enemies, he was delivered. As I had
abundance of trouble in the business, so, courteous Shepherd, I had abundance
of joy to see him out of all danger: But, because his Prison had made him very
sick, he was forced to stay a few days in Lions, and I with him, endeavoring
to cheer him up as well as possibly I could. At last being out of danger, he
entreated me to go unto his house, and prepare all things for the entertainment
of his friends, whom he would invite to rejoice with him, for his good success
in his business: When I was gone, these debauched fellows seeing they could
not revenge themselves by Law, they resolved to murder him in his bed and
entering into his lodging, gave him two or three stabbs with a Dagger, and
leaving him dead as they thought, fled. Judge, kind Shepherd, what cause have
I to grieve at this fatal accident.

Thus ended Cloris her story, with eyes swimming in tears, which dropped upon
her fair breast like links of Pearl. Now, generous Shepherd, this which I am
now about to tell you, is a fresh gale of Love: The sorrows which I saw in
this Shepherdess, moved me unto so much compassion, that though her face
perhaps was not able to cause love, yet plain pity touched me so to the quick,
that I must confess, neither Carlis, Stilliana, Aymea, Floriana, nor all of
them together, ever tied me in such strong chains, as this poor desolate
Cloris; not that I did not love those, but because there was yet a place void
in my soul for this Thus see me resolved upon Cloris as upon the rest; but I
knew it was to no purpose to mention my love unto her, until Rosidor were
either dead or recovered, for her sorrows had taken up all her soul. Thus came
we to Lions, where every one parted, and my new affection unto Cloris moved me
to wait upon her to her lodging, where I did visit Rosidor, purposely to be
acquainted with her; for I knew, the way to get into the favor of the Wife,
was, to begin with the Husband. She thought, he had been much more wounded than
she found him, (for what one fears, is always apprehended in the worse sense)
and changed color when she saw him up, and walking about the Chamber. But see
how things happen, the sorrows of Cloris in the Boat was the ground of my
affection; and now her joys and contentment makes it die, which argues, that a
disease may be cured by its contraries: for, I entered into the house a captive,
and went out a man of liberty, and Master of my self: But, considering this
accident, I called Aymea and Floriante into my memory again. Now am I presently
in quest of their lodgings, and enquiring of every one I met with; at last by
fortune, I found them both together. The next morning was the great Feast of
Venus, and according to the custom of the day, the preceding day unto the
Festival, the Maids do sing in the Temple Authems, unto the honor of that
goddess, and remain there until midnight: I heard, that the Stepmother of
Aymea would be then there in performance of her vow; Floriante, at the earnest
request of Aymea, promised to be there also: And I resolved to disguise my
self in the habit of a Virgin, and to get in when it was dark: and when I was
in, I stayed in the most blind and least frequented corner of the Temple till
it was nine or ten of the clock. Then was the doors shut, and not a man but my
self in, unless some that might be as full of curiosity as my self and so
disguised: but when the Hymns began, then came I out of my lurking corner: And
because the Temple was very large, and had no lights but such as was about the
Altar, I might the more safely mingle amongst the rest of the Virgins, without
fear of being known. Then looking about me where Aymea was, I saw her carry a
taper unto a young Virgin, who rising up, aprpoached the Altar; and after some
certain ceremonies she began to sing some staves, which at the end of every
stave was answered by all the company as a Chorus: I know not whether it was
the dimnesse of the light. (For it does often hide the imperfections of a
complexion) or what it was, or whether she was really very fair, but so it
was, that as soon as ever I saw her, I loved her. Some affirm that Love
proceeds from the eyes of the party loved but this cannot be; for her eye never
looked upon me, nor did mine see her so much as to know her again; and this
was the reason that I thrust in amongst the Shepherdesses that stood nearest
her. But, but as ill luck was, after I had with much dainger gotten near her,
she ended her Anthem, and carried her taper into its wonted place, so as it
became so dark that though near her, yet could I not well see her. Yet in
hope that either she or some other would ere long sing again, I stayed there a
little longer, but I perceived the light was carried into another Quire, and
presently after, one that was there began to sing, as my new, and unknown
Mistress had done before: the difference betwixt them both in voice and face,
was very great, for neither was comparable unto her that I began to love: so as
not being able to hold out any longer, I addressed my self unto a Lady was the
further off from any company, and counterfetting my voice as well as possible I
could, I asked her who it was that sung the last before. Certainly, said she,
you are a mere stranger that asks this question, and does not know her.
Perhaps, said I, I should know her, did I hear her named. Who does not know
that, said she, by her face, does ask that question in vain; but to satisfy
you, her name is Cyrcenna, the fairest Virgin that is in all the Country, and
so known unto every-one, that if you do not know her, certainly you are of
another world. Hitherto I counterfeited my voice so well, that as the night
deceived her eyes, so my words did her ears, but not forgetting my self I
told her, that in recompense of that favor she had done me no man could be
more her servant then my self. How Is this said she unto me, who are you that
uses any such lauguage unto me? then observing me a little more nearly, she
found by my dress and Garb, what I was* Then in a great amaze she said unto
me? how durst you be so bold, as thus to break the holy laws of this sacred
place? do you not know, that you must expiate this crime with the loss of your
life? The truth is I did not think the punishment had been so great: but
seeming unto her, to be a stranger, and ignorant of their statutes, she took
pity upon me and said that it was a thing impossible to obtain a pardon, so
rigorous was the law. Yet seeing that I did not come with any bad intention,
she would do what she could to save me. And in order to that, I must not stay
until the midnight bell did ring, for then all the Druides would come unto the
Temple door with Torches or candles and look upon all their faces. But now the
door was shut, yet she would try if she could get it open; then putting a veil
upon my head and lending me her Mantle, it did so muffle me up as in the night
none could know whether I was man or woman: being thus equipped, she told one
of her neighbors that came with her she was not well so they went both
together to desire the key of the door upon that occasion. And going all three
together unto the door with a little candle, which she almost covered with her
hand, for fear of the wind, we crowded out altogether, and so by her favor I
escaped that dainger: Then the better to disguise the matter, also out of a
desire to know unto whom I was so much obliged, I went amongst the rest, unto
her lodging.

But fair Shepherdess, (said Hylas, and addressed himself unto Diana) this
discourse is not yet at the half; and me thinks the Sun is low, therefore I
conceive it convenient to refer the sequel until another opportunity. It Is
very true, courteous Shepherd, said she, we must not spend all we have at
once. And therefore will save some against another time: besides, Paris who has
a long way home, would be put upon the night, should he stay any longer* I can
never think the time long, said he, as long as it is spent in your company. I
wish Sir, said Diana, there were any thing in me worth your acceptance and I
should most willingly devote it to your service: for your merit and civility
obliges every one unto it. Paris would have answered, when Hylas interrupted
him by saying; I would to god, generous Paris, that I were you; and Diana,
Phillis, that I might have the honor of such language from her: If it were so
said Paris, you could not be more obliged to her, then both you and I am. It Is
true, said Hylas, but I did never fear being more obliged, unto those who
already have entirely obliged me; your obligations Hylas, said Diana are none
of the longest dates, for you can break loose from them when you please. It Is
good, answered he, to have two strings to a bow, for if one fail the other may
do service: and I do believe that Phillis is glad I am of that humor, for
otherwise she might slight my service. With such discourse as this Diana,
Paris, and several other Shepheardesses, came to the great Plain where they
always used to assemble, before they parted; and then Paris bidding good night
unto Diana, and the rest of the company, he went toward Laigneu.

All this while Lycidas was talking with Phillis; and his jealousy of
Silvander did so torment him, that he was not able to bear the weight of it
upon his heart until the morning: he was so much out of himself, as he never
minded whether any ears could overhear; but thinking he was alone with her,
after a hundred deep sighs, he thus began to ease himself. Is it possible,
Phillis, (said he unto her) that the heavens should preserve my life so long as
to make me resent your infidelity? The Shepherdess who expected any other
discourse sooner than this, was so surprised at it, that she could not answer;
and the Shepherd seeing her mute, and thinking it was only to pump for some
excuse, continued on: You have reason indeed, fair Shepherdess not to give me
any answer; for your eyes do too well speak the truth to let me ever hope for
any happinessie: and your silence does but too well answer and assure me of
what I desire to know. The Shepherdess being extremely offended at this
language, did in a very angry manner give him this answer Since my eyes can
speak so well for me, why would you have me answer you any otherwise? and if my
silence can so well inform you of my infidelity, that all my former actions
cannot assure you of my affection, do you think I can ever hope that words will
be a better testimony? but I perceive, Lycidas, that you would gladly make an
honest retreat: you have a design somwhere else, and not daring it without
some colorable excuse of your levitie, you faign these Chimeras of displeasure,
that your fault may reflect upon me. But, Lycidas, bring out your reasons to
the Test, let us see what they are; and if you will not, then get you gone and
do not accuse me with your own crimes: let your continual complaints wherewith
you trouble both heaven and earth, reflect upon some body else not me, who am
most mortally displeased at them. My doubts did much displease me, replied the
Shepherd, but this assurance which your tart language gives me, makes me die.
I pray you said the Shepheardess, what are your fears? Not little ones,
answered he, since the complaints which proceed from them does trouble both
heaven and earth, as you do upbraid me. And if you would know them I will in
few words tell you, that I fear Phillis does not love Lycidas. Is it so
Shepherd, replied Phillis; can you think that I do not love you. Yet remember
what you did for me and Olimpia? Is it possible you should consider my former
actions, yet make any such doubts? I do know, answered the Shepherd, that you
did love me; and had I doubted it, my grief had not been so great as it is:
but I fear a great wound though it do not kill, yet it will leave a scarr: and
that which love made in you, does only leave a mark that it was a wound.

Phillis turning her head aside at these words, with a discontented gesture
answered him thus; since Shepherd I see, that all my good offices and
testimonies of affection, have no better operation, I do assure you that the
greatest grief I will have, shall be the pains and time I have bestowed.
Lycidas saw, that he had much offended his Shepherdess; but he himself was
so full of jealousy, that he could not choose but return this answer; This
anger, Shepheardess (said he) is but a fresh confirmation of my fears: for to
be angry when you are put in mind of a great affection, is a sign it never was
accepted. Phillis hearing this reproach, turned aside and answered; Lycidas
dissimulation in all manner of persons, did ever displease me, especially in
those I would lust withal; can Lycidas tell me that he doubts my affection and
I not think he dissembles? What testimonies can I give more than I have
already? Shepherd, Shepherd, these words believe me makes me suspect those
assurances, which heretofore you have given of your affection, for it may be
that you would deceive me in your Love, as it seems you do your self in mine.
Shepherdess, answered Lycidas, were my affection of the common strain, as to
consist more in show then realitie, I should condemn my self, for suffering
the violence of it to transport me beyond the limits of reason; but, since it
is not of so low an ebb; but, as you know, did flow like an Ocean, you must
think, such an extreme love is never without some fears, though they have no
cause, those fears do turn themselves into jealousy, and jealousy into grief,
or rather into such a frenzy, as you may perceive in me.

Whilst Lycidas and Phillis were talking thus, thinking these words were heard
only by themselves, and that Trees have no ears, Silvander was behind a Tree,
and lost not a syllable: Laonice also, who was asleep there, she wakened at the
beginning of their discourse, and knowing them both, was very glad she was
there so opportunely, assuring her self, that before they parted, they would
impart many secrets unto each other, which she might employ to their ruin; and
it happened according to her hopes, for Phillis hearing Lycidas say, that he
was jealous, asked him, Of whom? and Why? Oh Shepherdess, answered the
wounded Lycidas, do you ask me this question? I beseech you tell me, from
whence proceeds all that faint and hollow coldness, which you have used
toward me of late? and that great familiarity with Silvander, unless your
affection to me had been withdrawn and conferred upon him. Ah Shepherdess,
you must not think, but my heart is very sensible of such blows, since it has
resented those from your fair, but false eyes: how came you to fall off from
me? why would not you speak as familiarly unto me as you were wont? where is
all the care which heretofore you used, in enquiring how I did? and your
grief, when I was at any time absent? You can remember, when the name of
Lycidas founded sweetly in your ears? and I do remember, when out of the
abundance of your heart, you named him when you should have named another: But
now, who but Silvander, Silvander is in the same heart and tongue, where
Lycidas had once a considerable room; but now, the veriest stranger in all the
Country, is preferred before him, that is still the same Lycidas that ever he
was, and was born only unto Phillis, whom he now suspects.

The extreme displeasure of Lycidas did force out so many words, as Phillis
could not put in one by way of interruption; for, if she opened her mouth to
speak, he still continued on with more vehemence, not considering, that the
more he complained, the more his misery increased, and that if any thing could
cure him, it was that answer which he would not hear: And, never considering
that it was his torrent of words which hindered the Shepherdess from
answering, he conceived, that her silence proceeded from her guilt, so as every
action that she used, did more and more augment his jealousy. The
Shepherdess all this while was so amazed and offended, that she had not time
to convince him of his error; but, though something dark, he saw her blush, at
least thought so, which then did put him out of all; taking that for granted
now, which he did but doubt of before. Thus, after he had called upon the Gods,
that were just punishers of all infidelity, he ran away from her through the
wood, and would not hear her, when she called him back; she followed, intending
to convince him of his error, but it was in vain; for, he ran so fast, as she
quickly lost the sight of him in the thick wood. In the mean time, Laonice was
very glad that she had discovered this affection, and to see so good a
beginning of her design, and therefore she retired: Silvander on the other
side, seeing Lycidas was so apt to be jealous, he resolved for the future to be
the bellows, that would blow it into a greater flame, and would seem, as if he
loved Phillis in earnest, the next time he saw him with her.

Leonida in the mean time came to the house of Adamas, and letting him
understand, that Galathea had extraordinary business with him; he resolved to
set out as soon as the Moon began to shine, which would be about an hour
before day, and accordingly they did so: When they were come to the bottom of
the Hill, and had only a long plain to go through, before they came to the
Palace of Isaure, the Nymph, at the request of her Uncle, began to relate the
business thus.

The History of Galathea and Lindamor.
DO not wonder, I beseech you, Father (for so she called him) I should entreat
you to hear me with patience, and when you see occasion, to remember, that it
is the very same Love which is the cause of all this, which in former times has
driven you upon the like, if not stranger accidents. I durst never have spoken
to you about it, had I not had both permission and a command to do it: But
Galathea, whom the business concerns, does earnestly desire, since she has
made choice of you for the Physician to cure her, that you should be acquainted
with it, both the beginning and progress, and that it may be kept secret from
all the world. The Druide (who knew what reverence was due unto his Lady (for
so he reputed her) did answer, that his Prudence taught him to conceal any
thing that concerned Galathea, and therefore any promise concerning that, was
superfluous. Upon that assurance (said Leonida) I shall acquaint you with the
business. It is a long time since Polemas first begun to love Galathea: To
tell you how it came to pass, is to no purpose; but so it was, he did love
her. This love proceeded so on, that Galathea her self could not be ignorant of
it, but did many times in private make it appear, that his service was not
displeasing unto her: And truly he was a man of very high deservings. As for
his Pedigree, it is, as you know, derived from the ancient Line of Surieu,
which in Nobleness is not inferior unto Galathea her self. As for his Person,
he is very handsome; every way so composed, as to move Love. Above all, he is a
great Scholar, and in any Learning can silence the greatest Doctors. But,
Father, all these things are known unto you, better than I can relate them. But
so it was, that these qualities did so recommend him unto the consideration of
Galathea, that she was more favorable unto him, than unto any in the Court of
Amasis; yet it was with so much discretion, that none could ever take any
notice of it. Then Polemas, having such a favorable wind, did sail so
contentedly in the sea of his hopes, as no man could live more happily than
he. But this inconstant Love, or rather inconstant Fortune, would have
Polemas, as well as the rest of the world, feel the sharpness of those Arrows
which are shot from his Bow. You may remember the time when Amasis permitted
Clidaman to bestow servants upon us all. Upon that occasion, Love, like swarms,
did rise both in Court and Country; and amongst the rest, Lindamor's lot did
fall upon Galathea. His merits also were very high; yet she did look as shily
upon him, as the ceremony of that Festival would permit her. But he, who
perhaps had before that some such intention, though he durst not let it break
out beyond the limits of his discretion was very glad of this occasion, under
which he might veyl his real passions, as under a fiction. As Polemas did
stomach this new Amity at the first, so the progress of it proved much more
vexatious to him. Though Galathea did receive him with some show of sweetness,
by way of common courtesy, and after the example of all the other Nimphs, yet
this in any reason could not be offensive to him, because she was obliged to it
both by the Law, and the example of others. But when this Courtship went
further than the bounders of courtesy and civility, then did he perceive it to
be in good earnest; and then did he resent such pangs of Jealousy, as are
usual in a soul that is really in love.

Galathea for her part, never thought of any such thing, or at the least did
not believe, it was so far on: But occasions, which, like drops of rain, do
follow one another did so apparently appear, that Polemas might well be excused
for suffering himself to be wounded by so sharp a Sword as Jealousy. Lindamor
was Generous and Noble, and adorned with all desirable qualities, that a person
well born could possible be: as courtly amongst Ladies, as brave in Martial
matters, and as full of Courage and Valor, as any that our Court produced many
years. He had arrived to the age of five and twenty years, before ever he felt
any such effects as Love uses to produce in hearts of his age. Not but that he
was, of his natural inclination, a much devoted servant unto Ladies but being
continually exercised in businesses much different from idleness, he had not
leisure to let Love sow any seeds in his soul; for ever since he was able to
bear Arms moved by a Generous instinct, which invites Noble spirits unto
dangerous enterprises, he was perpetually in Wars, where he did most heroickly
signalize himself. Afterward, coming to see Clidaman, and to pay that homage
unto which he was obliged, at one and the same time he devoted himself unto
two: To Clidaman as his Lord, and to Galathea as his Lady; coming to Court,
without any design upon either. But the sweet affability of the young Clidaman,
and the merits of the fair Galathea, were Loadstones of such attractive virtue,
as did draw him to their service. Thus did Lindamor begin to love, and so that
he could not umbrage his affection under the veil of courtesy and complement.
Polemas, as one that had interest, did presently perceive it; yet being
friends, he seemed to take no notice, but still courted his friendship, to the
end he might ruin him by Artifice, as afterward he attempted: And having, as I
told you, made profession of amity already unto him, it was the more easy to
continue it. At this time Clidaman, began to affect Tilting and Justs, wherein
for a beginner he got some honor. But Lindamor was the man that still carried
away all the glory and applause of all. At which Polemas was so stung at the
heart, that he could no longer dissemble his grudge; so as he would needs have
a turn with him at Tilting, thinking that he being elder, and having a stronger
Arm, he might well enough undertake his Rival, and get the glory; but he proved
to be only a foil unto Lindamors luster. The last day of the Bacchanals, when
the young Clidaman held a Turnement in maintaining the beauty of Silvia,
Guyemant and Lindamor did get as much glory as mortal men could do, but
especially Lindamor, who had the favor and good fortune that though Galathea
was not the Judge, yet, In spite of Love, she gave sentence against Polemas.
The Nymph, whose eyes could hardly look upon any but Polemas, could not now
choose but highly applaud Lindamor: And observe how Love does play and mock at
the Prudence of Lovers; that which Polemas imagined, would get him the
advantage of Lindamor, did most hurt him, and made him almost his inferior;
for, every one spending their judgments, and comparing the actions of the one
with the other, did find such a difference between them, that it had been
better for him to have sit quietly at home. That same night, Lindamor inspired
by some good Genius (which makes me believe, that there are some days
fortunate, some unfortunate) declared himself in good earnest a Servant unto
the fair Galathea, and such opportunities did fall upon him, as he could not
wish for better: For, dancing a kind of a Dance, which the Franks had newly
brought out of Germany, in which, every one catched her whom they most fancyed;
Lindamor guided by Love, but, as I think, thrust upon it by Fate, did steal
away Galathea from Polemas, who being more intent upon his discourse than
dancing, never heeded it, but went presently, and twitted the Nymph with her
affection unto Lindamor. She, who did not yet think Lindamor to be in earnest,
was much offended at his discourse, and took his language so ill, that it made
Lindamor more pleasing unto her: also, thinking upon some revenge for his
jealousy. I am the freer to speak it, for none was better acquainted with all
these passages than my self, who was destined to be a witness of all the
business: For, as soon as all were retired to their lodgings, and Galathea in
bed, she commanded me to stay by her and hold a Candle, whilst she read some
Letters of importance which came to her. This night desiring to be alone, she
dismissed all the rest of the Nymphs and when they were all gone, she commanded
me to shut the door; afterward she made me sit down upon her Bed; then, after
a little smiling to her self, she said thus unto me, I cannot choose but laugh,
Leonida, at an encounter which I met with this night at the Ball, you know that
Polemas has long professed himself my servant and (let me tell it unto you,
from whom I will conceal nothing) that as long as he behaved himself toward me
with honor and respect, his service was not displeasing unto me, but I
received him into more favor, then any other in this Court; yet, not out of
any love on my side, I will not say, but perhaps love did flatter him with some
hopes of obtaining what he desired; but, the very truth is, I never yet found
any thing in him which could force me so far as Love: I know not what may be in
the time to come, but hitherto there is no likelihood of it. Now Polemas,
seeing I allowed him freedom of talk, and heard him with patience; also
observing, that I did not expose my self so freely unto any other he is grown
so bold, that he knows not what he does, so much is he transported besides
himself: This very night he danced with me, in such a dull musing manner, that
I could not choose but rashly ask him, what he ailed. Shall it not displease
you, said he unto me, if I should tell you? No, said I, for I never use to ask
a thing which I would not know. Upon this, he went on: I cannot choose, Madam,
(said he) but be extremely sad at some passages, which are very frequently in
my eyes, and which touch me so to the quick, that had I but half as much
assurance as I have suspicion, I know nothing that is able to keep that life
which yet is in me. I do prorest, I was so ill advised, that I could not
imagine what he meant; yet, conceiving that his former amity obliged me a
little unto a farther curiosity, I asked him, what passages those were which
touched him so to the quick? Then looking ghastly upon me a long while, Is it
possible, Madam, (said he upon a sudden) you should ask me any such question?
Why not, (answered I)? Because, replied he, all these things are addressed unto
you, and it is only from you that they do proceed. Then seeing me stand silent,
for I did not know his meaning, he begun to walk and say; I do wonder you
should not blush, and I must tell you as much, though at the rate of my life:
You know, Madam, with what zealous affection I have striven to make my self
appear a most real servant unto Galathea, ever since the heavens devoted me to
become hers you may well say, that hitherto you never saw the least or greatest
of any action, that did not tend unto your service that was the mark which all
my thoughts did aim at: so as unless fortune be extremely averse unto me you
cannot choose, but afford me so much satisfaction at the least, as to confess,
that I am solely yours, and none but yours: And since it is so, I beseech you
judge how great my grief must needs be, when I see, contrary to all reason in
Love, and when I might well have expected some reward for my affection; when, I
say, I see in my room another Favourit, and heir possessed of my estate before
I die: I beseech you excuse the expression, which flows from the extremity of
my passion, and forces just complaints from my soul, which cannot any longer
hold silent, seeing one triumph over me, that has got the victory, more by
destiny than merit: It is Lindamor I mean, Lindamor, I say, whose services you
entertain and favor above mine; my grief is not to see him so happy as he
himself can wish, but to see him happy in my rain. I beseech you Madam excuse
me, or rather excuse the grandeur of my affection, if I do complain, since it
is only an argument of that power which you have over your most humble servant.
I speak thus, to observe unto you, Madam, that you use the very same language,
and treat him in the very same manner, you were wont to use toward me, at the
beginning of your goodwill to me, and at that time, when, me thought you knew
my affection: This puts me beyond all patience, and so much beyond my self,
that I am not able to command those extravagancies which proceed from my soul,
and transport me beyond the limits of my discretion. He would have talked on,
but his violent passion did so stop his breath, that he was not able to
continue any longer. Judge you, whether I was not much offended at these words,
for they were so full of vanity and rashness, as were not to be endured: yet,
because I would not give any knowledge of it into such, who have no eyes, but
to pry into the actions of others, I was forced to give him an answer less
tart than otherwise I should, and said thus unto him: Polemas, whatsoever you
are, and whatsoever I be, I never doubted, but that you were my servant, as
long as you dwelt in my Mothers house, and did my Brother any service but I
must needs wonder at those foolish terms you use in your discourse of Heir,
and your Estate truly I know not by what night you can pretend so much unto my
amity, as to call it your. My intentiond, Polemas, were ever to love and
esteem you according to your merits, and never with you any more. And as to
what you say concerning Lindamor, let me draw you out of that error for, if I
did behave my self toward him as I did to you, I would have you think, I did
no more then what I will do unto all such as shall merit it: for without any
further design, I must and will love and esteem worth wheresoever I do find
it. Why Madam, said I unto her, and interrupted her, do you think this to be so
mild an answer? I cannot tell how in any civility it could have been more
sharp: It Is true I must confess that he is a little too presumptuous, but it
cannot be denied, that this presumption in him is not without some color of
reason. Of reason? said the Nymph presently, why, what reason can he allege
for it? Very many, Madam, (said I unto her) but to be silent in all but one, I
must tell you, that you have permitted him to serve you with more
particularitie, then any other. It was, replied Galathea, because he pleased me
better, then any of the rest of my Brothers servants. I confess it, answered
I, and therefore when he saw himself more favored than any other, could he
hope for less, than to obtain you love? He has heard of many examples of Love
between persons of unequal degree, and might therefore very well flatter
himself with the like hopes; and I do remember some Lines which he composed
upon this subject, and sang them before you, when you commanded him to conceal
his affection: The Lines were these.

A Sonnet.
WHy Fair one, should you ever find
A fault, for being known so kind?
Is any thing but Deity,
So glorious as Amity?
Why should you such a virtue smoother,
As linketh souls to one another?
All enmity from human hearts,
When it begins to shine, departs.
But if, proud Beauty, you complain,
And, as inferior, me disdain;
Consider Dido, she did deem
A Pirate worthy of esteem.
Poor Paris, but a common Swain,
Yet his Oenone he did gain.
Diana had compassion
Of her beloved Endymion.
Love never looks at Grandeur high,
Or values Inequality.
A Sheephook and a Scepter are
Within the compass of compare.
Degrees are equal, all is alike,
Where hearts do once affection strike.
Then Adamas asked her this question, How comes it to pass, Leonida, (said he)
that this Galathea by her words, seems to slight Polemas, and yet by these
Verses, one would judge she loves him, and that he cannot endure she should
dissemble it. Father, (answered Leonida) it is most true that she did love him,
and did give him so many proofs of it, as he had been but a very shallow man,
had he not seen it: And though she would have dissembled it with me, yet, I do
know, that she drew him in, by such artifices and hopes of her goodwill toward
him, that I seeing demonstrable assurances given him, did think her wholly his.
But, he does most justly merit this punishment, for that perfidie which he has
used toward a Nymph, whose beguiled affection had just cause for revenge,
which Love at the last did execute upon him. The truth is, he is the basest
impostor, the most ungrateful, and the most unworthy to be loved, that is
under heaven, for his ingratitude; and if he do resent that pain which others
have endured for him, he deserves no pity.

Adamas, seeing her so exasperated against Polemas, asked her, who that Nymph
was which he had deceived; for, said he to her, she must needs be one of your
friends, since you are so sensible of the offense which was done unto her. She
now saw, that her passion had carried her too far, and that she had unawares
bolted out a thing, which had been kept long a secret: yet, having a quick wit,
she so dissembled the business, as Adamas took no notice of it. Do you not
know, Daughter, (said Adamas) that the aims of all men is, to overcome and
compass the design which they attempt; and the amity which they show unto
you women when they love you, is but to make the way more easy: You see,
Leonida, all Love is but a desire of something which is wanting; that desire
being sadded and cloyed, is no more desire; and there being no more desire,
there is no more love; and therefore those that would be loved long, are those
that give least satisfaction unto the desires of their Lovers. But, said
Leonida, she whom I do speak of, is one of my intimate friends, and I know, she
never treated Polemas, but with all the coldness she could. That, replied
Adamas, did stifle desire; for, desire is nourished by hopes and favors: As, a
Lamp, when Oil is wanting, does extinguish; so does desire die, when that
which should nourish it, is taken away: Thus does many Loves die, some, by too
many, some, by too few, favors. But let us return unto the discourse betwixt
Galathea and you, What was it which she did say unto you? She said thus,
answered Leonida, If Polemas had been so discreet, as to measure himself
aright, as he was presumptuous in loving me, he had taken these favors as
flowing from my courtesy, and not love: But this is nothing to the passage
that happened at that time, for I had no sooner made an answer unto Polemas,
but Lindamor, according to the order of the Dance, came, and stole me away; and
so dexterously, that Polemas could not avoid it nor by the same means answer
me, but with his eyes; but truly, he made such a sour^ face at me, as I could
not for my heart but laugh; as for Lindamor, he either took no notice of it, or
else would not make it appear; but presently after, he talked to me after such
a manner, as was enough to make Polemas mad, had he heard it: Madam, said he,
is not this a fatal exchange? What do you mean, said I unto him? I mean, said
he, that in this Dance I have stolen you, and in the very truth, you have
stolen my soul and my heart. Then blushing at this, I returned this seeming
angry answer, Fie, Lindamor, what strange language is this? do you not consider
who you are, and who I am? I do so, Madam, said he, and that does invite me to
this language: for, are not you my Lady, and I your servant? Yes, answered I,
but not so as you do intend it; for, it is your duty to serve me with
reverence, and not love; or, if it be with any affection, it must be such as
proceeds from your duty. To which he presently replied, Madam, if I do not
serve you with all humble reverence, never was any deity reverenced by any
mortal; but this reverence must be either the Father or the Child of my
affection; and, call it what you please, I am resolved to serve you, to love
you, and to obey you; your merits, your perfections, and my own fate has made
me eternally yours he that sees and does not love you, deserves not the name of
Man: and Clidaman's Lottery, though it was some cause, yet was it only a cover
of my souls affection. These expressions were uttered with a vehemence, as
made it plainly appear, that his heart and tongue agreed; and I beseech you
observe one pleasant passage; for, said Galathea to me, I never took any notice
of this affection, thinking it to be only in jest, and I never had perceived
it, until the jealousy of Polemas did hint it unto my thoughts; but ever
since, I have so set my thoughts upon Lindamor, and I have sound him as well
capable of causing love as jealousy; and Polemas ever since that time has so
displeased me in all his actions, as I could hardly endure him: On the
contrary, all Lindamors actions did seem so plausible unto me, as I wondered
that I should observe them no sooner; so as the jealousy of Polemas did quench
my love of him, and transferred my affection upon Lindamor. This change had
such an operation upon Polemas, as ever since caused him to look asquint upon
me, and I am sure my eyes did not look upon him as they were wont. When
Galathea spoke thus against him, I was not at all sorry, by reason of his
ingratitude; but, on the contrary, the more to prejudice him, I said thus unto
her, I do not at all wonder, Madam, that Lindamor should win more upon you than
Polemas, for their qualities and parts are not comparable, and every one that
sees them, are of the same judgment you are: It is true indeed, I do foresee
much jangling will arise; first, betwixt them two; and secondly, betwixt you
and Polemas. And why, said Galathea to me, do you think he has such an
influence upon my actions or Lindamors? That is not it, Madam, that I do mean,
said I unto her; but, I am so well acquainted with the humor of Polemas, that
he will try all manner of ways leave no stone unturned, and will conjure both
heaven and earth, to ingratiate himself unto that happiness which he has
lost; and will commit such gross follies, as will be visible unto all, but
such as will not see them, and such as will offend both you and Lindamor. No,
no, Leonida, answered she, if Lindamor do love me, he will do as I shall
command him; and if he do not love me, he will never care what Polemas does:
And as for Polemas, I know how to order him. Upon these words she commanded me
to draw the Curtain, and took her rest, at least, as well as these new designs
would permit her. But when the Ball was ended, Lindamor observing the
discontented looks of Polemas, when he took Galathea from him, he had an
opinion that he did love her; yet, having never observed it by any former
passages, he resolved to ask him, and if he did find him in love, then to
dissuade him from it and this he thought himself obliged unto by their former
friendship: therefore coming unto him, he desired to speak a word with him in
private. Polemas being as subtle as ever was any, did color his countenance
with a gloss of good will, and said, What is it which Lindamor is pleased to
command me? Oh Sir, said Lindamor, I never use commands where entreaties may
prevail, and at this time I will make use of neither; but only as a friend ask
you a question, which our friendship obliges you to answer. Be it what it will,
replied Polemas, you may be certain, I shall answer you with as much freedom,
as you can desire. It is this then, said Lindamor, After I had served Galathea
a good while, according to the Ordinance of Clidaman, I was at last forced to
do it by the commands of Love; for the truth is, after I had served her
according to the dispose of fortune, who cast me upon her great merits, she had
such an influence upon my affection, as I did ratify it by the dedication of
my self unto her; and therefore must assume to my self so much boldness, as
to say, that I do love her: yet, that friendship, which is betwixt you and me,
being contracted long before this love began, I resolved to tell you, that if
it be so, that you do Love her, and have any pretentions unto her, I hope that
I have so much command over my self, as to make a retreat, and make it appear
that my love is less then my friendship, and that the follies of the one ought
to give place unto the wisdom of the other: Tell me therefore, freely, how
your soul is affected, to the end the laws of friendship between you and me
may be observed: My intention is not to discover your secrecyes; and since I do
thus ingenuously open my self unto you, I conceive you need not fear doing
the like: for it is not out of any curiosity, but only a desire to preserve
our friendship, that I ask you this question. Lindamor spoke unto Polemas in
such a dialect as did become a friend, but like an ignorant lover, that thought
such a thing as a friend was to be found in matter of Love But Polemas the
Grand dissembler answered thus: Lindamor, this fair Nymph you speak of,
deserves the Love and adoration of the whole universe: but as for me, I have no
pretentions unto her But withal I must tell you, that for matter of Love, I
conceive every one ought and will do what he can for himself. Lindamor did now
repent himself of his courteous and civil language, since he had received such
an od answer: and resolved to do what he could to advance himself into the
favor of this Nymph, yet he answered him thus: Since Polemas, you have no
pretentions unto her, I will endeavor to prefer my self, unto a happiness,
which to recede from, would be death it self unto me. For my part, said
Polemas, my pretentions unto her in matter of Love, are only with an eye of
reverence and respect, such as we are all obliged to render unto her. For my
part, replied Lindamor, I do honor Galathea, as our great Lady; and also do
Love and adore her as my fairest Mistress: I do think my fortune may well pretend
unto such a height, as to cast my eyes upon her, and do conceive it is no
offense unto a Divinity, to Love her. With such discourse as this they parted,
both of them very ill satisfied with one another: but upon different grounds:
for Polemas was stung with jealousy, and Lindamor displeased at the perfidie
of his friend; from this day they lived at a distance: for though indeed they
were always together, yet they did hide and disgnise their desigues and
actions, one from another: but Lindamor did not neglect a minute that could be
employed to make his affection appear unto this fair Nymph: and certainly he
did not lose either his time or pains; for it was so aceptable unto her, that
though much love did not appear in her eyes, yet she was full of it in her
heart; and because it was a hard matter to conceal so great a fire but some
flame will be flashing out, do what they could, therefore Galathea resolved to
talk to Lindamor as little as possible she could, and to devise some way or
other, for conveying letters secretly betwixt them: And in order to that, her
design was upon Flurial Nephew unto the Nurse of Amasis, and Brother unto
hers, whose good will unto her, she had been long accquainted with for he being
the Gardener at Mount-Brison as his father was before him, when Galathea was
brought thither to walk, he would often take her in his arms, and gather her
what flowers she pleased: and you know that such infant amities as are sucked in
with the milk, do become almost natural: also she knowing that all old people
are covetous, she was so liberal unto him that she made him wholly hers. One
day, when she was got some distance from us, she called him unto her, as if the
business was to enquire the names of some flowers, which she had in her hand,
and after she had asked him several such questions, she said thus unto him, in
a low voice; Come hither Flurial do thou Love me? Madam, answered he, I were
the vilest varlet that ever breathed, if I did not Love you above all the
world: May I be sure of this thou say? said the Nymph. May I never live a
minute, replied he, if I had not rather neglect my duty to Heaven then to you
How? Said Galathea, without any exception? suppose it were a thing that would
offend Amasis or Clidaman? I care not whom it would offend, said Flurial, if
you Madam command it, I will never enquire further for I am wholly yours; and
though my Lady do pay me my wages; yet it is from you that my service is
conferred upon me: and besides, I have ever from your very Infancy so loved
you, that I did at the very first dedicate my self wholly unto you But Madam, I
beseech you why so many words? I shall never be truly happy until you put me
to the trial. Then said Galathea to him, hark thee, Flurial; if thou
continuest in that resolution and wilt be secret, thou shall be the happiest
man alive of thy quality, and what I have done for thee in times past, is
nothing in comparison of what I intend for the Future: but be sure thou be
secret; and remember that if thou be not, I shall become thy most mortal
enemy; and assure thy self nothing lessthen thy life shall satisfy me. Go unto
Lindamor and do as he shall direct thee; and believe it, I will reward thy vice
beyond thy hopes, but still be sure thou do forget thou have a tongue. Upon
these words, Galathea came to us and laughing told us, that Flurial and she,
had been in a long discourse of Love; but, said she, it was upon love of the
Garden, and the love of Simples. Flurial, for his part, after two or three
turns in the Garden, seeming as if he had some employment, went out, with a
mind full of this business: for he was not so ignorant, but he knew well
enough the dainger he should incur from Amasis, if he were discovered, and
from Galathea, if he did not execute her commands; imagining the business, to
be a matter of Love: and he had often heard say, that all offenses against Love
do wound the very heart; At last, his affection to Galathea and desire of gain
together, made him resolve, since he had promised to keep his word, and
thereupon went presently to Lindamor who expected him For the Nymph told him
that she would send Flurial unto him, and by him he might let her understand
any thing he pleased. As soon as Lindamor saw him, he seemed as if he knew
nothing, but asked before the company, if he had any business with him? Unto
which he answered aloud, that he came to beseech him, he would be pleased to
acquaint Amasis with his long service, and the little wages he had received
which was due unto him, and thereby he would create him his vassal: then in a
low voice he acquainted him with the business he came about, and offered to do
him what service he was pleased to command him. Lindamor, gave him thanks,
and, acquainting him freely what he should do, he conceived the way was
handsomely contrived. So as from hence forward, when Lindamor would write unto
her, Flurial seemed to present a Petition unto the Nymph and when she would
return an answer, she would give it unto him lapped up in that order, which
Amasis appointed in the business upon the Petition. And because it is
ordinary for many old Servants to have many things to Petition for; he wanted
not occasion to present every hour a Petition unto her, who often obtained such
advantageous answers to them as were beyond all hopes. All this while the
affection of this Nymph unto Polemas, did so wither, that she could hardly
speak unto him without disdain: which he not being able to endure, and
knowing well enough that all did proceed from her Love of Lindamor, he was so
transported that though he durst not speak much against Galathea, yet he gave
out many disadvantageous speeches against Lindamor; and amongst the rest, he
said, that though Lindamor was a very brave man, and accomplished with many
remarkable qualities, yet his over good opinion of himself did not take his
measures aright, since he was so presumptuous as to lift his eyes so high as
Galathea; and that not only to Love her in his heart, but also to vaunt and
brag of it, in his discourse. Which language came at last to the ears of
Galathea; and indeed had so spread it self that all the Court was acquainted
with it. The Nymph was so much offended at this, as she resolved to treat
Lindamor so for the future, as he should have no occasion to publish her
vanities and this was the reason she would not speak unto him, and those who
observed her actions and behavior, were persuaded that there was no such thing
as Love betwixt them: And Lindamors departure presently after did much help on
that belief; for Amasis sent him upon a business of great importance, as far
as the banks of the River Rhine: Yet his departure was not so sudden, but he
found an opportunity of talking with Galathea, before he went to know the cause
of her change: and watching for his time that morning when she went unto the
Temple with her Mother, he came to her, when she was so in the midst of us,
that Amasis could hardly see him. As soon as she saw him, she would have
changed place, had he not held her by the Gown, and said thus unto her: Madam,
what is my offense? and why this alteration in you? She answered as she was
going away: There is neither any offense in you nor alteration in me: for I am
still the same Galathea, and you are still the same Lindamor, a subject too low
for me to be offended with. His actions did make it appear, how these words
went to his heart for though he was just upon his departure, yet he could not
give any orders of any business, so much was his mind taken up with the
thoughs of this matter: At last, finding himself clearly innocent, he writ
this Letter unto her.

Lindamor's Letter unto Galathea.
I Do not, Madam, bid my pen complain against you, but only to deplore that
fatal mishap which has rendered me so scorned by her, who was wont to treat me
far otherwise. I am indeed the very same Servant, who ever did adore you with
all possible reverence and humility; and you are the very same Lady, that first
was my adored Saint: Since you did me the honor to take me for yours, I am not
grown less, nor you greater: and if so, then why do you not think me worthy
of the same treatment? I have called my Soul to an account for all its action;
when you please I shall display them all before you: As for me I cannot tax it
without fault: and if when heard you can, it will not be a small comfort unto a
poor condemned sinner, to know the cause of his punishment.


This Letter was brought her, as the custom was, by Flurial and at such a time,
that though she would, yet she could not refuse it, because we were all about
her: and the truth is, it is impossible any should carry the business better
then Flurial did. For he presented his Petitions with such reverent and
pitiful language, so suitable unto the thing petitioned for, as he might
deceive any whosoever; as for me had not Galathea acquainted me, I should never
have taken any notice of it. But it being very hard or indeed impossible, for
the young heart of this Nymph to endure without some Confident, unto whom it
might impart it self amongst the rest she did me the honor to make choice of
me, as most affectionate, and as she thought most secret. So that as soon as
she received this Letter, she seeming to have forgotten something in her
closset, she went thither and called me, telling the rest of the Nymphs, she
would return presently to them again. She stayed a good while in her closset,
and spoke not a word, so as I perceived something did much trouble her: but yet
I durst not ask her for fear of vexing her: Yet she did sit down, and cast
Flnuials pettion upon the table, saying unto me, this fool Flurial is
continually troubling me with Letters from Lindamor: I pray Leonida tell him
that I would have him bring no more: I was a little astonished at this charge:
yet I knew that Love cannot be long without some trivial quarrels, which in
the end does but prove a pair of bellows to blow the fire into a greater
flame: therefore I said thus unto her: When did he give you any, Madam? Not
long replied she, do not you know of it? No certainly Madam, said I unto her;
Then with a frowning brow she told me that indeed it was true, he was much in
her favor; but now he had so much abused her favor, by his rashness and
presumption, that she was quite out with him. I beseech you said I unto her,
what is his fault? The fault, said the Nymphs, is no great business, yet it
displeases me more then if it were of greater importance. What a gross piece
of vanity was it in him to report it, that he was in love with me, and that he
had professed it unto me? Oh, Madam, said I unto her, this can never be true;
his enemies certainly have invented it, only to ruin him, both in your favor
and the favor of Amasis. This may be, replied she; but Polemas, reports it
every where, and yet he is silent and gives a check unto none of these reports,
But suppose he do hear the report how can he help them? Said I unto her, what
remedy would you have him use against them? what remedy? said the Nymph, why a
sword, and death to the reporter. Truly Madam, said I unto her, I have heard
say that matters of love are so subject unto censure, that the less it is
meddled with, it is the better. These, said she, are but excuses, but might he
not very well have asked me, what course he should take? Had he done so I
should have been satisfied. Have you seen the Letter Madam, said I unto her,
which he writ unto you? No, said she: and more then that, let me tell you, that
I never will; but will avoid all occasions of ever speaking unto him. Then, I
took the Petition of Flurial and read it aloud unto her; then said thus; but
good Madam, ought you not to love one that is wholly devoted unto you? and can
you be so easily offended against him, that perhaps never offended you? Come,
come, said she, if he does love me, I will make him pay dear interest for the
pleasure he takes in vaunting of our love: if I have heretofore given him any
occasion to think I ever loved him, I shall for the future give a stop unto all
such conceits; and, to begin, I pray charge and command Flurial, that he never
presume to bring me any thing from this rash and vain glorious man. Madam, said
I unto her, I shall do whatsoever you are pleased to command me; but give me
leave to tell you, that I think it requisite to consider a little better upon
the business; for you may do your self an injury by thinking to spite
another: you know what kind of fellow this Fluriall is, whose wit cannot reach
beyond his Garden; should you let him know of this passage betwixt Lindamor and
you; I am afraid he should discover the business unto Amasis, to excuse
himself: For gods sake, Madam, consider what a displeasure this would be unto
you; were it not much better you did expostulate the matter with Lindamor? or,
if that do not please you, then let me do it; for I assure my self, he will
give you satisfaction, or else you may tell him your self when he departs, the
occasion o^ your breaking off with him, without making it known unto Fluriall.
As for spea king with him, said she, I cannot do it, my courage will not permit
it; nor will I permit any other, for I wish him not so well. When I saw her so
incensed against him, I told her, that she could do no less than write unto
him. By no means, answered she, too many of my Letters has made him thus
presumptuous. At last when I could obtain no more from her: she permitted me to
lap up a piece of paper in the manner of a Letter, and to put it into Flurialls
Petition; so he to carry it unto him, and this purposely, that Fluriall might
not perceive this dissension: Oh, how Lindamor was amazed, when he opened this
blank paper; but the greatest affliction to him was, that he must depart in the
morning betimes, unto a place, where the affairs of Amasis and Clidaman did of
necessity oblige him to stay a long time: to defer his journey he could not,
and to go upon these terms was even death unto him. At last, he resolved to
dispatch another Letter to her presently, more as a thing of hazard, than any
hopes of good fortune. Fluriall did his best endeavor to deliver it presently
unto Galathea, but he could not do it, because she being extremely vexed at
this fraction, was forced to go into her bed, and did not rise out of it many
days. Fluriall seeing Lindamor was gone, took upon him so much boldness, as
to go into her Chamber; and because I was, I must confess, an ill-willer unto
Polemas, I used my best invention, to piece up this affection between Lindamor
and her, and therefore gave Fluriall an opportunity to enter. Judge you,
whether or no Galathea was surprised when she saw him, for she expected nothing
less then this; yet, she was forced to set a good face upon the matter, and to
take what he presented unto her, which in appearance was only a Posie of
flowers. I would by all means be present, that I might put in the best advice I
could in the behalf of Lindamor, and certainly my being there, was not
unprofitable to him; for after Fluriall was gone, and Galathea was alone, she
called me unto her, and told me, that she had thought not to be any more
troubled with Letters from Lindamor, now he was gone; but, for ought she saw,
he was as impudent as ever. I, who was a real well-wisher unto Lindamor,
though he knew it not, seeing the Nymph in an humor of talking to me, did seem
to be very slack in the business, knowing, that to contradict her at the
first, was the way to spoil all, and that to sooth her in all she said was the
only way to bend her: And though she was much displeased at him, yet Love was
still the most predominant in her mind, and she her self was glad that I took
Lindamor's part, that she might have occasion of talking of him, and give the
anger of her soul some vent: So as having all these considerations in my mind,
I was silent when she talked of him; at last, she not being pleased at my
silence, said thus unto me: Leonida, what do you think of the presumption of
this man? Madam, said I unto her, I know not what no say or think, farther then
this, that if he have offended, he will be extremely sorry for it. But what can
I think of his rash impudency, said she? has he no other subject for his
discourse but me? Then (looking upon the Letter which he writ) were it not a
madness in me, if I should suffer him to continue his Letters unto me? To this
I answered nothing. And when she saw me a long while silent, she said thus unto
me, What Is the reason, Leonida, you do not answer me? have I not good reason
for all my complaints? Madam, said I unto her, will you give me leave to speak
my mind freely? With all my heart, said she. Then said I unto her, I must tell
you, that I think you to be reasonable in all things, but in looking for reason
in Love, for you must know, that to reduce Love unto the Laws of justice and
reason, is to take away its principal prerogative, which is to be a subject
only unto its self; so as I conclude, that if Lindamor have failed in matter
of Loving you, he is to blame; but if he have failed only against the Laws of
reason and prudence, then it is you that deserve to be punished, for offering
to bring Love, which is free, and commands all others, under the servitude of a
Superior. But why said she, I have heard, that if Love be laudable, it is
virtuous, and if so, then it is subject unto the Laws of virtue. Love,
answered I, is above that virtue whereof you speak, and gives Laws unto it
self, without any subserviency unto any: But, Madam, since you command me to
speak freely, I beseech you tell me, are not you more culpable than he is of
that whereof you accuse him, and of matter of Love? For say he were so bold as
to tell it, that he loved you, you your self is the cause of it, since you
permitted him. Though I had, answered she; yet out of discretion, he should
have concealed it. Then, said I, complain of his indiscretion, and not of his
Love; but, believe me, he has more occasion to complain against your love,
since upon the very first report, and before you can justly tax his affection,
you have repulsed that Love he bore unto you. Excuse, Madam, the freedom of my
language, if I tell you, that you do him the greatest wrong in the world, in
treating him thus, and condemning him before he have answered for himself, and
is convinced of his crime. She stayed a good while before she answered, and at
last said thus unto me, Well Leonida, there is time enough to make him amends
when he returns; not that I am in any mind to love him, or let him love me,
but then I shall tell him wherein he is faulty, and in that, satisfy you, and
oblige him to trouble me no more, unless he be impudence itself. Perhaps,
Madam, said I unto her, you may deceive your self, in thinking that his return
will be time enough for all this; for, did you but know the violencies of Love,
you would never think delays unto a Lover so tolerable as unto others;
therefore the least you can do, is to see his Letter. That is to no purpose,
answered she; But, to satisfy you, give it me. Upon this, she took it, and
found it thus penned.

Lindamor's Letter unto Galathea.
BEfore, it was love, now, despair, that dictates to my pen; which must, if it
bring me no comfort, be changed into a Sword, so will it be a thorough, though
a cruel cure. This white paper which you have sent me by way of Answer, is an
emblem of my innocence, and argues, you had no accusation against me to write
in it: yet alas, it is a too plain Assurance of your disdaign, for from whence
else could your silence proceed? If there do yet remain in you any memory of my
faithful service, let me out of pity beg from you a Sentence, either of life
or death. I am now departing, the most desperate forlorn man, that ever had
once any reason for hope.


This alteration in Galathea's courage, was an effect of Love; for I plainly
perceived her heart to melt, but withal, it was no small argument of her high
spirit for, since she would not give any knowledge of it unto me, and not being
able to hold her countenance, which grew pale, she did so tie up her tongue,
that she did not utter one word, which did argue any inclination to bend, but
went out of her Chamber into the Garden, and spoke not one syllable of this
Letter: for the Sun began to grow low, and her malady, which was a disease of
the mind, might better divert and solace it self abroad, than in bed; so as
after she had slightly dressed herself, she went into the Garden, and would
have none but me with her: I asked her, by the way, whether she pleased to
return any answer unto his Letter? And she answering, No: Will you then Madam,
said I unto her, be pleased, to give me leave to write unto him? You, said she,
what will you write? What you please to command me, said I. Nay, what you will,
said she, so you will not mention me. You shall see, Madam, what I will write,
said I unto her. Having gotten this leave, whilst she was walking, I writ, in
an Arbor, what I thought most pertinent, and least offensive. But she, that
would by no means see it, yet could not have so much patience as to let me
finish, but she read it whilst I writ.

Leonida's Answer unto Lyndam or, in the behalf of Galathea.
DRaw from your misory the knowledge of your happiness; if you were not loved,
but set at a small esteem, you should not have known so much; you cannot know
your offense, until you be present; but however, I bid you hope well in your
affection and your return.

She did not like the Letter should run thus; but I did overruled her, and gave
it unto Fluriall, with a command, to deliver it into no hand, but Lindamors
only: but, drawing him aside, I opened the Letter, and added these words,
unknown unto Galathea.


Leonida's Postscript unto Lindamor.
I Understand that you are gone, and very pity of your misery moves me, to
acquaint you with the occasion of your disaster: Polemas has published, that
you do love Galathea, and that you do make it your common boast: Such a high
spirit as hers, cannot put up so great an offense without resentement: The same
prudence you were wont to be a Master of, must canduct you in this business.
Because I do love you, and pity your misery, I cannot choose but grieve for
you, unto whom I promise all the favor and assistance that I can.


I sent him this hint, as I told you, unknown unto Galathea; but believe me I
did afterward repent it, as I shall tell you. It was now above a Month since
Fluriall went, when there arrived a Knight armed Cap a pe^, and a Herald of
Arms with him; and the better to disguise himself, his face was covered. The
Herald at the Gates of the Town, desired to be conducted unto Amasis; and
every one, out of curiosity to hear what news, went along with him. The Guards
of the Town did let them in, and after Amasis was acquainted, they were
conducted unto her, who had sent for Clidaman to entertain these strangers:
After the Knight had made a low Reverence unto Amasis, and kissed the hand of
Clidaman, the Herald spoke these words in a kind of a strange language:
Madam, this Knight whom you see here, being one of the highest quality in all
his Country, hearing that any man of honor, might freely demand satisfaction
of any that should wrong him he comes here to ask the same favor from you,
which you never denied unto any, which is, to permit him in your presence, and
in presence of all these fair Nymphs, to draw a satisfaction from the man that
has injured him, by such ways, as are allowed unto persons of his quality.
Amasis, after a little consideration with herself, returned this answer, That
it was true, this way of defending honor had ever been the custom of her
Court; but she, being a woman, never permitted any to try the matter by Arms:
yet notwithstanding, her Son being now at an age able to decide a greater
business than this, she would refer it wholly unto him. Clidaman never staying
for the Herauld's reply, said thus unto her: Madam, this is the way, not only
to be honored by all those who inhabit in those Provinces, over which the gods
have placed you the great Lady, but it is also most just to punish such as are
faulty, and to honor such as do deserve it; and the best way of all, is that
of Arms, especiallly in such cases, as cannot otherwise be decided: so as if
you do not allow of this most just way of discovering the villainies of wicked
men, you will encourage all wickedness, and base men will not care what
villainy they commit, so they can do it secretly. Moreover, these strangers, who
are the first that ever had recourse unto you, would have great reason to
complain, if they should be the first that are refused and denied justice: And
therefore, since you are pleased to refer the business unto me. I shall give
this Knight free liberty, to accuse and defy whom he will, and will promise
him a fair trial in the field. The Knight then kneeled down, kissed his hand,
and gave him humble thanks. Sir, said he, since you are so noble, I must
acquaint you, that the Knight I am in quest of, his name is Polemas, whom I
beseech you to produce, that I may accomplish my end that I came for. Polemas
hearing himself named, stepped forward, and in his lofty garb, said, Who is he
that is in quest of me? I am the man he looks for. Then the unknown Knight
went to him, and gave him his Gauntlet, and the Herald said, Sir, this Knight
presents that unto you as a gage, promising, that tomorrow morning by Sunrise
he will meet you, and prove, that you have most villanously invented all those
lies which you have spoken of him. Herald, said Polemas, I do accept the gage,
and though I do not know this Knight, yet I am certain to have justice on my
side, since I am sure, that I never said any thing against Truth, and let
tomorrow be the day to try it. Then the Knight, after a low reverence unto
Amasis and all the Ladies, went unto his Tent, that he had caused to be set up
without the Gates of the Town. You may well imagine, how this filled all the
Court with discourse, especially Amasis and Clidaman, who loved Polemas very
well, and were very sorry to see him in this danger; however, a promise had
obliged them to allow the field. As for Polemas, he, like a man of great
courage, prepared himself for Combat, not knowing his enemy. And for Galathea,
who had almost forgotten the injury that Polemas had done unto Lindamor, she
thinking, that he did not know his harm came from thence, she never thought of
Lindamor, nor I neither, who thought him to be a hundred miles off; and yet it
was he, who having received my Letter, resolved to seek revenge this way. But
to be short, for I am no good fighter, and therefore can make but a bad
relation of the Combat; but let me tell you as well as I can, that after a long
Combat, wherein both sides had equal advantages, and both of them so full of
wounds, that death was much more likely to be both their shares, than life,
insomuch as every one began to pity the loss of two such valiant men, Amasis
told Clidaman, that it was best to part them, and none could be thought more
fit for it, than Galathea; she being also much moved unto pity, was glad to do
the good office, and so with three or four of us, she went into the lists:
When she first entered, the victory seemed to incline more unto Lindamor, and
Polemas was reduced into such a bad condition, as he was almost quite spent.
Unto Lindamor she addressed her self, and pulling him by the Scarf which hung
behind him she drew him a little back: When he felt himself touched, he turned
suddenly about, thinking he was betrayed, and with such fury, as the Nymph
recoyling, for fear of being hurt, was entangled in her Gown, and fell in the
midst of the Lists. Lindamor, who knew her, ran presently to take her up: But
Polemas, without regard unto the Nymph seeing this advantage, gave Lindamor two
or three such blows upon the head behind, as made him stoop to the ground; but
he got up again so incensed against his enemy, that maugre all Galathea's
prayers, he would not leave him, till he laid him under his feet: then getting
upon him, he disarmed his head, and when he was ready to give him his
dispatching blow, he heard the voice of his adored Lady crying out, Oh Knight,
I do conjure you by her whom you love most, to give me the life of this Knight.
I will, said Lindamor unto her, upon condition, he will confess, that he has
falsely reported things of me, and of her, by whom you conjure me. Polemas being
as he thought, at the last gasp of life, did confess what they would. Thus
Lindamor got the day, and went away, after he had kissed the hand of his
Mistress, who knew him not, though he spoke unto her, his Helmet, and her own
fears, kept her from taking any notice of his voice; but, as he passed by me,
he said thus unto me in a low voice, Fair Leonida. I am too much obliged to you
to conceal my self, and therefore see the effect of your Letter. Then without
any more stay, he got on Horseback, though much wounded, and galloped presently
out of sight: this overmuch stirring of his body by riding, did him much hurt,
and brought him to that extremity, that being come into the house of
Eluriall's Aunt, where he resolved to lodge, in case he was wounded, he was so
weak, that it was three weeks before he could stir out of his bed. In the mean
time, Galathea was extremely angry with this unknown Knight, for not leaving
the Combat when first she desired him, being more offended at his refusal,
than obliged by what he had given her. And Polemas being, as you know of a high
rank, Amasis and Clidaman caused him with much grief to be carried off the
field, and dressed with all possible care, insomuch as they began to be in some
hopes of his life.

Every one was extremely desirous to know who this unknown Knight was, whose
courage and valor had got him the esteem of very many; Galathea was the only
person that had an ill opinion of him: for this proud Beauty remembered the
offense, and forgot the courtesy; and because it was to me only, that she used
to vent her most secret thoughts, as soon as she saw me in private with her: Do
you know this discourteous Knight, said she unto me, unto whom Fortune, and not
his Valor, has given the advantage of the Combat? Madam, said I, I do know
him to be both a valiant and a courteous Knight. He has not showed it in this
action, said she; for if he had, he would have left fighting at my first
request. Madam, answered I, you do blame him for that, which you ought to
esteem him for, since in doing honor unto you, he thereby was in danger of his
life. But, said she, he would not leave sighting when I desired him. Had he not
all the reason in the world, said I unto her, to chastise the base act of
Polemas, who would not first ceafe: for my part, I think he did very well, and
Lindamor could not in honor do less then he did. How, said she, was it
Lindamor who fought? The truth is, I was sorry that I had unawares named him,
but seeing it was out, I thought best to tell her; Yes, Madam, (said I) it was
Lindamor, who being offended at the report of Polemas, would try the truth of
them by Arms. She was extremely astonished at it, and after she had awhile
considered upon this accident, she said thus unto me; Then I see it is Lindamor
who has done me this discourtesie, that is so shallow in his respects unto me:
Was he so inconsiderate, as to put my Honor to the hazard of Fortune and
Arms? Upon this she was silent, and extremely vexed. And I, who would by any
means make her know, that Lindamor was in no fault, did thus answer her; Is it
possible, Madam, that you should thus complain against Lindamor, and not see
the wrong you do your self? What discourtesy has he done you? Has he not
vanquished Polemas your enemy? How, my enemy, (said she) Lindamor is much more
for he gave Polemas the first cause. Oh heavens, Madam, said I then unto her,
what do you mean? Lindamor more your enemy, who has no soul but to adore you,
nor one drop of blood that he would not spend in your service? And can he be
more your friend, who by his subtle discourse endeavors to stain your honor?
But Leonida, replied she, Who knows whether Lindamor, out of his accustomed
arrogance and pride, did not speak those words, wherewith Polemas did tax him.
But Madam, answered I, how much are you obliged unto Lindamor, for making your
enemy confess, that he did invent them? Oh Madam, I beseech you pardon me, if
I do accuse you of great ingratitude, when Lindamor hazzards his life, to make
it appear Polemas lied: You accuse him of inconsideration, and his making the
Liar to confess his Lie; you tax him with discourtesie: Had he not taken
himself to Arms, how should the truth ever have appeared? and had he left
fighting when first you commanded him, Polemas had then never confessed what
you and every one heard. Ah, poor Lindamor, how I pity thy fortune? What can
thou possibly do to please, since the most signal services are looked upon as
offenses and crimes. Well, well, Madam, perhaps you will not have long to use
these cruelties; for I believe, death, more pitiful than you, will put an end
unto your ingratitude and his torments; and may be, at this very hour he is
dead, which if he be, then the Nymph, Galathea, is the cause of it. Why do you
accuse me? (said she.) Because, replied I, when you went to part them, and fell
upon the ground, he helped you up, and in the mean while the courteous Polemas
whom you extol so highly, did most basely wound him in two or three places; and
I saw Lindamors blood run upon the ground after it; but if he do die upon it,
it is the least evil he has received from you for, to be scorned after so much
duty, is, methinks, a misery never equalled. But, Madam, I pray remember, the
time was, you said there was no way to stop these reports of Polemas, but by
sword and blood: He has done what you deemed the best, and yet you must needs
tax him for doing ill. Had not Sylvia, and some other Nymphs interrupted us, I
believe I should have somewhat tempered the animosity of this Nymph: But seeing
so much company coming in, we changed discourse; yet my words were not without
their effect, though she would not make it appear unto me; but yet I saw it by
a thousand symptoms. For since that day, I resolved to speak unto her no more,
unless she first asked me. She on the other side expected that I should begin:
And thus eight days passed, and not a word passed betwixt us of this business.
In the mean time, Lindamor was not without his cares, to know what reports went
of him at Court, and what Galathea thought. He sent Flurial unto me upon the
same business, and to bring me a short Letter: And Flurial was so ingenuous,
that he did his business, and Galathea never took any notice of it. The Letter
was this.

Lindamor 's Letter unto Leonida.
Madam,
THose that do doubt of my innocence, are no small offenders against truth: Yet
as some that shut their eyes, and will not see the light, though never so
resplendent; so I am afraid, Madam, that Galathea, to my grief, does shut her
eyes against the clearness of my cause. Oblige me, I beseech you, in assuring
her, that if the blood of my enemy will not wash away the stain that he has
put upon me, I will most freely add my own; for I value not my life, since she
does not.


I enquired very particularly of Flurial how he did, and whether any knew him:
I understood he had lost much blood, and that did most retard his cure, but
that he was not in any danger. I perceived he could not be known, because his
Herald was a Frank of Merovia's Army, far off; and those about, were not
permitted to stir out of the house: And that Flurials Aunt knew no more of him
but that he was the unknown Knight that fought with Polemas, whose valor and
bounty, made them all very diligent about him. Also that he had commanded
Flurial to come and know of me, how reports went at Court, and what he should
do. I commanded him to tell Lindamor, that all the Court was full of his
valor, though he was unknown; that he should rest himself, and have a care of
his cure, and that I would study his contentment as much as I could: But, I
told him, it was convenient before he went, 'to ask Galathea's leave,
pretending to see his Aunt. So the next morning when Galathea was in the
Garden, Flurial made a low reverence unto her, and offered to speak with her:
But Galathea, thinking it was to deliver some Letter unto her from Lindamor,
was so confused, as she grew as pale as death it self: and, lest Flurial
should take any notice of this alteration in her face, I stepped forward and
said unto her, Madam it is Flurial who has been with his Aunt that is sick and
beseeches you will be pleased to give him leave to go again unto her for some
certain days. Galathea then turned toward me and asked what she was sick of:
and I answered, that it was a disease of many years continuance, and such a
one as was out of all hopes of any cure. Then she addressed her self unto
Flurial and said unto him. Go Flurial and return again as soon as you can, but
not before your Aunt be recovered, for I ever loved her very well, for her
constant good affection to me, Then she continued on her walk, I talked with
him and seemed as if I were displeased, though I was not, that the Nymph might
take notice of me: but said I unto him be sure Flurial, thou be both secret
and prudent; for there upon depends either thy happiness or thy ruin; and
above al be sure thou do, whatsoever Lindamor commands thee: after a promise
of al fidelity, he went away, and I began to put on a face of extreme sorrow:
And when I was in any place; where, the Nymph might hear me, I would seem to
sigh, lift my hands pu to heaven, and clap them both together; and used all the
gestures I could possible devise, to seem the most grieved soul that ever
breathed. She hearing me often mention Lindamor untomy self, and never so much
as name him unto her, but on the contrary did shun all occasions of it; and in
lieu of that frolique humor I used in all company, to be only a lump of
melancholy, she began by degrees to be of that opinion I wished, but not fully:
for my design was to make her believe, that Lindamor, as he went off from the
combat, was so wounded that he dyed, to the end that pity might obtain from
this proud soul, what affection and service could not. Now my plot was so
handsomely carried, that it took almost according to my wish for though she set
as good a face upon it as she could, yet she was touched to the very quick for
Lindamor. So as perceiving me thus mute and sad, she imagined him to be very
ill, or worse; and was so extremely troubled in this conceit that she was not
able to hold any longer.

Two days after Flurial was gone, she called me into her closset, and seeming
to talk of something else, she asked me, whether I knew how Flurials Aunt did?
I answered, that since he went I heard nothing. Truly, says she, I should be
very sorry if that good old woman should dye. You have reason Madam, said I
unto her, for she ever loved you and was always very serviceable to you. If
she live, answered Galathea, I shall requite her; and if she die I shall love
Furial for her sake. Then I answered that indeed it was very true, the services
both of the Aunt and Nephew deserved recompense, especially Flurial, for his
fidelity and affection could not be corrupted. It Is very true, said she: but
for Flurial, what long and sad discourse was that which you had with him when
he went away? I answered in a faint and sad tone, nothing but desired him to
commend me to his Aunt. Recommendations, said she, do not use to be so long.
Then she came near me, and laying her hand upon my shoulder, Tell me truly,
said she, did you talk of nothing else? What should I talk of else except
that, replied I; for I have no other business with him? Now do I know, said
she, that you do dissemble. Why do you say, you have no other business with
him? have you none that concerns Lindamor? Oh Madam, said I, I did not think,
you could have any memory now of one that was so unfortunate; then standing in
a silentand dejected posture, I sighed very profundly two or three times. What
is it, said she, that causes you to sigh thus? Tell me truly, where is
Lindamor? Lindamor, said I, alas, he is not now a man of this world. How, cried
she out, is Lindamor dead? Yes certainly, answered I, and your cruelty did kill
him more then the blows of his enemy. For going off from the combat, and
knowing by several reports how ill you were satisfied with him, he would never
suffer himself to be dressed; and if you will needs know it, this was the
discourse I had with Flurial, whom I commanded to try, if he could handsomely
get away those Letters which you have written unto him, that you might burn
them, and the memory of him both together. Oh my god, said she then unto me,
what sad story is this you tell me? is it possible he should be thus lost? you
should have said, replied I, that it was your self that killed him, and that it
is you that has the loss: for as for him, he is a gainer by his death, and he
finds that rest there which your cruelty would never let him enjoy alive. Ah
Leonida said she, I hope all this is only to vex me, Tell me truly, is he
alive? I would he were, answered I, but why should you be so inquisitive? I am
sure life and death was both a like indifferent to you. And since your love to
him was so little, me thinks you should be glad to be rid of that trouble which
he was unto you. For you must think that had he lived he would have been
perpetually giving you such testimonies of his affection, as this with Polemas
was. Truly, said the Nymph, then I do most heartily lament the loss of poor
Lindamor, and swear unto you, that his death wounds me deeper than I could have
believed it would. But tell me, had he no remembrance of us at his last end?
And did he express no sorrows to leave us? This question, Madam, said I unto
her, is something strange; he dyed for the love of you, and yet you ask, whether
he had you in his memory? Alas, alas, his memory, and his sorrows, were too
much for his health; but I beseech you let us talk no more of him: I am
confident he is in a place where he receives the wages of his fidelity and
where, perhaps, he will see revenge upon you. You are angry, said she unto me.
I beseech you pardon me, Madam, said I unto her. I have some reason for what I
say; for there is none can give a better testimony of his affection and
fidelity than my self, and of your ingratitude wherewith you have recompensed
so many services. Let us leave that, answered the Nymph; for I do acknowledge
you are in the right but I beseech you by the affection you have unto me, to
tell me whether he had any remembrance of me in his last speech? and what words
he used? Will you needs triumph, Madam, in his last breath, said I, as you have
in all the rest of his life? If you would I will give you full satisfaction. As
soon as ever he heard, that you did endeavor by your words to blemish the
honor of his Victory, and that in lieu of pleasing you by his Combat, he had
gotten your hatred, he pulled off all clothes that lapped his wounds, and
leaving them all open, he would never suffer the hand of any Surgeon to
come near them. His wounds were not mortal; but when they were putrified, so
soon as he felt he could not live any longer, he called for Flurial, and when
he was alone with him, he said thus; Flurial, my good friend, thou must now
lose one that had a desire to do thee some good, but thou must arm thy self
with patience, since it is the will of heaven. I would request one piece of
service more from thee, which is the best thou ever did me: And having got a
faithful promise from him that he would do it, he went on with his discourse.
As soon as ever I am dead, open my breast, take out my heart, carry it unto the
fair Galathea, and tell her, I sent it, to the end, that after my death I may
not retain any thing which was not my own. As as soon ever these words were
spoken, he lost both speech and life. Now this fool Flurial, in performance of
his promise unto him he loved so dearly, brought hither the heart of Lindamor,
and, but for me, would have presented it unto you. Ah Leonida, said she then,
is it certain he is dead? Oh heavens, I should never know of his sickness?
Would none tell me of it? Oh Leonida, you were much too blame. Madam, answered I
I did not know any thing of it; for Flurial stayed all the while with him
because he brought none of his own servants with him: But if I had known of it,
I think I should never have acquainted you, since I knew you to be so averse
unto any thing that came from him. Then leaning her head upon her arm, she
commanded me to leave her by her self, as I think, that I might not see her
tears, which began already to trickle from her eyes: Yet I was no sooner gone,
but she called me back, and never looking up, bade me command Flurial to bring
what Lindamor had sent unto her; for she would by any means have it. Then I
went out in sure hopes that my plot would take effect according to my expected
desires. Mean while, when Flurial was returned unto Lindamor, he found him full
of impatient longing for him, but my Letter gave him full satisfaction. It was
thus penned.

Leonida 's Answer unto Lindamor.
YOur Justice is so apparent, that the most dim eyes cannot deny its splendour.
Content your self with this, that those whom you most desire should see it, do
confess it. As the wounds of the body may be far from being healed, though the
danger be over, and therefore must have time for it: So it is with the wounds
of the mind; the danger being removed by your valor and prudence, you must
refer the rest unto time, remembering the wounds which close too hastily are
subject to fester, which afterward becomes more dangerous than the wound it
self. Hope well, for the accomplishment of your desires; for you may do it with
reason.


I writ thus unto him, purposely that his grief might not be a prejudice unto
his wounds, and that they might the sooner heal: Presently after, he writ back
thus unto me.

Lindamors Reply unto Leonida.
Fairest Nymph,
SInce you command it so, I must, and will hope; and must confess that all my
happiness and hopes of it have their dependency upon you. Yet Love, which is
always accompanied with doubting, commands me to tremble. But let heaven do
what it pleases, I know at will not deny me a Grave.


My answer in short was, because I will not trouble you with too many Letters,
that as soon as he found himself able to travail, he should find some way or
other to come and speak with me; and as briefly as I could I let him understand
all the discourse between Galathea and me; also how she resented the news of
his death, and desired to have his Heart. But observe the force of a great
affection: Lindamor, that had so many several wounds, and lost so much blood,
as did narrowly endanger his life; yet, beyond all hopes of Surgeons, as soon
as he received my last Letter, he did rise out of his bed, dressed himself,
and within two or three days after got on Horseback to come unto me; and
because he durst not come by day, for fear of being seen, he put himself into
the habit of a Gardener, calling himself Cosen unto Fluriall, and resolved to
come into the Garden, and there behave himself as occasion should require:
Telling the Aunt of Fluriall, that he had made a vow before the Combat, and
must needs go and perform it, before he went out of the Country; and fearing
the friends of Rolemas, he disguised himself in such a habit, and desired her
not to speak of it: The good old woman would have dissuaded him, and advised
him to defer his voyage until another time. But he being inflamed with zealous
devotion, told her, that if he did not perform it before he went out of the
Country, he should think himself subject unto all the curses of all the gods.
So to prevent meeting with any, he went in the night, and came so happily into
the Garden, as he was unseen of any. Fluriall carried him into the house, in
which there was then none but a drudge that helped him to dig, whom he made
believe that Lindamor was his Cozen, whom he would teach the trade of a
Gardener. Thus Lindamor expected the morning with a longing desire, and the
night seemed longer than ordinary unto him, that waited for effecting his
desires. Morning was no sooner come, but Lindamor was in the Garden with a
spade in his hand: Had you but seen him with this tool in his hand, and how
aukwardly he handled it, you would have known, that he was not much versed in
it, but knew better how to wield a Spear than a Spade; and I have heard him
since swear a hundred times, that he was never in all his life so ashamed, as
when he did present himself before his Mistress in that habit, and that he
was in two or three minds, whether he should return or no: but at last, Love
surmounted the shame, and kept him there until we came.

As fortune was, the Nymph came that day into the Garden, with many of my
Companious; as soon is she spied Flurial, she trembled like an Aspen leaf, and
cast her eye upon me, but though I endeavored to speak with him, yet I could
not, because this new Gardener was so near him, who was so altered in his
habit, that none of us knew him. As for me; I might as well as any of the rest
be excused, for since he never acquainted me with his design, I should never
have believed he would have attempted it, until he had first acquainted me;
but he has since told me, that he did conceal it from me, because he knew I
would not have permitted him to come thither in that manner. Dreaming then of
any other than him, I did as inquisitivly ask Flurial who this stranger was, as
any in the company; and he answered me in a faint voice, that he was his Aunts
son, whom he intended to instruct in the trade of Gardening. Upon this answer,
Galathea, as inquisitive, but not so courageous, as I, seeing me in discourse
with him, came to us, and hearing that he was Fluriall's Oozen, did ask him how
his Mother did? Now was Lindamor put to his shifts, fearing least his tongue,
though not his habit, should betray him; yet, counterfeiting his Tone as well
as he could, he answered in a Country-like language. That, blessed be God, she
was now past the worst, and then made such a Leg, so like his Language, that
all the Nymphs could not choose but laugh: but he seeming to take no notice of
them, nor stirring his cap, but giving it a scurvy remove with both his hands,
he fell ill-favour'dly to his work^^. Galathea, in a smiling manner, told
Fluriall, that if his Consen were as good a Gardener, as he was an Orator, he
would be very useful unto him. Madam, said Flurial, he can speak no better
than he was taught; Country people all speak so, Yes, yes, said the Nymph, and
perhaps he is held for a prime fellow amongst them. After this, she returned to
her walk. This gave me an opportunity of talking to Flurial, for my companions
were all got about Lindamor, and every one had their questions to him, unto
which he answered, but so ill-favour'dly, that he forced them all to laugh, for
it was in such a manner, as made them all believe he was in good earnest; and
though he did answer unto every question, yet he never stirred his cap nor
head, but seemed very intent upon his work. In the mean time, I asked Flurial,
how Lindamor did And he answered, that truly he was yet very ill; for Lindamor
had commanded him to tell me so. But where lies his sickness, said I unto him,
for thou say, his wounds are almost whole? You will know, Madam, said he
unto me, by this Letter which he has writ unto my Lady. His Lady, answered I,
has an opinion that he is dead, but give me the Letter, and I will carry it
unto her. I dare not indeed Madam, answered he, for he has expressly forbidden
me, and tied me unto it by an Oath. How, said I does Lindamor mistrust me? No,
said she, but on the contrary, desires you to make the Nymph still believe that
he is dead: But, it will be both advantageous unto him and me, that I do
deliver it with my own hands. I was now very angry with him, and had continued
in longer discourse with him, had I not feared notice would have been taken:
Yet, I could get nothing more out of him; but for a conclusion, the Nymph must
receive it from his hand: But when I told him, that he had been long with the
Nymph, and he might have presented the Letter unto her: He answered me only
with a shake of his head, whereby I perceived, that he would not give it unto
me. Galathea perceiving our long discourse, and desirous to know upon what
subject it was, did leave her walk sooner then usual, and calling me unto her,
asked me what it was? I told her freely the resolution of Fluriall; but, in
lieu of the Letter, I told her it was the Heart of Lindamor, and how he was
sworn to deliver it to none but her, unless he should betray the trust of the
dead. Then Galathea answered me he may deliver it unto me, under color of
presenting me with a Basket of Fruit, in which the Heart may be put in the
bottom. I answered, that this might well be done; but I know, Fluriall the
fool will deliver it with his own hands, in expectation of some reward for the
services he has done you. Oh, said she, if that be all, let him ask what he
will, and I will give it unto him. This, Madam, said I, will seem a kind of
ransom, with which you redeem the heart. No, no, answered she, the Ransom I
am to pay for it, is Tears, and those drawn from my hearts blood. Perhaps she
was sorry for saying so much; but however, so it was, she commanded me to speak
unto Flurial, which I did, and used all the language I had to get this Letter
from him, even as far as threatenings, but all in vain for he told me once for
all, that neither heaven nor earth should make him forsworn: If my Lady, said
he, will have it, let her come in the evening to the bottom of the back stairs
which comes from her Chamber into the Garden, the Moon shines, the way is not
so far, and I have known her come the same journey as late; when she hears me,
I am confident she will allow of my reasons. When I heard this, I was extremely
angry at him, and told him, it was his duty to obey Galathea before Lindamor,
that she was his Mistress, and that it was in her power to do him good or harm:
and to be short, that it was not likely she would take so much pains for it:
but he still resolutely told me thus; Nymph, it is not Lindamor whom I do obey
in this; but it is my oath which I have vowed unto the gods; and if I cannot
perform it, there is no, remedy; I can return to the place from whence I
came. When I saw him thus resolute, I was almost out of all patience: for had I
been acquainted with Lindamor's design, since it was gone so far, doubtless I
should have seconded him; but being ignorant of it, I thought Flurial so far
from all reason, as I knew not what to say: At last, I returned to the Nymph
with his answer, who was so extremely angry at him, as she could have found in
heart to have turned him out of her Mothers service, had I not hinted unto her
the danger that might have ensued by his discovery. Three or four days passed
thus, before the Nymph would be brought to do as Flurial desired: At last,
Love, that commands all, forced her to tell me in the morning, that she had no
rest all night, that Lindamor's Ghost haunted her all the night, and told her,
that it was the least thing she could do for his memory, to go down a pair of
stairs, to get his heart out of the hands of another; and that I should
acquaint Flurial, she would be there that night. Oh heavens! what joy was this
unto the new Gardener, he has since told me, his heart was never in his life
so swelled with joy, as then; for he began to despair of his plot taking
effect, and seeing the Nymph never came into the Garden, he feared that she
knew him. But when Flurial acquainted him with the resolution that was taken,
this was such a resurrection of Love, as if one should die to make another
mourn, and revive to make them rejoice. The night being come, and every one
retired to their lodgings, the Nymph did put her self into her night dress,
and causing me to open the door, she went first; and, I swear, she trembled so,
that she had much ado to go; she told me, that she had such an unusual beating
at her stomach, as took away all her strength; whether it was her being in the
dark without light, or her going out at an undue time, or her apprehension of
Lindamor's heart, I know not; but whatsoever it was, she was much unlike her
self: At last, growing a little more confident, we came to the bottom of the
stairs, where we presently found Flurial, who had waited long for us: The
Nymph went before, and going into a Jessemine Arbor, which was so close, as to
keep out the Moonshine, or any sight from the windows of the house, she began
to say thus to Fluriall in a great rage: It Is very well, Flurial, are you grown
so stiff in your own opinions, that you will not do what I command you? Madam,
answered he undauntedly, it was to obey you that I have failed in this, if it
be a fault; for did not you command me, that I should punctually do whatsoever
Lindamor commanded me? Now, Madam, besides your command, I am obliged by oath
unto Lindamor, to put his heart into no hands but yours. Well, said she, and
sighed, where is his heart? Here Madam, said he; if you please to come hither
into this corner, you will better see it than where you are. When she came to
the place, she saw a man standing upon his feet, and without speaking a word,
bowed himself unto her. Oh heavens! said the Nymph, what is here? Flurial, see,
here is a man. Madam, said Flurial, and smiled, it is a heart that is presented
unto you. How? said she, a heart: Then would she have run away for fear; but he
took hold of her Gown, kissed it, and held her. I hearing these words, came
nearer, and presently knew him to be the same that Fluriall called Gozen. Upon
a sudden I knew not what to think: I saw Galathea and I my self with two men,
the one of which was unknown unto us; so as we knew not what to do. Cry out, we
durst not; fly, Galathea could not; to put any hopes in our own strength, we
could not. At last, all I could do, was, to lay hold on his hand that held
Galathea by the Gown, and not able to do more, I began to scratch and bite him,
which I did so upon a sudden, that the first thing he saw was his hand bitten.
Oh sweet Leonida (said he then unto me) how would you use your enemies, if you
use your servants thus sharply? Though I was almost quite out of my self, yet
me thought I should know that voice, and asked him, who he was? I am, said he,
one that comes to bring Lindamor's Heart unto this fair Nymph. Then kneeling
down upon the ground, he thus addressed himself unto her: I must needs
confess Madam, that this presumption is great, but yet not equal unto that
affection which produces it. Here, Madam, is the heart of Lindamor, which I
present unto you; I hope the present will find as good a reception from the
hand of the Donor, as from a stranger. But, if my diasterous Fate do deny me
that which Love does promise me, having offended against a Divinity whom I only
adore, then condemn this heart which here I do bring unto you, unto what cruel
tortures you shall please; for, so his pain may please you, he will endure with
contentment, since you do ordain it unto him. Now I knew him to be Lindamor,
and Galathea also, but not without abundance of wonder to us both, to see at
her foot him, whom she thought dead; and I, in lieu of a Gardener to find a
Cavalier, who yielded unto none in all the Country. Perceiving Galathea so
surprised that she could not speak, I began to talk unto him, and said: Is it
so Lindamor, that you delight to surprise and affright Ladies? this is not an
Art, that becomes such a Cavalier as you profess your self. I must needs
confess unto you, sweet Nymph, said he unto me, that it is not a becoming act
of a Cavalier, but it is of a Lover, and I am no less. Love that instructs
all, has taught me to be a Gardener. Is it possible, Madam, said he unto
Galathea, that this extreme affection which you have caused, should beso
displeasing unto you, as you must needs delight more in the death of him that
owes it, then his life? Will not this heart I have brought, find as good a
reception alive as dead? But, if you will needs have me die, here is a Poniard
will do that, which no time can ever do, for it will put an end to all. The
Nymph answered nothing unto all this, but said, Oh Leonida, have you betrayed
me? Upon this, she went in to another Walk, where she did sit down; for she was
so much transported out of her self, as she knew not what she did. Then
Lindamor did fall upon his knees again, and I went to her, and said, Why Madam,
do you say, I betrayed you? how can you accuse me for this? I vow unto you,
that I knew nothing of the business: but it is Flurial that has deceived us
both. But, I thank God, we are all deceived the better way. Thanks be to God,
here that heart of Lindamor which Flurial promised; he is here also ready to do
you any service: And have you not good reason to be glad of this Treason? It
would be over tedious to relate all our discourse at this time: out at the
conclusion, peace was made between all parties, and so, as this Love was tied
with a harder knot then ever it was before; but upon this condition, that he
should at this very hour depart unto the place, whither Amasis and Clidaman
had sent him. This departure went hard, yet obey he must; and so after a
parting kiss of Galathea's fair hand, he went away, in full assurance to find
her the same he left her. But it would be impertinent to particularize every
circumstance: Lindamor returned to his charge, did his business and with the
permission of Amasis and Clidaman, returned unto Forests, where giving a good
account of his Commission, he was honored and carrassed according to the merit
of his virtue. But all this did not half so much revive his soul, as the
favorable aspect which this Nymph did afford him, who ever since his last
departure so increased in affection to him, as Lindamor might well say she did
equal him in Love: And this Courtship came to that height, as one night, when
they were in the Garden together, he did often move her for leave, to ask the
consent of Amasis unto their Marriage, being confident, that so many services
as he had done, both unto her and her Son would invite her to grant him that
favor. To which she answered; You have more reason to doubt their good will
than your own merit; and be less assured of your own deservings, then my good
will: But yet, I would not have you mention it unto them, till Clidaman be
married I am younger than he and I may well stay so long. You may perhaps,
Madam, answered he, but so cannot the violence of my passion: But, if you will
not grant me this remedy, yet grant me another, if your affection be such as
you say unto me. If I can without prejudice to my self, said she, I will. Then
after he had kissed her hand; Madam, said he unto her, Promise me, before
Leonida and the gods, who are witnesses of our discourse, that you will be my
Wife, as I do vow, by all that is sacred, to be your Husband, and never look
upon any other. Galathea was surprised at this, yet seeming as if it were by my
persuasion, though indeed it was by her own affection, she gave him that
satisfaction, and swore unto him; upon condition, that Lindamor, to avoid
suspicion, should never return into the Garden, until their Marriage was
declared. Now was Lindamor the most contented man that ever was, being full of
hopes, and wanted nothing but the promised conclusion of all his desires. But
Love, or rather Fortune, did most extremely thwart him. Oh Lindamor, how vain
are all thy purposed hopes? At that time Clidaman went with Guyemant, to try
their fortunes in Arms, and went into Merovea's Army but though he went away
secretly, yet was he quickly discovered. And because Amasis would not let him
be there in that sort, she levied all the Forces she could, to send unto him,
and committed the charge of them unto Lindamor, constituting Polemas the
Governor under her in all the Provinces, until her Son's return; and this she
did, as well to satisfy two such eminent men, as to sever them; for since
Lindamor's return, they were always jarring. Polemas was very well contented
and Lindamor went not with an ill will: The one was glad he was to stay with
his Mistress, and the other hoped by his services so to oblige Amasis, as to
facilitate the way unto that happiness, which he aspired unto. But Polemas
finding himself in disfavour of his Mistress, and that his Rival had robbed
him of all, he put no confidence in any of his services or merits, but had
recourse unto cunning and artifice: In order to this, he procured the most
crafty fellow that ever was of that trade, whom he acquainted with every one
about the Court, showed him in secret Amalis, Galathea, Silvia, Selires, my
self, and all the rest of the Nymphs; and did not only show him their faces,
but acquainted him with all the secrets which he knew betwixt any of them: And
after a full information of all passages, he desired him to take upon him to
seem a great Druide, and a most learned Conjurer: He seated himself in the
great wood of Savignew, near the pleasant Gardens of Mount Brison, and close by
a little River which runs through the Wood: He stayed some certain days,
giving himself out to be the greatest Diviner that ever was; insomuch as his
fame reached unto us, and Galathea went unto him to know her fortune. This
crafty Impostor did know so well how to carry himself, and delude others, with
so many circumstances and ceremonies, as I must confess, he deceived me as
well as the rest. The main aim and conclusion of all his craft was, to tell
Galathea, that the influence of the heavens had given her choice of a great
happiness, or a great misery, and that it must be her own prudence that was to
distinguish betwixt them; that both these two extremes did depend upon Love;
that if she contemned his advice, she would be the most miserable woman in the
world: And on the contrary, the most happy, if she followed his counsel. Then
looking in her hand, and then her face, he said unto her, Such a day when you
are in Marcelles, you shall see a man clothed in such a color; if you marry
him, you will be the most miserable woman upon earth. Afterward he showed her
in a glass, a certain place upon the banks of the River Lignon, and said unto
her, See here is the place, go unto it such an hour and then and there you
shall find a man, whom if you marry, will make you infinitely happy.

Now this Climanthes (for that was this Conjurers name) had subtly got
knowledge of the day that Lindamor was to depart, and the color of his clothes
he would wear; and his design was, that Polemas under a color of going to
Hunt, should go unto the place which he had showed her in the glass. Now hear,
I beseech you, how things happened. Lindamor was clothed as Climanthes told her,
and Galathea remembering it, was so astonished, that she could not give him one
word by way of any answer. Poor Lindamor thought it to be his departure which
made her so sad, and so kissing her hand, he went his ways better contented
than his fortune allowed him any reason for.

Afterward, the day approaching on which Climanthes told her she should meet
with the man that would make her all happiness, upon the banks of the River
Lignon, she would not fully acquaint me with her design, but only said she
would try whether the predictions of the Druide were true. So she took with
her only Silvia and me, her Nurse, and little Meril. The Nurse was she that
most fortified her in opinion of these predictions, as commonly all old women
are very superstitious in such things* So as this Nymph observing the day that
Climanthes told her of, she prepared her self the night before to go unto that
place, and in the morning dressed her self to the best advantage she could, and
also commanded us to make our selves ready. Thus we went in a Chariot to the
place appointed, where being come at the very same hour that Climanthes named,
we found a Shepherd almost drowned, whom the waves had cast upon our side.
This Shepherd was one Celadon, who accidentally was fallen into the River, and
had doubtless been drowned, if we had not saved him: So Galathea apprehending
him to be the man that was to make her happy, began then to love him so, that
she would needs have us carry him in the Chariot unto the Palace, before he
revived; for then the sand and mud had so choked him, that he looked as pale
as death, and had no kind of motion or beauty in him. For my part, I cursed the
Conjurer, and did foresee we should be put to abundance of trouble with him;
for I swear unto you, I was never so put to it in all my life: But since the
Shepherd revived, and his complexion came into his face* he appeared to be a
very handsome man, and of a wit above the capacity of a Shepherd. I never saw
any in our Court more civilized, nor more deserving love: So as no wonder
Galathea should be so desperately in love with him, as she cannot be absent
from him either night or day. But certainly she is much mistaken in him; for he
is most desperately in love with a Shepheardess called Astrea: So as all these
things make not a little against Lindamor: For the Nymph finding all true that
this Impostor told her, she is resolved rather to dye than to marry Lindamor,
and studies all ways to win upon the affection of this Shepherd, who does
nothing even in her very presence but sigh for his absence from Astrea. I know
not whether his imprisonment be the cause (for she will not let him go out of
the Palace) or whether it be the abundance of water which he swallowed when he
was in the River; but so it is, he is fallen into a most violent Fever: So as
not knowing what to do for his health, Galathea commanded me to come in all
haste unto you, to the end you might see him, and tell us what was best for him.

The Druide stood very attentive unto this discourse, and had several conceits
according to the subject of his Neeces words; and perhaps, some not far off the
truth; for he perceiceived that she was not altogether exempted either from
love or blame. Yet he did very discreetly dissemble it, and told her he was
very glad to serve either Galathea or Celadon, whose Parents he ever loved; and
who though he was a Shepherd, yet he was descended from the best of our
Knights, whose Ancestors made choice of that kind of life as more tranquil and
happy, than that of the Court, and therefore he honored him, and would be glad
to serve him. But yet this kind of living with him was neither safe nor
honorable for either Galathea or her. And when he came to the Palace and saw
their deportments, then he would tell her how she should demean her self.
Leonida being a little ashamed, answered him, that she did intend long since to
tell him of it, but truly she had neither the confidence nor the convenience to
do it: Yet of a truth, Climanthes was the cause of all this. Oh, answered
Adamas, could I but catch him, I should with usury pay him for falsely usurping
the title of a Druide. That Sir, said the Nymph, will be an easy matter by the
means that I shall find out: For he told Galathea, that she should come four
or five times to the place where she was to meet with this man that would make
her happy, in case she did not meet with him the first day: And I know that
Polemas and he coming too late the first day, will not fail to be there the
days following: And whosoever will catch this Conjurer, must hide themselves
in a place where I shall direct, and they will be sure to find him. As for the
days of his coming, I can be informed from Galathea, though for my part I
have forgotten them.

With such discourse as this, the Druide and the Nymph beguiled the length of
the way, and they were both so attentive, as they were at the Palace of Isaures
before they were aware. But the Druide extremely disliking this kind of life
they led, did instruct Leonida what she should say unto Galathea, but
whatsoever she did, not to let her know that he disapproved any of her
actions: for, said he, such courages and spirits as the Nymphs must be won
upon by sweetness and lenity, not by rigor and force. And you Niece, I pray
consider and remember your duty, and know that these follies of love are
dishonorable both for those that own them, and those that favor them. He had
continued on his Instructions had they not met Silvia at their Palace gates,
who conducted them unto Galathea: At that time she was walking in the Garden
whilst Celadon reposed himself: As soon as ever she saw them, she went unto
them; the Druide kneeled down, and kissed her hand; Leonida did the same.
Afterward the Nymph embraced them both and thanked Adamas for his pains in
coming to her, promising requital upon the first occasion. Madam, said he unto
her, all my services are but just duties, and the very best of them cannot
merit half this expression: I am sorry only that I want occasions to make the
grandeur of my affection known unto you, and if I have not at any time been
deficient, it was only want of opportunities, not of any will to serve you.
Adamas, answered the Nymph, the service which you have done unto Amasis, I take
as done unto my self: And what I have received from your Niece, I accept of as
from you: And therefore, considering all circumstances, I have had sufficient
trial of your goodness. I do acknowledge your services past to be great, but
this which I am now to employ you in, is the greatest, and will be the most
acceptable unto me, for no greater cure can be than of a wounded spirit. We will
talk more of it at leisure; in the mean time go and rest your self: Silvia
will conduct you to your chamber, whilst Leonida does give me an account of
what she has done. Thus the Druide was dismissed, and Galathea carrassing
Leonida more than usual, asked her what she had done in her journey? Unto which
Leonida gave her a satisfactory answer: Madam, said she I thank the gods that I
have found you more joyful than I left you. Friend, said the Nymph, Celadons
recovery is the cause: for you must know, that you were not gone a mile from
hence before the Fever left him, and ever since he has so mended, as he
himself hopes within two or three days he shall be able to rise. This,
answered Leonida, is the best news I could desire, and had I known as much, I
should not have brought Adamas hither. But to the purpose, said Galathea, What
does he say to this accident? For I assure my self you have acquainted him with
it. Pardon me, Madam, said Leonida, I told him no more than what I thought
could not be concealed from him when he came: He knows of the affection you
bear unto Celadon, which I told him was only an effect of your pity. He
knows the Shepherd very well, and all his family, and is confident he can
persuade him unto what he pleases: For my part, I think, that if you do
employ him, he will do you good service, but then you must be ingenuous and
speak freely and openly unto him. Oh my God, said the Nymph, do you think this
possible? Certainly when he understands the whole story he will never
apprehend it unto my contentment; for his prudence and judgment is so great,
as I doubt he will rather condemn, than further the business. Madam, said
Leonida, I do not speak without some ground; you shall see if you do employ
him, what service he will do you. Thus the Nymph was the most contented person
in the world, fancying her self already at the very top of all her desires. But
whilst they were thus discoursing, Silvia and Adamas were talking of the same
business: For this Nymph being at the first very familiar with him, did at the
first speak openly unto him. Adamas much desiring to know whether all his Niece
had related was true, he entreated her to relate unto him all she knew, which
Silvia did without any dissimulation, and as briefly as she could, in this
manner.

The History of Leonida.
KNow, that for the better understanding of what you desire, I am forced to
touch upon all the particulars of Leonida's life, whose Destiny seems to twist
together all her designs with those of Galathea. What I shall say concerning
her, is not by way of reprehension or blame, nor with any intention to divulge
her faults; for in telling them unto you, I think them to be as secret as if
they had never been told. You must know then, that the beauty and merits of
Leonida, had long since gotten the affection of Polemas; and the merits of that
Cavalier being very high, your Niece gave his affection a kind reception, yet
behaved her self with so much discretion, that it was long before Polemas knew
it. I know that your self have loved in your time, and knows better than I do,
how hard a thing it is to hide love. And so it was, that the veil being taken
away, both of them did know that both of them were lovers and both loved.
However, they durst not of a long time declare it. After the Festival which
Amasis did Solemnize every year, as her day of Marriage with Pimander: So it
was, that after dinner we all walked in the Garden at Mont-brison, and she and
I set our selves down under some Trees to shelter our selves from the heat of
the Sun. No sooner were we set, but Polemas came to us, seeming as if but
accidentally; though I observed, that he followed us by the eye, a good way
distant. And because we sat silent a long while together, also he having an
excellent good voice, I told him he would much oblige us if he would sing. I
shall do so, said he (pointing at Leonida) if this fair one will be pleased to
command me. Commands, said she, would show indiscretion; but if you have any
Song that is new, I shall think my entreaties very well bestowed. I shall,
answered Polemas; and moreover, I will promise you, that this which you shall
hear, is so new, as it was made during the time of the Sacrifice this morning,
whilst you were at your Prayers. How said I unto him, is my companion the
subject of the song? Yes certainly, answered he, I am a witness of it, and then
he began thus.

Upon a Lady at her Prayers.
A Saint in Sacred Temple paid
Devotion to the Gods, and prayed:
She that all humane hearts adores,
Adores the gods, and help implores;
And she whose mercy may men save,
With eyes and voice does mercy crave.
Although she does her eyes disarm,
And will not suffer any charm
In either voice or eye to glance,
As might their luster more advance,
Such charming influence still they have,
As must all eyes and ears enslave.
Her eyes with holy Zeal inspired,
Half shut, as high as heaven aspired,
And courted it, with such a glance,
As if her soul were in a trance.
Such raptures of Celestial Love
Must needs both Earth and Heaven move.
Great God (said she) I do implore
Mercy from thy abundant store.
Have mercy on me too (said I)
Oh fairest female Dietie.
Religion bids you to impart
To others with a willing heart.
Since thou art pleased, O God (said she)
To call us Children, O then be
A Father, not a Judge severe.
Since you the worlds fair Mistress are
Oh then be mine, and kind, (said I)
Resembling so a Dietie.
Consider Lord (said she) how I
Have Essence from thy Majesty:
It Is only Thou I do adore,
And shall do so for evermore.
So it is only you, said I,
Whom I adore eternally.
Measure thy Mercy, Lord (said she)
According to thy Love, not me.
Measure your pity then, said I,
According to my Amity.
Here then she stopped, and went not on
Only in Contemplation.
Her prayers were heard; but mine, alas
Rejected were as poor and base:
Yet I dare confidently say,
Mine were as full of Zeal as they:
She only by her Faith obeyed,
I saw the Saint to whom I prayed.
Her Prayers did find an easy task;
Who could deny when she did ask?
But I poor silly mortal must
Return a sinner to my dust,
And never any mercy find,
Since she disdaineth to be kind.
We were both very attentive unto his air, and perhaps I should have heard
more, had not Leonida feared lest Polemas should out with something which she
desired should be kept secret; and therefore as soon as ever he had done
singing, she began to speak. I dare lay a wager, said she, that I do know her
of whom this Song was made; then whispering him in the ear, as if she would
name her, she bade him take heed what she said before me. He very cunningly
answered aloud, No, no, you are mistaken, I swear it is not she whom you named.
Then I perceived, that she did conceal her self from me; and therefore seeming
as if I would go and gather some flowers, I parted from them, but not so far
distant but still I held an eye upon their actions. Now since Polemas and she
fell off, he has confessed all unto me, but when they were in league together,
I could never make her tell me any thing. But being then together, they fell
to discourse, and she did first begin it. Come, come, Polemas, said she, why
do you jest thus with your Friends? Tell me truly, upon whom was those Verses
made? Fair Nymph, said he, your own soul can tell you as well as I, for whom
they were made. How should I know, said she, do you think I can divine things?
Yes certainly, answered Polemas, and I do think you one of those who does not
obey that god who speaks by your mouth, but rather will be obeyed by him. How
do you explain this aenigma? (said the Nymph) I do explain it thus, replied he;
The god of Love does speak by your mouth, otherwise your words could not be so
full of Fire, as to kindle so many flames as they do in the hearts of all
those that hear them: And yet you do not obey that god when he commands, That
all those who love, should be loved again; but you, all disobedience, do make
all those who love you, to think you infinitely fair, but not at all loving, no
not so much as pitiful. I speak, Madam, for my own particular, and can safely
swear, without the least danger of perjury, that never any beauty under the Sun
was, and is more loved than you by me. When he uttered these last words, he
blushed, and with a smile she answered thus; Polemas, Polemas, old Soldiers can
show their valor by wounds and never use to brag of it, but you that talk so
much of yours, would be put to your shifts to show them, if Love your Captain
General should ask you where they are. Cruel Nymph, said Polemas, you are much
mistaken; for I would only bid him look upon the fair eyes of my enemy, and
fully satisfy him; for then he would receive such wounds as I have in my
heart, and never complain of me. However, it is my glory to have such a worthy
author for my wounds. Should Love enter into argument with me, I should sooner
satisfy him than you; for he would be sensible of my pain, which you never
can, because a fire cannot burn it self. You can never be so sensible of our
tears, who are so full of rigor, that though we do adore you as fair, yet we
can hardly commend you as humane. Leonida did love Polemas, but as yet she
would not let him know it: On the other side, she feared, that if she should
put him quite out of hope she should then quite lose him; and therefore she
answered him thus; Polemas, if your affection be such as you say, then time
will give me better knowledge of it, than all your well spoken words can, which
are too eloquent to proceed from affection; for I have heard say, that
affection cannot be without passion, and passion will not permit a spirit the
freedom of discourse: But, when time has told me as much as you have done, you
may think, I am not such a stone, but I shall be sensible of your merits, and
your amity may perhaps find a favorable reception; until then, never hope
for any more from me, then what you may from all the rest of my Companions in
general. Polemas would have kissed her hand, by way of assurance, but she
forbad him, saying, Cavalier, be discreet, many eyes are upon us; if you use
any such things, you will lose me. Upon this she rose up, and came to us, who
were gathering flowers. Thus was the first overture of any affection between
them, which gave occasion unto Galathed, to intermeddle in the business; for
seeing this passage in the Garden, and having a design upon Polemas, she would
know that night what had passed between Leonida and him. And being ever very
familiar with your Niece, she durst not absolutely deny the truth of this
address; but Galathea pressed the matter further, and would needs know the
very same words which passed between them; unto which your Niece did partly
answer truth, and partly dissemble; but she said enough to exasperate Galathea
so much, as from that very day she resolved to get his love, and went to work
with so many artifices, as it was impossible he should resist. First she began
with Leonida, and charged her, to let this love betwixt Polemas and she, go no
further; then told her, that it was her best policy to root it out for she
knew, that Polemas had another aim, and made use of her only to laugh at:
Further, if Amasis should come to know of it, she would be much offended.
Leonida who then had no more subdety in her than a little Child, received the
words of the Nymph us from her Mistress, and never penetrated into the depth
of her design, but was for some days so strange unto Polemas, as he could not
choose but wonder what the matter was. This, at the beginning, made him more hot
upon this address, as it is ordinary for young spirits to be most violent upon
that which is most difficult unto them. And indeed, he did so continue his
courtship that Leonida had much ado to dissemble the affection which she bore
unto him, insomuch as Polemas perceived well enough that she loved him. But see
how love had ordained it: After three or four months continuance, in his most
violent prosecution: of his courtship, and when he had attained to as much
assurance, as almost he could desire, his affection began to slack, and lose
its violence, and by degrees grew so faint and bold, as it was quite dead.

The Nymph did not take any notice, that she was single in this affection; the
truth is, Galathea was partly the cause; for having a design upon Polemas, she
did use such artifice, and was so indulgent toward him as it may be said, she
did insensibly steal him: for when Leonida was shurp with him, Galathea was
sweet; when the one did fly his company, the other carrassed him; and all this
so long together, and so openly, that Polemas began to cast his eyes upon
Galathea, and a little after, his heart followed; for, he seeing himself
favored by the greater, and slighted by the inferior, he began to embrace
the smiling fortune. But Oh! wise Adamas, see how it pleases Love to play with
hearts. At this time, Agis, at the motion of Clidaman, became a Servant unto
your Niece, not so much, as you know, by election, as by instigation. At the
first, this new Cavalier did apply himself in all becoming courtship unto his
new Mistress, and she was still wholly devoted unto Polemas: Agis, who like a
Miser, that has still his eye upon his treasure, did take notice of it, and
complained unto his Mistress, but her faint and hollow answers, in lieu of
extinguishing his jealousy, did by little and little stifle his love: for,
considering what loose hold he had of her soul, he resolved to let it go, and
be gone himself. The best receipt (as I have heard say) for the cure of a
Lover. For, as Love has its beginning from the eyes, so its decay must needs
be, from not seeing them; which cannot be but in absence, where oblivion
swallows up all memory of the party loved: And so it did in Agis, he was no
sooner gone but all love vanished out of his soul, and entertained disdain in
lieu of it, so as Leonida, in striving to get Polemas, lost him, who perhaps
would have been entirely hers. But the rallerie of Love rested not here,
Polemas must have his share as well as the rest; for just about this time, the
affection of Lindamor began to break out; and, as Leonida had lost Agis for
Polemas, and polemas Leonida for Galathea; so Galathea cast off Polemas for
Lindamor. It is a task too hard to relate all their particular follies: but so
it was, that Polemas seeing himself paid in the same coin that he paid your
Niece, would not for all that, be out of either hope or love; but on the
contrary, did use all inventions to ingratiate himself, but all to this very
hour in vain; But yet, this satisfaction he found, that he, who was the cause
of his misery, did not enjoy that happiness he aimed at: For, whether it was
by reason of his stratagems, or the will of the gods, I know not, but Lindamor
is out of favor as well as he: And it seems, Love could never find any rest
in the breast of Galathea, the memory of one was no sooner out, but another was
presently in; and now, at this very time, her thoughts are all upon a
Shepherd, whose qualities as a Shepherd may indeed merit much, but never to
be Galathea's Servant; and yet she is so extremely passionate and tender of
him, that if his-sicknesse should continue, I know not what would become of
her; for I never saw one so careful, nor so troubled, as she has been, ever
since he was ill. But this is not all, most wise Adamas; Your Niece is also so
taken with Celadon, as I know not whether Galathea or she be more, and hereupon
great jealousy is grown betwixt them: and though I qualify the matter as well
as I can, yet so it is, that I do despair of it for the future: And therefore I
thank the gods that you are come; for really without you; I know not how to
carry my self betwixt them. Excuse me in speaking thus freely unto you, since
it is upon a business that concerns you; the affection I do bear unto you,
constraines me to it.

Thus did Silvia end her discourse, with abundance of demonstration of her
hatred, against this kind of life, for which Adamas did much esteem her. And
to begin the cure of this Shepherd, and these Nymphs (for the last of these
was the greater difficulty) Adamas asked her advice. For my part, said she, I
would first take away the cause, which is this Shepherd, and the effects may
of themselves follow; but this must be done with much artifice, else Galathea
will never let him go. It Is very true, answered the Druide; but in the mean
time, until that can be handsomely contrived, care must be taken, that he do
not fall in love with them; for there is such a sympathy between Youth and
Beauty, that if they should conjoyne affections once, all separations will be
in vain. Oh Adamas! said Silvia, did you but know Celadon as well as I do, this
would be the least of all your fears; for he is so rooted in the love of
Astrea, that all the beauty in the world except hers cannot shake him,
especially now he is sick, for his care may well be more of his cure than any
thing else. Fair Silvia, answered the Druide, you speak as one that is ignorant
in Love, and never knew the force of it; this little god can do such miracles,
that when there is least appearance of any effects, even then will he show his
power: Be not therefore so secure, for there is no kind of virtue whatsoever,
that is Armour-proof against Love. Chastity it self cannot do it, witness
Endymion. Away, away, said Silvia. Oh! wise Adamas, why do you terrify me with
so great a dysaster? Because, said he, I would have you arm your self against
the forces of this god, lest being too secure in your opinion of that which you
judge impossible, you should be surprised before you be prepared. I have heard
say, that Celadon is so handsome, so discreet, and so every way accomplished,
as he is furnished with all perfections which cause Love, and therefore there
is danger: Treasons of Love are so hard to be discovered, that not one of a
thousand can see them. Nay, nay, said Silvia, let me alone for that, and tell
me only what I should do in this business, that we have already discovered. I
do conceive, said the Druide, this cure must be wrought very much by the eye;
and when I have seen how the world goes, we shall order things to the best
advantage we can, and in the mean time, let us keep our design secret. Hereupon
Silvia left Adamas to his rest, and went to Galathea, who with Leonide was by
Celadon's bed side; for they hearing he was awake, they could neither of them
hold from him: He esteemed Leonida very much, her carrasses did oblige him to
it; but Silvia's humor pleased him much better. A litter after, they fell into
discourse of Adamas, much extolling his wisdom, prudence, and goodness: Upon
which, Celadon asked, whether it was not he who was son unto great Pelion, of
whom so many wonders are reported? The very same, said Galathea, and he is come
hither purposely to be your Physician. Oh Madam, answered the Shepherd, he
must have abundance of Art if he can cure my disease: but, I am of opinion,
that when he knows it, he will so despair of my recovery, as he will not
undertake the cure. Galathea thought, that he had spoke of the disease in his
body: But is it possible, said she, that you should find your self so ill? I
am confident, that if you would but help your self, you would be able to quit
your bed in two or three days. Perhaps not, Madam, said Leonida, for some are
so inwardly sick, as they themselves do not know of it, until it be at the
height. Their discourse had lasted longer, had not the Druide come, to see how
squares went; and he found him well enough disposed in body, for the Malady was
past the height, and in its Decline; but when he talked with him, he found the
disease to be most in the mind, though he did not believe it was for any of
these Nymphs: Yet like a prudent Physician, he would feel how the pulse of his
mind did beat: and therefore to begin the cure, he would try how he stood
affected first to Galathea; and in order to this, when all the Nymphs were
retired he shut the doors, and began thus: I see, Celadon, said he, that your
astonishment is not little, to find your self exalted so suddenly unto such a
height of fortune, as this you enjoy; for I am confident it was above your
hopes, since being born a Shepherd, and brought up in a Village, you are now
carrassed, cherished, and waited upon by Nymphs, and such as are accustomed to
command; and more then that, such as command the whole Country: You have great
reason to be thankful unto the gods for it, and pray, that it may continue.
Adamas spoke in this manner, purposely as an invitation, to make him speak the
truth of his affection, thinking by this means, and seeming to approve of it,
he would discover himself. Unto which the Shepherd answered with a deep sigh;
Father, said he, if this be such a high fortune, then certainly my mouth is out
of taste; for I did never in all my life relish more bitter Wormwood than this,
which you call good-fortune, and since I came into this condition wherein you
find me. Why, (said the Druide, the better to discover his subtlety) is it
possible you should be so insensible of your happiness, as not to see the
Grandeur unto which you are advanced? Alas, alas, said Celadon, all this does
but show me a Precipice and menace me with the greater fall. Are you afraid,
said Adamas that this good fortune will not last? I fear (said the Shepherd)
that it will last longer than I would have it. Why should Sheep languish and
die in a great water, where Fishes thrive and play? Because, answered the
Druide, it is against their Nature. And do you think, Father, (said the
Shepherd) that it is not against the nature of a Shepherd, to live amongst so
many great Nymphs? I was born a Shepherd, and so habituated to a Village-life;
as nothing but things of my own condition and quality can please me. But is it
possible, said the Druide, that Ambition, which is so natural unto men, cannot
invite you to quit your woods? Cannot beauty allure a young heart unto it, and
divert you from your first intentions? The ambition which every one ought to
have, answered the Shepherd, is, to do that well which is their duty to do,
and in that, to be the prime amongst those of their own rank; and that beauty
which becomes us to look upon, and ought to attract us, is that which we may
love, and not that which we ought to reverence, nor look upon, but with eyes of
respect only. Why do you imagine, said the Druide, that there is any such
Grandeur amongst men, which merit and virtue may not arive at? Because,
answered the Shepherd, I know, that all things ought to keep themselves within
the limits and bounds that nature has placed them: A Ruby, though never so
excellent in its kind, can never become a Diamond; and he that hopes to
elevate himself too high, or, to say better, to change his nature, and to make
himself more then he is, will but spend both his pains and his time in vain.
The Druide now amassed at the wise considerations of this Shepherd, and very
glad to see him so far from any thoughts of Galathea, began to deal with him in
this manner: Son, said he, I am extremely glad to find so much wisdom in you,
and do assure you, that as long as you continue in this mind, the heavens will
shoure all manner of felicities upon you. Many are so taken up with vanities,
and transported with them, that they run out of their wits, and that upon much
vainer hopes than these I propound unto you: And what becomes of them at last?
just nothing, unless after long and intolerable pains, a sad repentance, for
suffering themselves to be so long deluded. You have reason to thank the
heavens, that have endued you with this knowledge, before you come to
repentance; and you have great reason also to pray, that they will preserve you
in the same mind, in the same tranquillity, and sweetness of life, in which
you have hitherto lived. But since you do not aspire unto any Grandeur nor
Beauty, what is it then, Celadon, that will stay you here amongst these Nymphs?
Alas, answered the Shepherd, there is nothing can stay me by my good will;
it is only Galathea that keeps me here in the nature of a Prisoner, and the
truth is, I would have tried all ways to make an escape, had not my sickness
prevented me; and if no way would have hit, I should have been so unmannerly,
as to have gone away by force When I would speak unto Galathea about it, she
seems so extremely angry, as I must confess; I durst not mention it any more
unto her: But, in the mean time, my stay here has been so tedious unto me, that
I do accuse it to be the principal cause of my malady. And therefore, Father,
if ever you will compassionate the miserable condition of an extremely
afflicted person, I do conjure you by the great gods, whom you do most
reverence and adore, by your own good genius, by the memory of your worthy
Father, great Pelion, that you will take some pity upon my life, and by your
prudence, added unto my earnest desire, to help me out of this wearisome
Prison, for so I shall call it as long as I stay here. Adamas extremely glad to
hear how passionately he expressed himself, did embrace him, and after he had
kissed his cheek, said thus unto him: Yes, dear Son, be confident I will do as
you desire; and as soon as your disease will permit, I will use all possible
means to facilitate your getting out of this place; continue only in this
mind, and recover as soon as you can. Then after much other such discourse as
this, he left him, so much contented, that if Adamas would have suffered him,
he would have quitted his bed that very hour.

In the mean time, Leonida, who would not suffer Galathea to run on any longer
in that error, which Climanthes had infused into her, one night, when Silvia
and the little Merill were retired, she sat down by her beds-side, and after
some common discourse, she said thus unto her; Madam, I have met with some
news in my journey, news that concerns you, and I would not upon any terms
conceal it from you, because I shall thereby extremely undeceive you. What is
it, said the Nymph? It is, said Leonida, the most subtle piece of knavery that
ever Love invented, and I believe, you will not be sorry for my voyage, though
it were for nothing else, but the discovery of it. This Druide that resided
here, is the most wicked fellow, and the cunningest knave, that ever deluded
any one. Then did she relate all that she heard, from the mouth of Climanthes
and Polemas, and all the plot that was invented, only to dispossess Lindamor,
and ingratiate Polemas in his room. At the first, the Nymph was astonished;
afterward, the love of this Shepherd did so flatter her, that she was
persuaded, Leonida spoke this out of design, to divert her affection from this
Shepherd, and to enjoy him her self; so as she did not give any credit to
what she said; but on the contrary, turning it into laughter, said thus unto
her: Go, go, Leonida, go to bed, and to morrow perhaps you will be more subtle,
and know how to disguise your tricks better: Then she smiled, and turned to the
other side. This did so extremely offend Leonida, as she resolved, whatsoever
came of it, to set Celadon at liberty: In order to this design, she went the
same night unto her Uncle, unto whom she used this language; Father, said she,
you see Celadon is now recovered, why should he stay any longer here? I pray
consider what prejudice it may bring upon us all hereafter. I would gladly have
undeceived Galathea, and divert her from the persuasions of the impostor
Climantes; but she does so dote upon Celadon, as whosoever shall motion his
departure, is her declared enemy: but I do conceive, the surest way is to get
him gone, which we can never do without you; for her eye is so continually upon
me, as I cannot stir a foot, but she takes notice of it, and suspects me.
Adamas did a little wonder to hear his Niece say so, and had an opinion, that
she was afraid that he perceived the good will she had unto this Shepherd, and
therefore she would blind him: However, conceiving to cut up Love by the
roots, the best way would be, to get Celadon away; he told his Niece, that he
did very much desire the same, but knew not how. The way, said she, is the
easiest in the world: Get the habit of a Nymph, put it upon him, he is young,
and has not a beard; this way he may get out, unknown who helped him, nor can
Galathea tell whom to blame. Adamas found this invention to be good, and the
sooner to put it in execution, would presently go and get this habit made,
under color of going to fetch some Physic for Celadon, letting Galathea to
understand, that though he was out of a Feavour, yet he was not out of danger
to relaps, which he could easily prevent; and did communicate the design unto
Silvia, who did very well approve of it, so he would not stay too long before
his return. Celadon was no sooner awake, but Galathea and Leonida went into his
Chamber, under pretense of seeing how he did. Adamas perceiving how assiduously
indulgent these Nymphs were, did think delay to be very dangerous; and after
some ordinary questions concerning his disease, he turned toward Galathea, and
desired her to give him leave to enquire of some particulars, which he durst
not do before her. Galathea supposing it to be something that related to his
sickness, withdrew, and gave Adamas an opportunity to acquaint the Shepherd
with his design, and promised him to return within two or three days at the
furthest. Celadon conjured him unto it, by all possible entreaties, knowing,
that without him his imprisonment would last long. After he had assured him
that he would, he took Galathea aside and told her, that though the Shepherd
was at that present very well, yet there was great fears of a relaps, and
therefore it was requisite to prevent it in order to which, he would go and
provide such Medicines as were proper for it, and return again. The Nymph was
very glad of this; for, on the one side, she desired the Shepherds cure; and
on the other, the presence of Adamas began to be very troublesome unto her,
foreseeing, that she could not be so free with her friend Celadon in his
presence. Adamas knew her mind well enough; however, as soon as dinner was
done, he went his way, leaving the Nymphs in perplexity enough; for all three
had different designs, and each of them aiming at their several ends, of
necessity they must deceive one another: And this was the reason, that they
were commonly all three about his bed together, but especially Silvia,
purposely to keep them from talking with him in private; but for all her
vigilance, Leonida found a time to tell him the resolution of her and her
Uncle, and had this further talk with him: I hope, Celadon, (said she unto him)
that when you are at liberty, you will not be so ungrateful, as to forget this
good office, but will then consider of it, and of the affection which now I do
bear unto you; at least, you will remember the injuries I have received from
Galathea for your sake: And if Love which in any other would produce a
reciprocal love again, have not the same effects in you; yet I shall be
extremely glad to hear from your mouth, that I am not disagreeable unto you.
Celadon, who already knew of this growing affection, had a desire to stifle it
in the cradle; but fearing, lest if he should displease her, she should fall
off from that course which she had resolved upon with her Uncle, he would give
her such an answer, as should still keep her in the same mind; and therefore
said thus unto her: Fair Leonida, what a strange opinion would you have of me,
if forgetting Astrea, whom I have so long served* I should begin a new
affection unto you? I speak very freely to you, because I know, you are not
ignorant of my devotion to her. Oh Celadon, answered Leonida, you need not hide
it from me, for I know as much of your affairs as you your self does. Then,
Fair Nymph answered Celadon, since you do know it so well, how can you think I
should force my love from her, that has the sole power of my soul, my life, my
self, and all I have? I pray, look upon all the actions of my life, and then
tell me how I should give you satisfaction, and what I should do. Leonida could
not hide her fears at this discourse; yet, being wise, and considering how
against her duty it was to live in this manner, also that all would be in vain,
she resolved to become a Mistress of her own will; but this being a work of
greater difficulty, than to be done as soon as thought upon, she thought it
best to take a little time, and consult with her pillow upon it: In this
resolution, she spoke thus unto the Shepherd; Celadon, said she, I cannot now
take that counsel with my self which is necessary, I had need to have a little
time to muster up all the powers of my soul before I can resolve. Their
discourse had continued longer, had not Silvia interrupted, and said unto
Leonida, Do you not know Sister (said she) that Flurial is come? and has so
escaped the guards of the gates, and came to Galathea before any of us knew of
it? He gave her some Letters: I know not from whence they came, nor from whom,
but I am sure they made her change color two or three times. Leonida presently
imagined that it was from Lindamor, and therefore she left Silvia with Celadon,
and went to Galathea to be satisfied. Silvia then seeing her self alone with
him, she began to talk so kindly unto him, that if any there could have made
him in love, doubtless it had been she. And see how Love is pleased to thwart
our designs: The other two Nymphs who courted him with all possible artifice
to make him in love, could not do it; and this who never aimed at it, did come
nearer the mark than either of the rest: By which is to be observed, That Love
must be free, and will not be obliged by any, but it self and whom it pleases.

Whilst Celadon was in these thoughts, Silvia, who thought upon nothing but
occasions of discourse, because she was much pleased with his conversation, and
delighted to hear him speak, she said thus unto him; You cannot believe,
Shepherd, how much I am pleased with your company; and I swear, that if
Galathea be of my mind, we will have more of it than formerly we have; for I
find by you there is abundance of delight to be taken in your villages, and
in your honest freedom, since you are exempted from all ambition, and by
consquence from envy; and do live without any artifice and slander, which are
the four Pests of our Court-life. Wise Nymph, answered the Shepherd, all this
is most true, if we were out of the power of Love; but you must know, that the
very same effects which Ambition produces in Courts, Love does produce in the
Country; the envy of a Rival is no less than a Courtiers; and the Artifices of
Lovers and Shepherds are nothing inferior unto my others; and so detraction
and censuring of others is as rise amongst us as you. The truth is, we have
this advantage of you; for in lieu of two enemies which you have, which are
Love and Ambition, we have but one of them. And from hence it is that there are
some particular men amongst us which may be called happy; and none, I believe
amongst you Courtiers: For, such as do escape being in Love, do not escape
the allurements of Ambition; and such as do escape Ambition, have not such
frozen souls, as can resist the flames of so many Fair eyes; whereas we that
have but one enemy, may the more easily resist him, as Silvander has hitherto
done; a Shepherd truly full of excellent perfections, but more happy than
wise; for he having yet never met with any beauty that pleased, or could
attract him, he never holds familiarity with any Shepheardess, which is the
reason that he preserves his liberty; for my part I believe, that unless one do
love some where else, it is impossible to be long with an amiable beauty, and
not love her. Silvander answered, I am so little versed in this science, that I
submit unto what you say; yet I do believe it is something else than beauty
which causes Love, otherwise one Lady that is loved of one man should be loved
of all. There are (answered Celadon) several answers to this position. All
beauties are not looked upon with one and the same eye: Colors, some please
one eye, some another none all: So of Beauties, all eyes do not judge alike;
but Silvanders reason methinks is above all. If any ask him why he never was
in Love, he will answer, that he has not yet found his Loadstone; and when he
has found it, then he shall infallibly love as others do. What does he mean,
said Silvia, by his Loadstone? I know not, replied Celadon, whether I can well
inform you; but he is a man very well studied, and held amongst us for a good
Scholar: He says, that when great Jupiter first formed man, and all souls he
touched every one with a several piece of a Loadstone, and afterward put all
the pieces in a place by themselves: Likewise the souls of women, after he had
touched them, he put them in a Magazine by themselves: Afterward when he sent
the souls into bodies, he brought those of the women to the place where the
Loadstones were, which touched the souls of the men, and likewise the souls of
the men into the place where the loadstones were which touched the women, and
made every one to take one piece: If there were any theevish souls, they took
several pieces and hid them. Now when that man meets with that woman that has
that piece which touched his soul, it is impossible but he must love her; the
Loadstone she has, does attract his soul: And from hence proceeds the
several effects of Love: For those who are loved of many, are those theevish
souls who took many pieces of the Loadstone: If any do love one who loves not
him again, that was one who took her Loadstone, but she not his. Many questions
upon this were put unto him, unto which he answered very well: Amongst the
rest I put this, How comes it to pass (said I) that one Shepherd loves many
Shepheardesses? Thus, answered he, the piece of Loadstone which touched him
being amongst the rest, when Jupiter did mingle them all together, it broke;
and being in several pieces, all those who have them, do attract his soul; but
perhaps those who are taken with so many several Loves, will never love much,
because those little bits cannot have so much force as if it were a whole one.
Moreover, said he, from hence it comes to pass, that we do often see some
persons love others, who in our eyes are nothing amiable. Also from hence
proceeds those strange loves which sometimes fall out; As that a Gaul brought
up amongst many beauties, should fall in love with a barbarous stranger. Diana
asked him, what he could say for Timon the Athenian, who never loved any, nor
any loved him? His Loadstone (answered he) is either still in Jupiters
Magazine, or else she who took it, dyed in her cradle: So as when we do see
any one who does not love, we use to say, his Loadstone was forgotten. But,
said Silvia, what could he say unto this, that none did love Timon? That
sometimes (answered Celadon) Jupiter did count the pieces that remained, and
finding the number come short, because some theevish souls had taken more than
they should, he sent those souls into their bodies without stones; and hence it
comes to pass that many Shepherds and Shepheardesses, who are accomplished
with many excellent qualities, yet are disfavoured, and none loves them. But
Corilas put this question to him; One loves another a long time, How comes he
to quit her, and love another? Silvander answered unto this, That his
Loadstone, who changed, had been broken; and hers, whom he loved last, was a
greater piece than the other; as we see a piece of Steel between two
Loadstones, will go to that which has the greater force, and so the soul will
go to that party who has the most attractive power. Truly said Silvia, this
must needs be an admirable Shepherd, that is full of such fine conceptions;
But, I beseech you, tell me, Who is he? I shall hardly tell you that, Madam,
(said Celadon) for he cannot tell himself; yet by the judgment we can make of
him by his good qualities, he is from somegood place; for you must know that he
came into our village not long since with a very short pittance of estate, and
without any acquaintance only this he said, that he came from about the Lake
Lemane, where he had been brought up of a child, Since he has got acquaintance,
every one is ready to help him: Besides, being an excellent Herbalist, and
having great knowledge in the nature of Animals, his Flock so increases under
his hands, and he thrives so well, as at this hour he may be called Rich, at
least in content. And, fair Nymph, it is no great difficulty to attain unto so
much wealth; for Nature is contented with a little, and we who live according
to her Rules are Rich, if contented; and our contentment being easily obtained,
our Riches are quickly gotten. You are, said Silvia, much richer in happiness
than we are. But you spoke of Diana; I know her only by sight; Pray tell me,
who was her Mother? The Mother was Belinda, answered he, Wife unto the sage
Celion, who dyed young. And Diana, said Silvia, who is she, and what humor is
she of? She is, said Celadon, one of the fairest Shepheardesses about the River
Lignon, and let me but except Astrea, and I will say, she is the fairest: for,
besides those that are obvious unto the eye, she has so many beauties of mind,
as no more can be said or desired than is in her. Oftentimes we have been three
or four of us Shepherds together, looking and admiring her, and always
concluded, that there was no perfection which could be wished, but was to be
found in her. And though her genius be not very inclinable to love, yet she is
such a sincere lover of Virtue, as she does oblige more that way, than others
do by their most violent affections How comes it to pass said Silvia, Has she
not many servants? No, answered Celadon; she will not entertain any: The deceit
which the Father of Philidas did put upon her, does hinder her. And truly it
was the most notorious trick that ever I heard of. Were it not too much trouble
to you, said Silvia, I should be very glad to understand it from you, and also
to know who Celion and Belinda were. I fear, answered Celadon, that the story
will be so long as to weary you. No, no said the Nymph, we cannot better
employ the time, whilst Galathea is reading her Letters. Then, in obedience to
your command, answered he, I shall do it as briefly as possibly I can: And
thus he began.

The History of Celion and Belinda.
IT is most certain, fair Nymph, that Virtue, be it never so naked, is yet most
lovely in it self; and has so many attracting Adamants in it, that as soon as
any soul is touched with it, it must needs love and follow it. But when this
virtue meets with a fair body, it is not only lovely, but admirable; all eyes
and spirits are ravished at the luster of such a glorious vision. And this will
be apparently seen by the discourse I intend to make you of Belinda. Be
pleased to know, that not far off hence, about the River Lignon, there was a
very excellently well quallified Shepherd, called Philemon, who after a long
Marriage had a Daughter whom he named Belinda, and who being grown up to ripe
years, appeared in beauty both of body and mind, admirable. Not far off her
house inhabited another Shepherd, called Leon: As neighborhood had contracted
a firm league of Amity betwixe these two houses, so Fortuns would have some
equality also between them, and bestowed one Daughter upon Leon, whose youth
promised much beauty for the future, her name was Amaranthe: The amity of the
Fathers begat a frequency of Society between the Daughters. They were from
their cradles brought up together; and since, did always keep their Flocks
together also: As they grew in stature, so in beauty: Many young Shepherds
courted their amities, but all their services and fair professions of affection
could obtain no more from them, but a civil and courteous reception. It happened
that Celion a young Shepherd about these parts, having a Sheep that strayed,
he came to look for it in Belinda's Flock, where she her self was: She restored
the Sheep with so much kindness, as the finding of this strayed Sheep, proved
the losing of himself; and from that time he began to be sensible, that fair
eyes have power to offend; for before he was so ignorant, that no such thought
could ever enterunto his soul: but, be his ignorance what it would, he so
carried the matter, as knowing his disease, he made it known unto that
Physician, from whom only he could expect a cure. Belinde, by his actions knew
his disease almost as soon as himself, for at the first, he could not tell her
his mind; but his affection growing with his age, it came to such a Grandeur,
as he did resent it in good earnest, and was constrained to change his childish
Pasti^^es, into a very curious Courtship, Belinde, on the other side, though
she was c^urted by several other Suitors yet she entertained Celion's
affection better han any of the rest; but yet, no otherwise, then a Sister to a
Brother, which she did plainly make appear unto him one day when he thought to
have declared his mind unto her: She kept her flock by the River side and was
c^nt^mplating her own beauty in the water The Shepherd took this opportunity
and holding his hand before her eyes, in an amorous manner, he said thus unto
her: Take heed fair Shepherdess, l^ok not in the water, lest you should incur
the same danger, that others have done by the like action. Why do you say so,
said Belinde who did not understand him? Oh fair Shepherdess, said Celion,
you see more beauty in this River, than ever Na (...) did in the Fountain. At
these words, Belinde blushed, which did the more advantage her beauty; yet she
answered him: How long, Celion, have you wished m^ so well? I have wish^d you
well very long, said the Shepherd, and believe it, this good will is confined
unto no other time then the end of my life. Then the Shepherdess, bowing
toward him, told him that she never made any question of his affection, but
ever received it with as much benevolence, as she offered her own unto him. To
which Celion presently answered: I do kiss this fair hand by way of thanks,
for so great a favor, and by way of promise of that faithful service which
Celion vows unto you, as long as he lives. Belinde perceived by the zealous
utterance of his words, and the kiss which he passionately imprinted upon her
hand, that he meant of another kind of affection then she intended and
therefore would not let him go on in his error: Celion (said she unto him) you
are very far off that which you do fancy to your self you can find out no
readier way to banish me your company than this; if you do desire I should
continue the same affection to you, which I promised, continue you also within
the same compass, which your virtue did ever promise me; otherwise I will
break off all manner of familiarity with you, and protest never to love you: I
could (as the custom of those that are loved is) chide and brawl with you, but
I will not, because I would freely have you know that if you behave yourselfe
otherwise than becomes you, you can never have any hopes in my affection. She
added many other bitter expressions, which did so astonish Celion, that he knew
not what to answer; only he cast himself upon his knees at her feet, and
without any capitulation, but submission, asked pardon, and protested, that his
affection should proceed no further; but, as she did cause it, so she should
regulate it. If you do behave your self so, said Belinde, you will oblige me
to love you, otherwise, the contrary Fair Shepherdess, replied he, my
affection is now born, and such as it is it must live; for it cannot die but
with me, so as I cannot remedy it, but with time but I will promise to give it
such a check, as you shall command; and let me never be blessed with any favor
from you, if you find any action of my life that can displease you. To
conclude, she permitted him to love her upon these terms. And thus these two
Lovers lived long in such contentment, as they had good cause to thank their
Fates for it: Sometimes he would send Letters unto her, by his Brother Diamis
who presented them unto her, under a color of presenting her with some fruit.
She would often return him such satisfactory answers, as he had some reason to
be contented with And this affection was carried with so much prudence as few
perceived it; Amaranthe her self, though she was continually with them had
been ignorant of it, had she not accidentally found a Letter, which her
companion had lost: And see I beseech you the consequences of it, with this
Note, That it is very dangerous for any young soul to come near the fire of
Love. Till now, this Shepherdess never had the least resentment of any love,
no, nor so much as any mind of being loved; but, as soon as she saw this
Letter, whether out of envy to her companion, whom she thought no superior in
beauty; or because she was of that age which is most apt to take fire; or
whether this Letter contained such hot and servent expressions, as would thaugh
a piece of Ice: so it was, that she began to swell with desire, not only to
love, but to be loved again, by this Shepherd: And then she read over the
Letter again several times, which was thus penned.

Celion's Letter unto Belinde.
Fair Shepherdess,
IF your fair eyes, were as full of truth, as they are of motives to love, the
sweetness which at the first they do promise, would then make me adore them
with as much contentment, as they do now produce in me vain hopes; but they are
so far from making good their deluding promises, as they will not so much as
confess them; and are so far from curing my wounds, as they will not so much
as say they are the causers of them. The truth is, they can hardly deny them,
if they do but consider, that no other Beauty but theirs, could ever make them
so great. However, as if you intended to make your cruelty to equal your
beauty, you ordain that affection, which you inspired, may cruelly die in me.
Oh heavens! was there ever such a merciless Mother, as to murder her own
child. But I, that am more dear of any thing that comes from you, than of my
life, will never suffer such a piece of injustice; and therefore I am resolved,
to carry this affection along with me to my grave, hoping still, that heaven,
considering my patience, will once move you to be as pitiful unto me, as you
are now dear and hard-hearted.


Amaranthe read over this Letter several times, and ere she was aware, sucked
in the sweet poison of Love, as a weary person by degrees falls asleep; If her
imagination brought the face of this Shepherd before her eyes, Oh how full of
beauty and handsomnesse she fancyed him? His behavior and mind was agreeable,
his wit rare and every part so exquisite, as she thought her companion
infinitely happy in his love. Then would she read the Letter over again, and
when she came to the end of it, she flattered her desires (being blown by the
bellows of vain hopes) with an opinion, that Belinde did not yet love him, but
that she her self might perhaps easily get him; but this poor fond Lover never
took notice, that this was the first Letter he writ unto her, and that since
this, much alteration might be. Belinde's friendship sometimes gave her a
check; but love presently surmounted friendship. In conclusion, she writ this
Letter unto Celion.

Amaranthe's Letter unto Celion.
YOur Perfections may well excuse my error, and your Civility may as well
receive that affection which I do offer unto you. May I perish, if I love any
that is inferior unto you, but such is your merit, as I make it my glory to
love you, and my shame to stoop so low, as to love any other. If you do refuse
this offer, it will be for want of will or courage; and which of the two soever
it be, it will be more dishonorable to you than me, that you refused me.


She gave this Letter her self unto Celion, who not imagining what it should
be as soon as he came to a private place, he read it, but not with more wonder
than scorn; and had he not known her to be the dear friend of his Mistress, he
would not have daigned her an answer: yet, fearing left she should some way or
other prejudice him, he sent her this Letter by his Brother.

Celion's Answer unto Amaranthe.
I Cannot tell what is in me, that can move you to love me: However, I do think
it to be as great an honor, that such a Shepherdess should daigne to look
upon me, as I do think it a misfortune, that I cannot receive such an
happiness. Oh! that it would please my Destinies, to let me give my self unto
you, Fair Amaranthe; I should think my self the happiest man alive, if I could
live in your service; but since it is not in my power, I beseech you excuse me,
and blame neither my wit nor my courage for that, which is hindered by a
compulsive Necessity. It would be abundance of happiness and glory unto me,
to be in your favor, but it would be as much grief unto you, to find a
continual impediment in my affection; so as I am forced most humbly to beseech
you, even by your virtue, to temper your too hot passion, by a moderate
affection, which I shall with all my heart entertain, for there is no
impossibility in that; but whatsoever is in me, that is within the compass of
possibility, is wholly at your service.


This answer had been sufficient to have diverted her, if Love of its own
nature, were not like unto Gunpowder, which the more it is restrained, the
greater force it has: Her apprehensions did oppose against these difficulties,
some shadows of reason, as that Celion could not so soon cast Belinde off;
that it would argue too great a levity in him, if he should upon the very first
Summons deliver up the Fort. But time told her to her cost, that this was but a
mere shadow of reason; for ever since that day, this Shepherd did to disdain
her, that he shunned her company, and often chose rather to be without
Belinde', then have hers with it. Now perceiving her self to be imba^qued upon
a Sea so full of dangers as was impossible to avoid a Shipwreck, and finding
her self not able to brook so great a displeasure, she grew so sad, as she
shunned all company and places, where any pleasure was to be found; and at last
fell sick in good earnest: Her dear friend, Belinde, came presently to visit
her, and not dreaming of any thing, desired Celion to come with her; but the
sight of a happiness which one cannot have, augmenteth the desire of it the
more, and this visit did but more fester the disease of Amaranthe. Night being
come, all retired to their lodgings except Belinde, who was very much troubled
at her companions misery, though she did not know what it was; for when she
asked her any question, she was answered only by sighs at which Belinde was
astonished. And at last, a little offended at her, she said: I did not think,
Amaranthe, that you had loved Belinde so little, as to conceal any thing from
her; but I see I was deceived: And whereas hitherto I could say that I loved
you, now I can only say, that I love a dissembler. Amaranthe, whose mouth was
closed with very shame, when she saw Belinde alone with her, and being prompted
unto it by the violence of her affection, she resolved to make trial of the
most desperate remedies that might cure her disease. Laying shame aside
therefore, as well as she could she opened her mouth two or three times, to
declare the whole business but the word died as soon as it was on her lips,
all the could do, was to profer some interrupted words but at last, holding her
hands before her eyes, as not daring to look her in the face whom she spoke
unto: My dear Companion, (said she unto her for so they called one another) our
friendship will not permit me to conceal any thing from you, knowing very well,
that whatsoever is spoken unto you, will be ever kept as secret, as if locked
up in my own heart; but I beseech you excuse an extreme error, which; to
satisfy the Laws of friendship, I am forced to open unto you. You ask me
where my pain is, and from whence it proceeds? Know that it is Love, which
arises from the perfections of a certain Shepherd. But alas, being at this
word overcome with shame and sorrow, she turned her head to the other side, and
was silent, but turned her silence into a torrent of tears. Belinde wondered and
knew not what to think; but, to cheer her up, I could not believe (said she
unto her) that a passion so common unto every one, should so much trouble you.
To love is a thing most ordinary; but, to love the perfections of a Shepherd,
argues an act of judgment. I pray tell me, who this happy Shepherd is.
Amaranthe fetched a sigh from the very root of her heart, and said: Alas, alas,
this Shepherd loves another. But who is he, said Belinde? Since you will needs
have it, said Amaranthe, it is your Celion; I say, yours, my friend; for I know
he loves you, and disdaines me. Excuse my follies, I beseech you, and without
notice taken leave me alone to endure my own torment.

The wise Belinde hearing this, was so ashamed of her companions error, that
though she loved Celion as well as possible, yet she resolved, upon this
occasion to render a strange testimony of her friendship, and turning toward
Amaranthe, said thus unto her: Truly, Amaranthe, I am extremely troubled, to
see you thus transported with this affection. And though our Sex has not an
absolute authority over Love, yet thanks be to the gods seeing you in this
condition, I have, and will give you a clear testimony of my being your
faithful friend. I do love Celion, I will not deny it; yet it is as a Sister
may love a Brother: But I do love you also as my Sister, and will have him to
love you more then me, (for I know he will obey me). Rest therefore your self
contented, rely upon me, and when you are well recovered, you shall see how
much Belinde is yours.

After much other such discourse, night called upon Belinde to retire, leaving
Amaranthe so full of contentment, as, forgetting all sorrow, in a few days she
recovered her former beauty. In the mean time, Belinde was not a little
troubled, but seeking for an opportunity to acquaint Celion with her design,
at last, she met with one as fit as she could desire: By fortune, she found him
playing with his Ram, in that great Plain where Shepherds do commonly feed
their Flocks: this Animal was the leader of the flock, and was so well taught,
that he seemed as if he understood his Master when he spoke unto him; in which
the Shepherdess took so much delight, that she stayed longer there; at last,
she would try whether the Ram would obey her as well as him, and he seemed much
more obedient: What do you think, Brother, said she unto him, of the
acquaintance betwixt your Ram and me? I think, fair Shepherdess, (said he)
that he is yours, if you will be pleased to do me the honor to accept of him;
but it is no wonder he should be so obedient unto you, for he knows, that if
he had not, I should have disowned him for mine, having heard me often say and
sing, that, All I had was more yours than mine. It Is very well, said the
Shepherdess, I will try whether I have so much power over you, as you seem to
give me; and will not only command, but earnestly entreat a thing from you.
There is nothing, answered the Shepherd, which you may not more absolutely
command. Then Belinde, seeing this fit opportunity, began to open her mind
thus: Since that day we first began our friendship, Celion, I have ever thought
my self obliged to love and honor you, more than any person living and I
would not have you think I do intend to lessen this love, for it shall
accompany me to my grave; and yet perhaps you would make it diminish, did I not
advertise you before hand, that my life and my friendship shall lessen
together. These expressions made Celion admire, not knowing what she intended:
At last he told her, that he waited to know her pleasure in much joy and much
fear: Joy, because he could think upon no greater honor then her commands; and
Fear, because he knew not what she meant yet, death it self should be welcome,
if it came by her command. Then Belinde went on thus: You have ever, as well as
now, given me such full assurance of your obedience, that I cannot doubt of it;
and therefore I shall not only entreat, but conjure Celion, by all the amity he
bears unto Belinde, that he will obey her in this one thing: I will not impose
any impossibilities upon him, nor to lessen the love which he bears unto me,
but on the contrary, would have him rather to augment it. But before I go any
further, I pray you let me know, whether your affection was ever of any other
quality then it is at this time. Then Celion, looking more cheerfully than
before, answered, That heretofore he did love her with such affection and
passions, and with the same designs, that youth uses to produce in hearts,
most transported with Love, and in this, he would not except one that did
exceed him; but since, that her commands had such power over him, as he has
moderated his passion; and his friendship has so surmounted his love, as he
has had no thoughts of her, but such as would not offend a Sister. I protest,
Brother, replied she, for so I will hold you to be as long as I live; you could
never have obliged me more than by this. Know then what it is I do desire from
you, only this, that preserving still inviolably this affection which you do
now bear unto me, you will place your love upon one of the fairest
Shepheardesses about Lignon Perhaps you will think this a strange office from
Belinde, but your wonder will vanish, when I tell you, that she is one whom I
do most love; for it is Amaranthe: Her, I do command you to love, by all the
power that I have over you, for she has earnestly begged it of me. She was thus
hasty in her command, because she feared, that if she should have retarded it
any longer, she should not have had power to resist his supplications, which
she foresaw he would make. What do you think, fair Nymph (said Celadon to
Silvia) became of poor Celion? he looked as pale as death it self, and so much
out of himself, as he could not speak one single syllable: But at last, when
he had a little recovered the use of his languishing tongue, and in a Tone,
like one in the midst of Torment, he cried out: Oh cruel Nymph! have you
preserved my life hitherto, thus inhumanely to ravish it away? This command is
too full of cruelty, to be heard and live; and my love is too great, to let me
die without despair. Alas, if I must die, let me die faithful; and if there be
no other way to cure Amaranthe, but by my death, I will most freely sacrifice
my self unto her health, so you will but change the doom of your command, and
bid me die loving only you. Belinde was much startled at this, but not altered:
Celion, said she unto him, leave off all these vain expressions, you will give
me cause else not to believe what you told me, if you do not satisfy me in the
first command that I do impose upon you. Cruel Shepherdess (said the sad
Celion) must you needs command me impossibilities? for though I dare not love
you beyond your commanded limits; yet, command what you will, I cannot love any
other.

Pity did begin a little to melt her heart, and it was abundance of content
unto her, to see, that he whom she loved most, did most certainly love her: And
this perhaps had altered her resolution, had she not been resolutely fixed to
take away all thoughts from Amaranthe, that she was stung with the same
disease; therefore she constrained all her pity to retreat, which began
already to draw tears into her eyes; and to the end they should not be seen,
she went away, and at parting said unto him; Think well upon it, Celion, and be
certain, I will never see you again, unless you will effect my entreaty, and
your own promise. Whether Celion had a sad dejected soul seeing himself so far
from any consolation or resolution, let them, that ever loved, judge; He was
two or three days like a man lost, he ran into the Woods, and shunned all
manner of company: at last, an old Shepherd that was an intimate friend of his
Fathers, and one that was very wise also loved Celion very well, seeing him in
this condition, and perceiving, that nothing but effects of Love could thus
distract him, he was some comfort unto him by his counsel; For in his younger
days, he himself had been in the like straits; and began to mock Celion, for
being so much troubled for so poor a business, demonstrating unto him, that
the remedy was easy, and so very easy, as he was ashamed, that Celion, who
was reputed wife, and a man of courage, should not hit upon it I know, said he,
that to fulfill this command of Belinda's is at the first a matter of some
difficulty, and she will think your affection to be extreme, but that will
oblige her the more to love you; yet, since you have made such professions of
obeying her, it will content her, if you do dissemble, and seem, as if you did
obey what she has commanded. This counsel sounded well in the ears of Celion,
and was accordingly executed. But before this, he had writ this Letter unto
Belinde.

Celion's Letter unto Belinde.
HAd I merited so ruff a Treatment as this which I have received from you, I
should sooner have dyed than endured it; but since it is for your contentment,
I shall entertain it with a little more willingness, then if in exchange you
had hidden me die: Since I have wholly dedicated my self unto you, it is but
reasonable you should have the whole disposure of me: But I beseech you
consider, that as long as this constraint lasts, so many days are navished
from my life; for I cannot call those days life, that are full of sorrow and
death: Shorten them therefore, Oh most severe Shepherdess, if there be but
one spark of pity remaining in you.


It was impossible that Bolinda should not resent these expressions, which she
knew proceeded from a most perfect affection; withal, it was impossible any
thing could divert her from her design She did advertise Amaranthe, that
Celion would love her, and that she would know it as soon as she was recovered:
Which advertisment did so hasten her recovery, as she did make it appear, that
to the cure of the body, the cure of the mind is not unprofitable. But Oh!
what a lamentable constraint did Celion live in, and how intolerable was his
torment? He grew so lean, and was so altered, as he was not knowable. But see
the extreme severity of this Shepherdess, she was not contented with what she
had done; but because she thought Amaranthe had some jealousy of their
affection, she was resolved to drive the Nail so to the head, that neither of
them should think, she jeasted The Shepherds address unto Amaranthe was
observed by every one, for it was openly declared; the Father also of this
Shepherd being acquainted with the commendable virtues of Leon, and knowing
his family to be honorable, he did not disapprove of this Match. Belinde her
self did propound the Marriage, and it was almost made up before Celion knew
of it but when he heard of it, he could not forbear speaking unto Belinde, and
was so plain with her, that she was half ashamed: but the Shepherd seeing
words would not do, he resolved upon another course, and a better way, which
was, to apply himself unto his Father: Sir, said he, I should be very sorry to
disobey you in anything, and more in this than any other thing. I see, Sir,
that you do like of this alliance with Amaranthe, and as becomes me* I have
made addresses to her, and I do know no Shepherdess more affectionate than
she: But, Sin, give me leave to tell you, that I do love her better for a
Mistress than a Wife; yet I do humbly beseech you, command me not to tell you
my reason. Upon this, the Father had some suspicion, that he knew of some ill
quality in the Shepherdess, and did heartily commend the prudence of his Son,
who he thought had such a command over his own affections. Thus this Match was
broken off, and the former passages being publicly known, many did ask the
question, from whence this coldness of the business should proceed: The
Father, he could not hold from speaking of it unto his familiar friends, and
they unto others, so as Amaranthe at the last came to hear of it, who at the
first was much grieved; but afterward seeing her own folly, in thinking to
make her self loved by force, she did by degrees fall off, resolving to
entertain the next motion of marriage that was offered. Thus were these Lovers
eased of an intolerable burden, but it was to be loadned with one much more
heavy.

Belinde was now at an age full fit for Marriage, and Philemon very desirous to
see her well bestowed; he would have been very glad to entertain Celion; but
Belinde, hating marriage as much as death, had charged him not to speak unto
her; yet promising him, that whenever she saw her self forced to marry, she
would acquaint him, to the end, that then he might put in for a share of her,
and demand her in Marriage: And this was the reason, that Philemon perceiving
the coldness of Celion, he would not offer her unto him. In the mean time,
Ergastes the prime Shepherd of all the Country, and one who was generally
esteemed for his many virtues, did make an overture of Marriage with her; and
because he would not have the business talked of, until he was sure of
speeding, he, who did treat about the matter, did carry it so closely, that a
promise was made of the Marriage as soon as asked; for Philemon making himself
sure of his Daughters obedience, did first pass his word, and then acquainted
her. At the first, she could not resolve what to do because he was a man whom
she had never seen: However, this lofty spirit, that never would sink under the
burden of any misery, did presently rouse up it self, and did not seem the
least discontented at it for her own sake, which was more than she could do for
Celion; and now her error of obstinate hatred against marriage, must be washed
away with tears. So it was, that to be as good as her promise, she acquainted
poor Celion, that Philemon intended to marry her. As soon as Celion had this so
much desired permission, he did so solicit his Father, that the very same day
he made the motion unto Philemon; but it was too late, for which Belinde's
Father was very sorry for he loved Celion much better then Ergastes. Oh
heavens! what grief, when he heard the doom of his misfortune; he went
immediately out of the house, and never rested till he found Belinde. At his
first accost, he could not speak, but his looks did sufficiently tell what was
Philemon's answer. Though she stood in as great need of some good counsel as
he, and strength to support this blow: yet she would show her self so stout,
as not to stoop to any dysaster: but she would not show her self so
insensible, as not to show how she resented the Shepherds misery, but made it
appear unto him, that it did displease her: Whereupon she asked him, how her
Father relished the motion? The Shepherd related the very same answer which
Philemon gave, adding so many sighs and sad lamentations, that she had been a
very Rock, had she not been moved at them; yet she did interrupt him,
surmounting her self with as much virtue as possible, and told him, that
lamentations were only for poor weak spirits, and did not become persons of
courage; and therefore he did both himself and her wrong, if he used any such
expressions. Celion, (said she) where is that brave resolution, which you said,
you had armed your self withal, against all accidents whatsoever, except at
the change of my affections can any thing else make you stagger? Consider, that
words do no good at all, only make those that hear them, think worse both of
you and me? For heavens sake, do not stain my honor with that pusillanimity,
which hitherto I have with so much pain avoided; and since there is no better
remedy be patient as I am: perhaps the heavens will hereafter contrive things
better to our contentment, then we at this time ought to desire* For my part, I
will avoid the misfortune as much as I can possibly; and if there be no better
remedy, we will resolutely fly from it, and leave one another. These last words
made him almost desperate, imagining, that her great courage proceeded from the
faintness of her affection. Could I as easily resolve upon this accident as
you, (answered the Shepherd) I should think my self unworthy of your Love;
for a hollow faint affection deserves not such a happiness. For a reward of
all my services you bid me resolve to lose you and does implicitly bid me not
despair, if I see you, Another's. Ah Belinde! with what face can you look upon
your new friend? with what kind of heart can you love? and how can you ever
carrasse him, since you have promised a thousand times never to love any but
me, since your heart has so often sworn never to be any but mine? Well, you do
command me to leave you, and to obey you, I will do so; for the last minute of
my life, shall be the first of my disobedience. I pray the heavens, you may be
as happy in your new choice, as I shall be miserable. Live and enjoy all
contentment with Ergastes; and may you enjoy as much good fortune together, as
I have will to do you service; may this new affection swell with all delights,
and last as long as life, whilst I am sure my most faithful affection will be
smoothered with extreme griefs. Belinde did let Celion speak so long together
because she feared, that if she spoke, her tears would do the office of words,
and that would argue too little power over her self. Oh proud beauty, that had
rather be censured for want of love than resolution? But at last, finding her
self confident enough* she said thus unto him: Celion, you think that all this
is an argument of your affection* but I think the contrary; for how can you
love me, and have such an ill opinion of me? If you took this opinion up since
this last accident, it is to be believed, that that affection is not very great
which can so suddenly change: If you have not an ill opinion of me, how can you
possibly think, that once I did love you, and now do not? Consider how unlikely
it is, that Celion, whom I loved above all the world, and whose humors were
ever as agreeable to me, as my own, should be changed for Ergastes? whom I
never saw, and whom rather then I will marry, I will marry a Grave. If I be
forced, it is by the commands of a Father, whom neither in duty nor honor I
ought to disobey. But is it possible you should so soon forget all those vows
and protestations which I have made unto you, never to marry? How comes this
change to pass? For if you did love me without marrying me, why cannot you
love me still without marrying me? And when I have a Husband, who can forbid me
to love a Brother still, with as much affection, as is due unto a Brother?
Adieu, adieu, my Celion, live, and love me, who will love you to the last,
whatsoever becomes of Belinde: At this word she kissed him, which was a greater
favor than ever yet she did him, and left him so much out of himself, that he
could not utter one syllable. When he returned to himself, and considered that
love ought to bend unto duty, and that there was not one spark of hope left,
which could help him out of his griefs, like a man that ravelled in his
resolutions, he wandered up and down Woods and unfrequented places, where he did
nothing but lament his cruel dyfaster; do what all his friends could, they
could not persuade him from this errant life.

Thus he lived many days, in which he moved the very Rocks unto pity. And to
the end, she who was the cause of his misery, might a little resent it, he sent
her these Verses.

Celion, upon the Marriage of Belinde and Ergastes.
It Is hard, by Jove, that after so much love,
And service paid, you should another prove.
Must I, that served a Prenti hip of sorrow,
See you another joy and bliss to morrow?
And have no other wages for my pains,
But sad remembrance of another gains?
You once did love me well, it is very true:
But Oh, this fatal, Did, does grief renew.
What am I better for a Love that is past,
When you are in another's a mesembrac'd?
When you are once another half, not mine,
Away my soul with sorrow needs must pine.
Had he more merit or more love than I,
Then were I silenced in my misery.
But this is cruel Martyrdom, that he
In one short day should find felicity
Without desert and I denied am,
Who long had loved and merited the same.
Oh cruel memory of happiness that is past?
Out of my thoughts, since hope is quite defaced:
There is no reason you should harbor there,
Where nothing is but horror and despair.
Although he seemed by his actions to be quite out of any hope, yet there was a
little spark left, because the Contract of Marriage was not yet past; and he
knew, that some Matches have been broken off, which were believed to be as
current as this: But when he understood, that the Writings were Signed and
sealed on both sides; Oh! in what a dismal despair was he then; then did he
wring his hands together, scratch his head, tear his hair, beat his stomach;
and, in short, was so transported and besides himself, that he was in a hundred
minds to go and kill Ergastes; and when he was upon the very point of putting
it into execution this consideration amidst his fury did come into his mind,
that this perhaps would offend Belinde; unto whom, for all his madness, he
writ several Letters full of love and reproaches which she could hardly read
without tears; and, amongst the rest, he sent her this.

Celion's Letter unto Belinde, in his Transport.
WHat, inconstant Shepheardess! must my misery equal my affection? must I
still love you, when I see you clasped in the arms of another? Surely, the
gods do punish me for loving you too much, or rather indeed, for not loving you
enough, yet I do love you as much as ever any other in the world can: And yet,
for gods-sake tell me, why I should love you, since you do love a person whom I
do not? And then again? why should I not love you, since I did once love you so
well? Faith, me thinks I have no reason to love you, because you are
ungrateful, your soul is a very stone, and is insensible of any love. But, be
you what you will, you are still Belinde; And can Belinde be, and Celion not
love her? Should I love you then, or should I not love you? pray,
Shepherdess, be judge your self. As for me, my spirit is so much troubled,
that I cannot discern any thing, but that I am the most afflicted person in the
world.


At the lower end of this Letter, he writ these Verses.

I never can excuse
Such fond inconstancy,
As you, it seems, do use
In changing Amity.
To change for better, may
Be called Prudence good;
But for the worse, I say,
Is madness understood.
When Belinde received this Letter and Verses, she had a good mind to send him
one of hers; for hearing what a strange kind of life he lived, and what
language he used against her, she was much displeased at it, considering that
it gave occasion of discourse unto such, as have no ears nor tongues, but to
hear and talk of the business of others: Her Letter to him was this.

Belinde's Letter unto Celion.
IT is impossible I should any longer endure the injuries, which your strange
kind of life does both your self and me. I cannot say, but that you have
reason to complain against our fortune; but I must needs also say, that any
wise person cannot, without abundance of blame, play the fool: Though your
raptures and transport does let all the world know, that you are ready to die
for the love of me; yet, you do thereby force me to believe, that in reality
and truth you do not love me; for if you aid, you would never thus displease
me. Do you not know, that death it self cannot be more horror unto me, than
that opinion which you do raise in every one, of our Amity? Take heed
therefore, dear Brother, I entreat you, and by that name conjure you, to have a
care how you blemish my honor. If you cannot endure this dysaster, without
divulging it to the censorious World, then I conjure you to go away, that my
name may no more be brought into question. If you do satisfy me in this, then
you will make me believe, that it is a superfluity, and not defect, of Love,
which has made you err thus against me: And this will oblige Belinde to keep
in memory her dear Brother, whom, in spite of all these in supportable
injuries, she loves.


Although Celion was so transported, that he was hardly capable of any reason
that his friends could urge unto him; yet his affection did so open his eyes,
as he saw, that Belinde advised him well. So as resolving upon travel, he took
order for his departure, and the day before he was to go, he writ unto his
Shepherdess, intimating his intentions of obeying her, and desiring so much
favor only, as to take his leave of her before he went. The Shepherdess,
who did really love him though she did foresee that this would but augment his
sorrows, yet would not deny him his request, but appointed him to meet her the
next morning at the Fountain of Sicamours.

Day did no sooner dawn, but the disconsolate Shepherd did drive his Flock
toward this Fountain, where staying by the side of it, and fixing his eyes
upon the course of this stream, he waited for his Shepherdess, and after a
long silence, sighed out these Verses.

The comparison of a Fountain unto his Griefs.
THis restless River that does run
Wave after wave as it begun,
Is like my Sorrows, that do flow
Upon my soul woe after woe.
As like a Vagabond it wanders,
Murmuring it self into Meanders.
So I must glide away, and rove,
Murmuring against my Fate and Love.
Whilst this Shepherd was thus talking to himself, and so troubled at this
dysaster, as he talked loud enough to be heard a long way off, Belinde, who had
not forgot the time and place of appointment, as soon as ever she had rid her
self of her company, she came unto him, so troubled at the thought of losing
him, as she could not so hide her sorrows, but some appeared in her face.
Ergastes, who was that morning got up betimes to walk, by fortune spied her
afar off, and seeing she was by her self, as if she sought for some close
place, he had a mind to see whither she intended to go; and following her
at a distance, he saw she went toward the Fountain of Sicamours; then looking
a little further, he saw, though it was very early, a Flock feeding: Ergastes
not being ignorant of all passages betwixt his Shepherdess and Celion, had a
conceit that it was his Flock, and that Belinde was going unto him. Although
he did not suspect the Chastity of his Mistress; yet he was easily induced to
believe that she did not hate him, imagining that so large a Courtship had
never been, if it had been disagreeable unto her. And so, to satisfy his
curiosity, as soon as he saw her amongst the Trees, so as she could not
perceive him he crept nearer, and hid himself in a bush, from whence he could
see the Shepherdess sitting upon the grassie seats about the Fountain, and
Celion upon his knees before her. Oh how he was startled as soon as he saw
this! Yet because he would hear what they said, he crept close under the hedge
which was about the Fountain, and so heard every syllable what the
Shepherdess said. What, Celion, said she, is this your profession to please
me? Has this accident more force upon you, than the power which you have
given me, has? Where is your courage Celion, or indeed where is your
affection? Have you not out of your love to me surmounted greater difficulties
than this? Where is your affection? What is become of those resolves which you
once professed? Would you have me believe that you have less affection unto me
now, than at that time? Oh Shephead, rather rob me of my life, than of that
good will which you long since have promised unto me. How comes it to pass
that hitherto I have had as much power over you as I could desire? And why
should I have any less for the future? Ergastes heard also what Celion
answered. Is it possible, Belinde (said he) that you can make any question of
my affection, or the power you have over me? Can you be so forgetful of all
those testimonies which I have rendered you of it? And must I survive that good
opinion which you ought to have of me? Can you, Belinde, tax me in any of my
actions, or ever doubt of my obedience unto all your commands? I pray, before
you do entertain any such ill opinions of me, ask Amaranthe what she thinks:
Nay, ask Belinde her self, if ever she imposed any difficulty upon me, which
my affection has not surmounted? Even at this very time, when I see you are
giving your self unto another, I am ready to leave you in the arms of one more
happy than my self, by putting an end to my dysasterous love, and banishing my
self for ever from you. Alas, can you say, that this is any want of
affection or will to obey you, since I do resent it more dismally than death
it self? Oh Shepherdess, what strange misunderstandings are betwixt you and
me? For if you do doubt of my affection because I support this dysaster and
live, I will tell you that your extreme resoluteness is too certain an argument
of your small affection. But to what purpose should I retain any hopes of you,
since another (O fatal word) another must enjoy you. At this word, the poor
Shepherd, without any strength or thought leaned upon Belinde's knee, and
there swooned: Whether Belinde was touched to the heart at this, I leave you to
judge, fair Nymph, since she did love him as well as was possible to love, and
seemed only as if she did not resent this sad separation. When she saw him in
this swounding fit, and thought there was no witness but the Sicamours and
Fountain, she would not conceal from them what she had kept so secret from
her all companions: Alas (said she and held up her hands) Oh ye sovereign
powers, either deliver me from this misery or from my life; either remove this
cruel dysaster, or let this cruel dysaster remove me. Then casting her eyes
upon Celion, and thou, O too faithful Shepherd (said she) who had not been
so miserable if thou had not loved me, Oh that the heavens would either give
thee that contentment which thy affection deserves, or else take me out of
the world, since I am the only cause that thou endurest these miseries, which
thou do not deserve. Then pausing a while, she went on; O how hard a thing
it is to love well, and be wise both together? I know very well that my Father
has good reason to bestow me upon the prudent Shepherd Ergastes, because the
Alliance is convenient for him; but alas, what is that to me, as long as my
love and affection looks another way. I know Ergastes deserves very well, and
I could never hope for a more advantageous match than him; but how should I
give my self unto him, when as Love has disposed of me unto another? Reason
is on my Fathers side, but Love is on mine: And not a love newly begun, but a
love even from my cradle, by a long continuance has so insinuated it self into
my soul, that he is more my soul than my soul it self is. Oh heavens! Is it
possible to lose my soul and live? Tell me, Belinde, will thou not be utterly
undone, when it is gone? As she uttered these words, a river of tears ran from
her eyes, and fell upon the hands and cheeks of the Shepherd, who coming to
himself by little and little, caused the Shepheardess to be silent, and wipe
away her tears from her eyes lest he should take any notice of them: And
changing her countenance and voice, spoke thus unto him; Shepherd, I must
needs confess I am very sensible of your pain, and did I doubt of your
affection, I were the most ungreateful person in the world. But, alas, what
will my acknowledgements and sensibilitie avayl, since heaven has subjected
me unto the will of him who gave me my being? Would you wish me to requite
him with disobedience? But admit I should suffer my affection to transport me
beyond my duty, Will that, Celion, set us in any more tranquillity? Can it be
any contentment unto you if you do love me, to see me grieve and mourn away
all my days? Do you think my disobedience to my Father will not be a terror
to my conscience as long as I live? Yes, yes, and more unto me than any other,
who have ever disallowed it in others; and I cannot for very shame fall into
that sin my self. Let us arm our selves therefore, O Shepherd, with this
resolution, that as hitherto, our loves though extreme, could never make us
commit any crime against our duties, so for the future let us never suffer it
to force us unto it: Besides, where there is no remedy, complaints are but
unprofitable: My Father has bestowed me upon Ergastes, and this gift can
never be revoked but by Ergastes himself: And what small hopes is there in
that? But since I had disposed of my affection before my Father, I do promise
you, and vow before all the gods, especially before them of this place, that in
affection I will be yours unto my grave: And neither Father, nor Husband, nor
the Tyrant, Duty, shall ever be able to make me break my Vow. Heaven has given
me unto a Father, this Father has given my body unto a Husband, and my Duty
commands obedience unto my Father; but neither Heaven, nor Father, nor Husband
can hinder me from having a Brother, whom I will love, as I have promised you,
whatsoever becomes of me. Upon these words, foreseeing that Celion would break
out into complaints and tears, she did rise up, and kissing his cheeks as
she bade him Adieu, said thus unto him, I beseech the gods, Shepherd, give
you as much contentment in your voyage, as I shall want when you are gone.
Celion had neither power to answer, nor courage to follow her, but lifting up
his hands, and looking after her as long as he could see her, at last the trees
interposed: Then lifting up his watery eyes unto heaven, after many a deep and
sad sigh he turned the other way, not caring what became of either Flock, nor
any thing he had left in his Cabin. Ergastes, who lay hid all this while under
a thick bush, heard all their discourse, and was more satisfied with the virtue
of the fair and wise Belinde, and more admired the strength of her courage, and
excellency of her resolution, then is possible to express. After he had been a
long time in a ravishing contemplation of all these passages, and considering
upon the extreme affection that was between these two Lovers; he thought, that
it would be an act unworthy of himself, if he should be the cause of their
separation, and that heaven had brought him so opprotunely to this sad
farewell, purposely to let him see that error which unawares he was going to
commit. Being then resolved to labor their contentment, as much as possibly he
could, he began to follow Celion; but he was already so far gone, that he could
not overtake him; but thinking to find him in his Cabin, he took a little path
which conducted to it: but Celion was gone another way, and without speaking to
any of his kindred or friends, he wandered up and down like a vagabond many
days, without any design, unless to shun all men, and to gather such wild
fruits, as extreme hunger made him gather in the woods. Ergastes seeing his
design frustrated that way, after a day or two's search after Celion, he came
unto Belinde, hoping to understand from her which way he went, and as good
fortune was, he found her in the same place where she bad adieu unto Celion,
being alone by her self at the Fountainside, and thinking upon the last
accident in that place, which had drawn into her eyes abundance of tears even
from the very root of her heart. Ergastes, who saw her afar off, came nearer
and nearer as closely as he could, purposely to surprise her; and seeing tears
trickle from her eyes like two Fountains, this sight moved so much pity in
him, as he swore, not to sleep, until he had given a remedy to her griefs; and
to lose no time, stepping to her, he saluted her very kindly. She being-thus
surprised, with tears flowing from her eyes, to dissemble the matter, feigned,
as if she were washing her self at the Fountain, and putting her hand
presently into the water, she washed her face; so as if Ergastes had not seen
her tears before, he could hardly have known she had cried: That which made him
most admire her virtue was, that presently she put on a countenance of
laughter, and turning toward him in a very courteous manner, she said thus
unto him: I had thought, kind Shepherd to have been alone: but I see you are
come hither upon the same occasion as I did, I mean, to take the fresh air, and
wash your hands and eyes at this clear Fountain, and truly it is the best and
clearest Spring in all the Plain. Wise and fair Shepherdess, answered
Ergastes, and smiled, you have good reason to say, that the same occasion
brought us both hither, for it is very true; but in saying, that both of us
come hither with intention to wash our selves in this water, I must needs
contradict you, for it was neither of our designs. As for me, said the
Shepherdess, I hope you will give me leave to tell you, that none knows better
than my self with what intention I came. I do agree, said Ergastes, that you do
know it better than any other; but for all that, you cannot make me believe,
that the same occasion which you say brought you hither, was really and truly
the occasion. What then, said she, do you think it was? As she asked this
question, she put her hands before her face, seeming as if she rubbed her
forehead; but indeed, it was to hide that color, which she perceived came into
her face: Which Ergastes taking notice of, and being desirous to put her out of
that pain, in which he saw she was, did answer her thus: Fair and discreet
Shepherdess, never think to dissemble any longer with me, who knows as well
as you do the very secrets of your soul; and that you may the better believe
me, I will tell you, that you were now thinking upon the last farewell which
you gave unto Celion in this place. Who I? said she, in a great amazement. Yes,
you answered Ergastes, but never be sorry that I know it: for I do so much
esteem your virtue and merit, as I will do all I can to give you full
contentment. I know of all the services this Shepherd has done you, and with
how much honor he has courted you; I know with how much affection he has
continued it this many years and more then that, how you have affected him. The
knowledge of all these things makes me desire death, rather then be any cause
of your separation. Do not imagine, that any matter of jealousy makes me speak
thus, for I never had the least suspicion of your virtue; especially since with
these ears, I heard all the wise discourse you had with him. Neither think but
that I believe, I shall lose my best fortune in loving you; but the only reason
which reduces me to give you unto him, whose you ought to be, Oh wise Belinde,
is because I will never suffer my contentment to be with your eternal grief.
And, because I should think my self culpable both to god and man if I should
be a cause, why so pure and virtuous a Love should be broke betwixt you; I must
also tell you, that in thus doing, I deprive my self of the best alliance I
ever could have, and shall lose my own content, for the satisfaction of yours.
Me thinks I do in this, but what my duty commands me, and it will be no small
satisfaction unto me, to think, that if Belinde be contented, Ergastes is an
instrument of it. Only this I shall require, and in it you will oblige me, that
since I am a cause of your reunion, you will be pleased to take me in, as a
Third amongst you two; and that I may have the same share in your affection,
which you promised unto Celion, when you thought to have married Ergastes, so
as both of you may receive me as a Brother. I am not able, fair Nymph, (said
Celadon) to express the joy of this disconsolate Shepherdess; nor do I
think, that she her self did know what language to use, for the expression of
her thanks; but taking him by the hand, and sitting down by the Fountain side,
she told him all the whole story that had passed betwixt Celion and her self,
and after a million of thanks, she entreated him to go himself to Celion; for
the transport of this sad Shepherd was such, that he would not return with any
else that should go and seek him, because he would never believe this story, if
he heard it from any other. Ergastes, who would by all means finish the good
work he had begun, resolved to go the next morning with Diamis, Celion's
Brother, promising not to return, until he had found him, and brought him back.

Being thus gone, and taken the first way their feet light upon, they wandered
up and down in quest of Celion; and long had they looked in vain, if he
himself, transported with fury, had not returned into Forests, with a design
to kill Ergastes, and with the same sword, reach the heart of Belinde, not
being able to live, and let another enjoy her. In this rage he set forward; and
because he fed upon nothing but roots and herbs which he found in the high way,
he was grown so weak, that he could hardly walk; and had not his rage supported
him, he would have fallen down: needs therefore must he rest himself very often,
especially in the heat of the day. Being thus weak and weary, he sat down under
some shady Trees, close by a fountain; and after he had a while resented his
affliction, he fell asleep. Fortune, that was now weary with afflicting him had
a mind, it seems, to make him completely happy, and directed Ergastes and
Diamis just to the same place, and by chance Diamis walked first. As soon as he
saw his Brother he knew him, and looking behind him, told Ergastes, who being
much rejoiced at it, would needs go and embrace him but Diamis would not suffer
him, saying, I beseech you, Ergastes, do not acquaint my Brother too suddenly
with this news, lest it should cause his death by excessive joy; therefore I
conceive it better, to let me acquaint him with it by little and little: and
because perhaps he will not believe me, you may come after, and confirm him in
what I said. Ergastes thinking this advice to be good, he went behind some
Trees, where he could not be seen, and Diamis went forward It may be said, he
was inspired with some good spirit; for had Celion seen Ergastes first, perhaps
his desperate rage might have proved fatal to him. As soon as Diamis came up,
his Brother waked, and began to fall into his accustomed complaints; and, after
he had saluted him, he said thus: I thank the gods, Brother, that I have so
happily found you, to deliver a message which Belinde has sent unto you.
Belinde, (said he presently) What! can she have any memory of me, now she is in
the arms of Ergastes? Ergastes, said Diamis, has none of Belinde in his arms;
and I hope, if you have any resolution, never shall. Do you doubt, Brother,
said Celion, that my resolution will fail me upon such an occasion? I would
say, Prudence, replied Diamis. I fear no prudence will serve, answered Celion,
to alter that course which Destiny has resolved upon. Destiny, said Diamis, is
not so much your enemy as you do imagine, nor are your affairs upon such bad
terms as you do think them: for, Ergastes has refused Belinde. How, said
Celion, Ergastes refused Belinde? It is most certain, (said Diamis) and that
you may the more believe it, Ergastes himself will tell you as much. Celion
hearing this news, was so amazed, that he stood still, and could not answer of
a long time; but at last, recollecting himself, he said thus unto him: Surely,
Brother, you mock me. No, said Diamis, I do swear by the great Theatates,
Hesius, and Thamaris, and by all that is sacred unto us, that I tell you truth,
and that ere long you shall hear it from Ergastes himself. Then Celion lifting
up his hands and eyes unto heaven, Oh gods, said he, unto what happy end have
you reserved me? Then his Brother, to interrupt him, said thus: Never talk any
more, Brother, of misery and death, but of joy and contentment; and above all,
prepare your self to thank Ergastes, for the favor he has done you, for I
see him coming toward us. At this word, Celion rose up, and seeing him near,
he ran to embrace him, with as much good will, as a little before he intended
ill: But, when he heard the truth of the whole business, he fell upon his
knees before Ergastes, and would have kissed his feet. I shall omit all their
discourse, Fair Nymph (said Celadon), and only tell you, that Ergastes when he
was returned, gave Belinde unto him, and with the consent of him and her
father, he married her; only, desiring both Celion and Belinde to accept of him
as a third in their sincere affection, he devoted himself entirely unto them,
and would never marry.

This, fair and wise Nymph, said Celadon, is their Fortune, which was extremely
happy unto them all three, as long as the gods permitted them to live together;
for a little while after a Son was born unto them, whom they named Ergastes,
because of the affection which they bore unto the kind Ergastes, and to
preserve him longer in their memory: But it happened that in the cruel Plunder
and Ravage which some strangers committed in the Provinces of the Sequanois,
Viennois, and Seguntians, this little child was lost, and doubtless dyed for
want. A few years after they had a Daughter which was called Diana. But neither
Celion nor Ergastes, had much joy of this child, because they both dyed
presently after in one day. And this Diana, of whom I speak, is she who is
held amongst us for one of the fairest and wisest Shepheardesses in all
Forests.

Celadon was thus relating unto the Nymph the History of Celion and Belinde,
whilst Leonide and Galathea were discoursing upon the news which Flurial
brought; for as soon as the Nymph saw Leonide, she took her aside, and told
her, that she would not have Flurial see Celadon; for, said she, he is so much
a creature of Lindamors, as he will tell him all he sees: Keep him therefore
in discourse, till I have read my Letters, and when I have done, I will acquaint
you what news. Upon this, the Nymph went out of the chamber, and carried
Flurial with her: Then, after some other talk, Well Flurial, said she, what
news do thou bring unto thy Lady? Very good, answered he, and such as both
you and she will be glad to hear; for Clideman is well, and Lindamor has done
such wonders in a Battle, that Merovia and Childericke do esteem him as his
virtue deserves: But here is a young man with me that would speak with Silvia,
and is denied entrance by the Guards, he can relate all particulars better
than I; for he came from thence, and I but from my Aunts, where one of
Lindamors men brought these Letters, and stays for an answer. Do thou not
know, said Leonida, what his business is with Silvia? No, answered he, he would
never make me of his counsel. He must enter, said the Nymph; so going unto the
door, she remembered that she had seen him with Ligdamon, and supposing her
companion desired the business should be secret, she would not ask him any
questions, seeming as if she knew him not; only told him she would acquaint
Silvia. Afterward, drawing Flurial aside. D^st thou know, Flurial (said she
unto him) the misfortune that is fallen upon Lindamor? No, said he, we all
think him to be extremely happy; for he has got so much Glory, that Amasis at
his return cannot deny him Galathea. Oh Flurial said she, did thou know how
all things go here, thou would confess, that the voyage of our Friend is
to him a voyage of death, and I believe when he returns he will dye of grief Oh
my good God said Flurial, what is the matter? It is as I tell thee, Flurial,
said she, and there is no remedy against it unless it comes from thee. From
me, said he, if that will do, be confident there is nothing in the world which
I will not do. Then, said the Nymph, be sure thou be secret; I will tell
thee more anon, but now I must see what the poor absent man has writ unto me.
He sent them, said Flurial, by a youngman unto my Aunts, and she has sent me
hither with them, and here is one directed unto you. She opened it, and found
these words.

Lindamor's Letter unto Leonida.
ALthough I find that distance and absence has but little power upon my soul,
yet I am afraid it has too much upon yours, whom I adore. My Faith bids me
hope well, but my Fortune menaces me with the contrary. However, the assurance
that I have in my prudent Confident, makes me live in less fear: Remember
therefore, that you do not deceive the hopes I have in you, nor fail the
assurance which I have of your friendship.


Well, said the Nymph; Flurial, I would have thee go this night to the nearest
Lodging thou can find, and return to me in the morning betimes; for then I
will acquaint thee with a story that shall make thee wonder. Then she called
for the young man that would speak with Silvia, and carried him as far as
Galathea's Antichamber, where bidding him to stay, she entered, and told the
Nymph what she had done with Flurial. Here Leonide, said she, pray read this
Letter which Lindamor has written unto me: Which she did, and found these
words.

Lindamor's Letter unto Galathea.
NEither the length of my voyage, nor the horrors of War, no nor all the
beauties of Gaul, are able to make the memory of your most faithful servant,
for get you, Madam, one minute. So as not being able to deny my affection the
curiosity of knowing how my most adored Lady does; after I had kissed your feet
a thousand times, I do present unto you, all the good fortune which Arms have
favored me withal, and lay them at your feet, as a Divinity unto whom I owe
them. If you will but be pleased to accept of them, I shall think myself more
honored thereby, than by all that Renown which Fame can trumpet in my praise.


I care not a straw, said Galathea, neither for him nor his victories: He would
oblige me much more if he would forget me. For Gods sake, Madam, said Leonide,
do not say so; did you but know what a high esteem both Merovia and Childerick
have of him, I cannot think but you would set a higher value upon him than
upon this Shepherd: A Shepherd that does not love you, but even before your
face, sighs for a Shepherdess who has his heart. You will say, perhaps, that
all this I say is said out of some cunning Artifice. It is very true, answered
Galathea. Well Madam, answered she, you may think and say what you please, but
I do swear unto you by all that is sacred, that what I told you concerning the
Impostor Climanthes, and the crafty Polemas, is most true. Leonide (said
Galathea) you do but lose your time: I am fully resolved what to do, and
therefore talk no more. I shall do, Madam (said Leonide) as you command me, if
you will give me but leave to ask you one question, and it is this, What do you
intend to do with this Shepherd? I will have him love me, answered she. How, I
beseech you, do you think this love will end, said Leonide?. How eager you are,
said Galathea, to know future events? Let him but once love me, and we will
afterward see how it will end. Although we cannot know future events, said
Leonide, yet every one does propose unto themselves an end at which they aim. I
have no other end, said Galathea, but that of Love, nor aim at any thing else,
but that he should love me. That certainly is all that you can aim at, replied
Leonide; for there is no likelihood you should ever marry him; and if you
should not marry him, what then will become of your honor? Your honor, I say,
which you have ever been so tender of, will be extremely endangered. This new
affection cannot surely so blind you, but you must needs see what wrong you do
yourself, to have a man your Lover, whom you would not have your Husband. And
you, Leonide, said she you that make such a scruple of it, have you any desire
to marry him? I? Madam, answered she, I beseech you; do you think me so low in
my own thoughts, as to look upon such a silly fellow as he? But if ever there
were a man that was within the compass of causing me to love, the respect I
owed you, made me retreat if I did love him. When? said Galathea. Do you
remember Madam, answered Leonida, when you commanded me to make no more account
of Polemas? Oh, very well remembered to no purpose, said Galathea; But did you
never love Celadon? Madam, answered she, I do not love Celadon any otherwise
than as a Brother; and in that she said true; for since the Shepherd and she
had the last discourse, she resolved to change her love into friendship. Well
Leonide, said the Nymph, let us leave this discourse both of him and Lindamor,
for we have had too much of it. But what answer, said she, will you return to
Lindamor? Nothing, said she, but silence. Must he then whom he sent hither,
said she, return without any answer? Let him take his own course, said
Galathea. As for me, I am fully resolved, that neither for his sake, nor any
others, will I make myself miserable. Is it not necessary then said Leonide,
that Flurial comeback? No, said she. Leonide then told her that there was a
young man who desired to speak with Silvia, and that she thought it was from
Ligdamon, because he would deliver his Message unto none but Silvia herself.
Then tell him where she is, said the Nymph; we need but draw the Curtains of
Celadons Bed; for I do assure my self he will be glad to hear what Ligdamon
has writ, since I believe you have already acquainted him with their love.
It Is very true, said Leonide but Silvia is of such a haughty spirit, that I am
confident she will be much offended, if this Messenger should speak unto her
before Celadon. Let it surprise her, said Galathea, and go you before to bid
the Shepherd, that he speak not, and draw the Curtains, whilst I conduct the
messenger into the Chamber. Thus these Nymphs went out, and Galathea,
remembering she had seen this man with Ligdamon, asked, From whence he came, and
how his Master did; also, what news he brought from him? I come, Madam said
he, from Merovea's Army; and as for any thing from my Master, I have it in my
Commission to tell it only unto Silvia. You are very close it seems, said
Galathea; But do you think, that I will permit you to say any thing unto my
Nymphs, unknown to me? Madam, said he, I will deliver my message before you, if
you please, for I had it so in command especially before Leonida. Come then,
said the Nymph: And so they came into Celadon's Chamber, where Leonida had
before set all things in order, not acquainting Silvia with it, who, at first,
was astonished; but afterward, seeing Galathea with the young man, she
presently imagined, that it was to keep Celadon from being seen. Silvia's
surprise was very great, when she saw Egides, for so was the young man called,
whom she knew presently for though she was not downright in love with
Ligdamon, yet was she not exempted from much good will unto him; she did
imagine, that he brought some news from him, yet would not ask him. But
Galathea addressing herself to the man: If you will deliver your message unto
Silvia, said she, here you may, since she and Leonida are both here. Madam,
said Egides, addressing unto Silvia, Ligdamon my Master, and the most faithful
of all the Servants which your merits acquired, has commanded me to acquaint
you with the state of his fortune desiring nothing else from heaven in
recompense of his fidelity, but that your heart might be moved unto some sparks
of pity, though Love could never come near the Ice of it. What, said Galathea,
and interrupted him, you speak, as if he had made his Will: How does he? Madam,
said the man, addressing unto Galathea, I shall tell you, if you will please to
give me leave: Then addressing himself unto Silvia, he began thus.

The History of Ligdamon.
AFter Ligdamon had taken his leave of you, he departed with Lindamor, and
promised to himself, to obtain that by this voyage, which his services could
not do at home; hoping either so to signalize his nameby his acts of valor,
that he might become agreeable unto you; or else in dying, to make you grieve
for his loss. In this design, they came into the Army of Merovea, a Prince
adorned with all Perfections requisite in a Conqueror; and came so
opportunely, as the Battle was to be fought the seventh day after; so as all
the young Cavalrie had no other cares, but to burnish up their Arms, and get
their horses in good order. But it is not of them I am to speak, therefore
passing all them over in silence, only what relates unto Ligdamon, give me
therefore leave to tell you, that the assigned day of Battle being come, the
two Armies drew out of their Camps, and in sight of each other ranked
themselves into Battalia. Here a Squadron of Horse, there a Battalion of Foot;
here the Drums, there the Trumpets; on one side the neighing of Horses, on the
other side the voices of men, did make such a noise, as if B^llona had roared
in the field, and displayed her most horrid Banners. As for me, I never having
been before in the like service, I was so deasned with the noise, and dazzled
with the shining of Arms, that the truth is, I knew not where I was; yet my
resolution ever was, not to abandon my Master, though nothing was to be seen
but Engines of Death. But, all this was nothing, compared to that horrible
confusion, when all these Squadrons met, and when the word of Combat was given.

The Cavalrie and Infantry: Men, Arms, Horses, and Engines, made a most
affrighting thunder. After we had received several clouds of Arrows, I cannot
tell you, how I came to be with my Master in the midst of his enemies, where I
did nothing but admire the miracles of his sword. I swear, fair Nymph, one
wonder makes me forget another, so many did Ligdamon perform; and such was his
valor, that Merovea desired to know his name, having observed him above all
the rest of the Cavaliers. The first Squadron was already victorious, and ours
rallied to fall upon the second, when the Enemy with his whole Body marched
upon them, and so suddenly, that Merovea could not relieve them in time. And
certainly, if he had found a Captain less experienced than this, he had
effected his design: But this great Soldier, imagining the despair of his
Adversary, sent presently three fresh Squadrons, two, unto the two wings, and
the third in the arrear of the first; and so well, as they sustained a great
part of the first shock; yet we, who were advanced, were much oppressed with
numbers. At the same time, both Bodies of Infantry being joined, that of
Merovea had the better; and look, how much we gained ground upon the Horse, so
much the Infantry of the Enemy lost. So it was, that upon the enemies first
Charge, many of our men were trodden down, besides those whom Arrows had at the
first un-Horsed; amongst the rest, Clidaman was one, his Horse being killed
under him with an Arrow. Ligdamon, who ever had an eye upon him, as soon as he
saw him upon the ground, did ride up, and lay about him so courageously, that
he made a Wall of dead bodies about Clidaman, who, in the mean time, had
leisure to recover himself from under his Horse, and who doubtless, without
my Masters help and valor, had been trodden to pieces; for Ligdamon lighted
from his Horse, and set Clidaman on the back of him, whilst he himself was so
wounded and pressed with enemies, that he could not get upon that Horse which I
led. Now was our party forced to recoile, wanting the invincible Arm of my
Master; and we were in such a desperate condition, and we were amidst so many
enemies, as there was no hopes of any life. However, Ligdamon would never
render himself; and though he was wounded and weary, yet there was not an
enemy, seeing what deadly blows came from his Arm, that was so bold as to lay
hold of him: At the last, five or six came galloping up with all their fury,
and he having run his sword into the first Horse, it broke at the very bilt,
and the horse, being run through the heart, fell upon him: I ran to help him
up, but half a score more that was fallen upon him, hindered me. Thus both of
us half dead, were carried away; and the accident was the more dylasterous,
because almost at the very same time, our Party recovered what they had lost,
by the relief which Childerick brought from the Rear guard, and were Masters
of the Field, burning all the enemies Hutts, most part of them being taken or
killed. As for us, we were carried unto their principal City, called
Rhotomages, where my Master was no sooner arrived, but many came to visit him;
some said, they were his Cosens* others his friends, though he knew not one of
them: For my part, I knew neither what to say nor think of it, when I saw so
many strangers carrassing, and making so very much of him: yet much more was
our amazement, when a Lady, well attended, came to visit him, saying, he was
her Son, with so many demonstrations of affection, as he was almost out of
himself; and much more, when she said, Oh Lydias my Child, how great are both
my joys and fears, at the sight of you in this place? Alas! how am I afraid to
see you in this cruel Town, since your enemy Arontes, is dead of those wounds
which you gave him, and since you are condemned to death by Justice? For my
part, I know no other way but to ransom you presently, and hide you, till you
be able to get away. Ligdamon was extremely amazed at all this, and knew that
he was taken for some other; but he could not answer her, because at the very
same instant, he who took him, came into the Chamber, with two Officers of the
Town, to take a list of the names and qualities of the Prisoners; for many
being taken they intended to exchange them. The poor Lady was much affrighted,
thinking they came to seize upon him, and carry him to Prison; and hearing them
ask his name, she told them her self but my Master said, his name was
Ligdamon, a Segusian: She had an opinion, that he would dissemble his name; and
to remove all suspicion, went presently to her house, with a resolution to
ransom him before he was known. The truth was my Master did so resemble
Lydias, that every one did take him for the same. This Lydias was a young
Gallant of that Country, and being in love with a great Beauty, had fought with
Arontes, his Rival, and killed him, yet had time enough to escape the hands of
Justice; but, after the death of Arontes, was so prosecuted by his friends,
that Lydias, though absent, was condemned to death. Ligdamon was so wounded
that he could not think of these things. I foreseeing what danger might ensure,
still pressed the Mother to ransom him, which she did, yet not so secretly,
but the Enemies of Lydias were acquainted with it; so as the very same day that
this good Lady paid the ransom, and carried him to her house, the Officers of
Justice came and carried him to Prison, say what Ligdamon could. Thus being by
every one taken for Lydias, he was in very great danger: but much more the next
morning when he was examined upon such interrogatories, of which he was so
ignorant, that he knew not what to answer. However, the Judges persisted in
their former judgment, and confirmed it, giving him no longer term than the
healing of his wounds. The noise was presently all about the Town, that Lydias
was a Prisoner, and condemned to die, not only as a Murderer, but as a Rebel,
being taken in Arms for the Franks; and therefore, as the custom of that time
and place was, for such an offense, he was to be put into a Den of Lions;
nothing else was talked of through all the Town: At last, it came to my ears;
upon which I disguised my self, and with the help of that good Lady, who had
paid his ransom, I came to Paris, unto Merovea and Childerick, whom I
acquainted with the accident at which they were much astonished, thinking it
almost impossible, two persons should resemble so much as to find no
difference; but to prevent any danger, they presently sent two Heralds of
Arms, to acquaint the enemy with their error. But all this conduced to no
purpose, but confirmed them in their opinion, and rather hasted the execution
of the Sentence than otherwise. The wounds of Ligdamon were now healed, so as
they pronounced the Sentence, That he should die by Lions, which should be his
Executioners; yet, being of a noble Family, they would do him so much favor,
as to let him wear his Sword and Dagger, as Arms belonging to a Cavalier; with
which, if he had so much courage, he might defend himself, or at least,
generously revenge his death. At that time they returned unto Merovea, that
thus they always punished their own Countrymen, who were Traitors unto their
Country. Thus see poor Ligdamon in most pitiful danger; yet, his Courage that
never fainted, unless in matters of Love, seeing there was no other remedy,
resolved to defend himself as well as he could. Lydias being one of the best
Families of the Neustrians, almost all the City assembled to behold this
Spectacle. When he was ready to be put into this close horror, his only
request was, that he might fight with these Lions one after another. The people
hearing this just demand, did approve of it by their acclamations and clapping
of hands, in spite of the prosecutors. Now, see Ligdamon alone in a great
Court, and the Lions seeing their prey through some Bars, did roar so horridly,
as would have chilled the blood of any, but him; who taking notice which door
first opened, lest he should be surprised, he saw a huge hungry Lion come out,
who at the first, pawing with his foot upon the ground, and striking himself
with his tail, he began to stretch forth his paw, and open his claws, as if
he would show him what death he should die. Ligdamon seeing no safety but in
his own valor, as soon as ever he saw him begin to walk, he darted his Dagger
so dexterously to the Lions breast, as the point of it pierced his heart, and
the beast fell dead immediately. Great was the shout of the people! for every
one observing his courageous behavior, his valor and dexterity, they did wish
him well in their very hearts. But he, that knew the severity of the Judges
would not be thus satisfied, he ran presently to take his Dagger again, which
he had no sooner got into his hand, but another Lion, no less furious then the
first, came running furiously upon him, so as Ligdamon was like to be
surprised, but he stepped a little aside out of this raging Animal's full
carrier, and cut him over the eyes; upon which, the furious beast turned so
short upon him, that Ligdamon stepping back to fetch another blow, he fell; but
so, that in falling, the Lion coming over him, he ran him into the belly, and
so mortally, as he fell dead as soon as the first did. Whilst Ligdamon was thus
fighting for his life, a Lady, one of the fairest of all the Neustrians,
kneeled down before the Judges, beseeching them to stay Execution until she
had spoken unto them; her name was Amerina, the very same for whom Lydias had
killed Arontes, and who, though much ashamed, yet, spoke thus unto the Judges:
Sirs, Ingratitude is a sin as great as Treason, and I deserve a punishment as
great as his, did I not save his life, as he formerly ventured his to save my
honor. Therefore I do present my self before you, and claim the Privilege,
which is, That any condemned Person shall be delivered, if any Virgin do come
and ask him for her Husband: As Soon as I heard of your judgment, I came with as
much haste as I could, to demand him; and since I am now come yet in the nick
of time, I hope you will not deny me justice, and him to be my Husband. The
people hearing this, shouted for joy, and cried, Favor, Favor; and though the
enemies of Lydias did urge the contrary, yet it was concluded, that the
Privilege should be observed: But alas! Ligdamon came out of one danger, to
enter into another, and greater; for being brought before the Judges, they let
him understand the custom of the Country, which was such, That any man who was
condemned for any crime, should be released from execution of Justice, if any
Virgin came and demanded him for her husband: so as if he would marry Amerina,
he should be released to live with her. Ligdamon, who did not know her was
extremely put to it for an answer: Yet seeing no other remedy to avoid the
danger wherein he was, he promised that he would, hoping that time would find
out some expedient to get out of this Labyrinth. Amerina, who knew that Lydias
always loved her, was not a little amused to see him so faint and cold in the
business; yet thinking that the terror of the danger in which he was had made
him so, she pittyed him the more, and carried him into the house of Lydias
Mother, who procured this Marriage, knowing there was no other way to save her
Sons life, which caused her to press on this Marriage as soon as it was
possible, thinking that it would the more please her Son, whom she knew was
in love with Amerina. But, alas, all this was to hasten his death. Oh my dear
Master, When I think upon thy last words which you spoke unto me, I cannot
choose but wonder, how it is possible I should live. All things being ready for
the Marriage, and the time of Ceremony being come, he took me aside, and said
thus unto me; Oh Egides, my friend, Did thou ever see such a piece of Fortune
as this, that they would make me believe I am not my self? Sir, said I unto
unto him, methinks your fortune is not bad; Amerina is fair and rich, every
one says her Parents are of the best Families in all the Country, What can you
desire more? Oh Egides, said he, thou talkest merrily; but did thou know the
condition I am in, thou would pity me: I know thy fidelity, and therefore I
trust and conjure thee to carry this Letter unto the fair Silvia, and tell her
all thou have seen: And tell her further, that I did never love any but her,
nor will I ever love any other: Upon these words he gave me this Letter,
which I have carefully kept ever since that morning when he went unto the
Temple, and when he called me, making me swear again, that I would the next day
come in all haste unto you; Then came a Messenger to conduct him to the Nuptial
Chariot, in which Amerina already was, with one of her Uncles, whom she
honored as her Father. She fate in the middle betwixt Ligdamon and Caristes
(so was her Uncle called). Before the Chariot went all their own Family, and
after it followed their Kindred, Friends, and Allies. In this Triumph went they
unto the Temple, and when they came there, they were led up to the Altar of
Hymen, upon which five Torches were lighted; on the right side of Hymen was
placed Jupiter and Juno, on the left side Venus and Diana: As for Hymen, he was
crowned with Flowers and sweet Marjerome, held in his right hand a Torch, and
in his left, a Vail, of the same color of Amarine's. When they came first into
the Temple, the Mother of Lydias and Amarine lighted their Torches. Then the
chief Druide coming unto them, addressed his speech unto my Master, and asked
him this question: Lydias, will you have Amarine to be the Mother of your
Family? It was long before Ligdamon would speak; but at last, he was forced to
say, Yes. Then the Druide turning toward her: And you Amarina, Will you have
Lydias for the Father of your Family? And she answering, Yes, he then taking
their hands, and putting them together, he said: And I, in the steed of the
great gods, do give you one unto another; for ever after, eat your bread
together. And then taking the Barley-cake, my Master broke it, and, according
to the custom, they did eat of it together. Now there rested no more to be
done to complete the Ceremony, but to take the Wine and drink: Then he turned
toward me, and said: I do conjure you, Friend, as the best service you ever
did me, to give me the Cup: Which I did, and alas, too soon. As Soon as he had
it in his hand, he said in a loud voice: O ye great gods, who know that I am
not Lydias, do not revenge my death upon this fair Lady, whose error, in
taking me for some other, more happy than my self, has redeemed me from one
kind of death, to give me unto another: Upon this word, he drank up all that
was in the Cup; which was contrary to the Custom, for the Husband should have
drunk one half, and the Wife the other: Upon which, she smiled, and said unto
him: It seems, Lydias, you have forgot the Custom, for you should have left
me a part. God forbid, wise Amarina, said he, for it is poison, which I have
chosen to finish my life withal, rather then fail in my promise to you, and in
my affection which I owe unto the fair Silvia. Oh my god, said she is this
possible? And then thinking that he was Lydias, but that during his absence, he
had changed his mind, and not desiring to live without him, she ran with the
Cup in her hand to the Bottle, where the poisoned wine was, and before Ligdamon
was aware, had drunk it off; for the Apothecary, whom Ligdamon had prepared had
filled the Bottle full: Afterward returning to him, she said; You cruel man,
had rather have death then me, and I, rather then be without you. Oh Amerina,
said Ligdamon, I confess, that I had offended, if I had been him you took me
for: but, believe me, now I am upon my last breath, I am not Lydias, but
Ligdamon, and time will discover the error: However, I choose death, rather
then break my promise made unto the fair Silvia, unto whom I have consecrated
my life, since I am not able to satisfy both. Then he continued: Oh fairest
Silvia accept of this good will I now offer unto thee, and of all my actions,
let this last be best received, since it is imprinted with the noble character
of Fidelity. The Poison now began to work by degrees upon the spirits of these
two new-marryed persons, so as he could hardly breathe, when turning his head
toward me, he said, Go, go, my friend, go, and do thy business, relate what
thou have seen, and that death is more welcome unto me than life, which would
have stained that Fidelity, which I have vowed unto the fair Silvia. Silvia was
the last word he ever spoke, for as he uttered it, his Soul departed out of his
Body into the Elizian fields, where if ever any Lover was happy, it is he, in
expectation of seeing you there with him. Is it then certainly true, (said
Silvia) that Ligdamon is dead? Alas! too true, answered he. Oh ye gods! cried
out Silvia. All she was able to do, was, to lie down upon the bed, for her
heart quite failed her; where after she had been awhile, she called for
Leonida, to take Ligdamon's Letter, and to tell Egides, that she would have him
serve her. Thus Egides withdrew, with eyes swimming in tears. Now did Love
show his power; for this Nymph, who never much loved Ligdamon alive, now she
heard of his death, she expressed as much grief, as was possible for any
Lover. Upon this occasion, Galathea talking unto Celadon, she said, That
hereafter she would think it impossible, that a woman should never in her life
love any one; for, said she, this Nymph has been too cruel unto all those
that loved her, that some have dyed for very grief, others have been banished
out of her sight by despair; and this very man, whom she now laments for, she
did heretofore drive into such extremity, that but for Leonida, he had then
dyed also so as I durst have sworn, Love would have sooner harbored in the
most snowie part of the Alps, than in her heart; and yet you may see, unto what
she is reduced now. Do not think this to be Love, Madam, said Celadon, but
rather Pity; for, she had been the hardest piece of Marble that ever was, had
she not been extremely perplexed at this report. For my part I think Ligdamon
more happy, than if he were alive, since he loved this Nymph so extremely, and
she was so hard hearted unto him: For what greater happiness can be, then to
be at the end of misery, and to enter into felicity? How joyed would he be, to
see Silvia mourn for him, and set a value upon his affection? No, no, Madam,
Ligdamon is not to be mourned for so much, as Silvia; for you shall see, that
all her mind and fancy will run upon Ligdamon: The discourse, the garb, the
affection, the valor, and briefly, every action of this Lover, will, in
revenge of her cruelty, continually torment her mind, and will in revenge, be
the Executioner of Love's justice. This discourse was spoken so loud, and so
near Silvia, that she heard it all, and it did but increase her grief: so as
she went out of this Chamber into her own, where she could no longer restrain
her tears: for, shutting the door after her, and desiring Leonida to leave her,
she threw her self upon the bed, where, with watery eyes, and folded arms, she
called to mind all the former life of Ligdamon, how great his love was, how
patiently he endured all her rigor, with what discretion he served her, how
constant he was in his love, and in the end, said she, all this is now enclosed
in a little piece of earth. Then calling to mind her own demeanor, her
discourses, her farewells, her impatiencies, and a thousand more particulars,
she was forced to say, Oh fatal memory, let the ashes of my dear Ligdamon rest
in peace; if thou do torment me thus, I know he will not be contented with
it. At last, after she had been a while mute; Well, said she, it is resolved
upon, be my life long or short, as it shall please the Fates, I will never
cease loving my dear Ligdamon, nor forget his affection or virtues. Galathea in
the mean while opened Ligdamon's Letter, which was in Leonida's hands, and
found in it these words.

Ligdamon's Letter unto Silvia.
IF you are offended at my over-boldnesse in loving you, my death will revenge
your Quarrel: If you stood neutrall and indifferent, I am confident, this last
act of affection will have such an operation upon your soul, as will gain me
some more esteem; which if it do, I shall cherish my resemblance of Lydias
more, then my own birth; since by the one, I was but a trouble, and by the
other, acceptable unto you.


These are the great revenges of Love, said Celadon: And I do remember another,
though upon another subject, how a Shepherd writ this Epitaph upon a jealous
Husband,

An EPITAPH. Upon a Jealous Husband.
HEre, in this durty Dungeon, lies
One of god Cupid's enemies.
The wages of his crime was death,
Who troubled all, whilst he had breath.
This Tyrant ever made a Theft
Of Love, which ought to be a gift.
This was the man, who, Argos eyed,
More faults than ever was, espied.
And out of his depraved Mind,
Still looked for what he would not find.
But Love at last did stop his breath,
And in revenge did send him death.
Love injured, though he make no haste,
Will be revenged yet at last.
It is most true, answered Galathea, Love never suffers an offense committed
against him, to escape unpunished; and hence it is, we see so many strange
accidents in all human actions. And therefore Celadon, I wonder that you po^
not tremble for fear, and every moment expect an Arrow of revenge from that
god. Why should I fear, said the Shepherd, since it is I that am the offended
party? Ah Celadon, said the Nymph, were all things equally balanced, you would
find your offenses committed much greater, then those you have received. This
is the very height of misery, said Celadon, that a person afflicted should be
thought happy, and when his pain is palpable, yet not to be pitied. But I pray
tell me, Shepherd, said the Nymph, does not Ingratitude, of all crimes and
offenses that are accounted great, hold the first place? Doubtless it does,
answered the Shepherd. If it do, said Galathea, how can you clear your self,
since for all the love and affection I have showed unto you, I receive nothing
but a hollow faintness and disdain from you? This for all; considering what I
am, and considering what you are, I cannot conceive, how I have any ways
offended against Love, that he should punish me with so much rigor. Celadon
was extremely sorry for beginning this discourse; but since it was already on
foot, he resolved to clear himself, and therefore said thus unto her: Madam, I
know not how to give an answer unto your speeches, but by blushes; yet Love,
which makes you speak, constraines me to answer. That which you call
ingratitude in me, I must call Duty; and if you shall please to ask me my
reason, I shall give it. What reason can you give, said Galathea, unless that
you do love another, and that your faith is obliged to her? But let me tell
you, that the Law of Nature is before all others, and that Law commands us, to
seek and prefer our own good before another: And can you desire a greater good
than my affection? Whom have you in the Country like me, who can do as I can
for you? These are mere mockeries, Celadon, to insist so much upon these
follies of Fidelity and Constancy; terms invented only by old women and ugly
to keep such within their Pales, as their faces has set at liberty. They say,
all the Virtues are chained together; Constancy cannot be without Prudence: And
can it be any Prudence to let go a certain good, only to avoid the bare name
and title of Inconstant? Madam, (answered Celadon) Prudence never taught us to
thrive by any shameful means; nor did the Laws of Nature ever command us to
build, before we have a sure foundation. Is there any thing more dishonest and
shameful, than not to observe and be punctual in promises? Is there any thing
fuller of levity, than a Mind, that like a Be, flying from flower to flower,
is still in quest of new sweetness? If Fidelity be once lost, Madam, what sure
foundation can I have in your affection? Since you follow the Law which you
speak of, I shall remain no longer in this happiness, then you stay in a
place, where there is no Man, but my self.

The Nymph and the Shepherd discoursed thus, whilst Leonida went into her
Chamber, to dispatch a Letter unto Lindamor, which was, to invite him home with
all haste, otherwise to despair for ever: And the next morning, when Flurial
came again, after she had given him her Letter, she said thus unto him: Go
Flurial, let thy love to Lindamor be seen in thy haste; for delay may be no
less then death unto him. Go, or rather, fly; bid him return with all speed,
and in his return, go straight to the house of Adamas, whom I have gained to
him; there he shall find the most notable treachery in Love that ever was
invented; but if it be possible, let him come unknown. Thus Flurial departed,
so desirous to serve Lindamor, that he would not go unto his Aunts, because he
would lose no time. Thus three or four days passed on, during which time,
Celadon began to long for the return of the Druide, in hopes, that when he
came, he should then get out of this place; and to make the time seem less
tedious, he went sometimes into the Garden, and sometimes into the Woods; but
never without the company of one of the Nymphs, and often all three: Silvia's
humor pleased him best, as most sympathizing with his own, and therefore he
courted her as much as he could.

It happened one day, being all four together, that they passed by the Grotto of
Damon and Fortune; and because the entrance seemed to be very fair, and made
with much art, the Shepherd asked, what it was? To whom Gaelathea answered,
Will you see, Shepherd, one of the greatest proofs of Love's power, that ever
was? What is that, said the Shepherd? It is, said the Nymph, the Loves of
Mandrague and Damon; as for the Shepherdess Fortune, that is ordinary. Who is
that Mandrague, said the Shepherd? If one may know what the Worker is, by the
Work, said Galathea, you will find her to be one of the greatest Magicians in
all Gaul; for 'twas she, who by her enchantments, made this Grotto, and many
other Rarities that are within it. Then entering in, the Shepherd was ravished
with the curiosity of the work; the entrance was very high and spacious; on
both sides, in lie^ of Pillars, were great Statues, which with their shoulders,
supported the Arches of the Portall: The one represented Pan, the other
Syringes, which were most industriously carved into hair, veins, eyebrows,
and beard; also the horns of Pan were excellently wrought: The Arch without
was of Rustic work, and the Vault, both without and within, was adorned with
abundance of excellent Statues, which being hollow within, conveyed water into
several Fountains, and every one of them represented some effect of the
puissance of Love. In the midst of the Grotto was a Tomb, some twelve or
fourteen foot high; and all about it hung such pictures, as the sight of them
deceived the judgment: The space betwixt every piece was filled up with a
Demi-columne of black polished Marble, and at the top was a Cornish of white
Marble, unto which the several pictures were chained. After Celadon had
contemplated them in general, he was so full of curiosity, as he desired to
know more of the particulars, and therefore to give an occasion to the Nymph to
say something more upon every part, he commended the Invention and Art of the
worker. These are the spirits of Mandrague, (said the Nymph) who were left
here, to testify, that Love does not pardon either old or young, fair or foul;
and to relate unto those who come hither, the unfortunate Loves of Damon and
she, and of the Shepherdess Fortune. But, said Celadon, is this the Fountain
of Love's Verity? No, said the Nymph, but that is not far from hence: But would
I had so much ingenuitie, as to interpret these Pictures unto you, for the
story is very well worthy of your knowledge. As she was beginning to expound
them, she saw Adamas enter, who being returned, and not finding the Nymphs
within, imagined that they were gone to walk; and after he had hid the clothes
which he brought, he came after them. Galathea no sooner saw him, but she cried
out, Oh Father, you are come in excellent good time to help me out; and then
addressing unto Celadon, Here Is one, Shepherd, said she, that will satisfy
you in the story of these Pictures. Then after she had asked him how he did,
and after salutations on all parts, Adamas, in obedience to the Nymphs
commands, and to satisfy the Shepherds curiosity, going with them near the
Tomb he began thus.

The History of Damon and Fortune.
AS the Workman is pleased to make his work, and form it into what he
pleases, so likewise the great gods, by whose hands we are all formed, are
pleased to make us act such parts upon the Theater of this world, as they have
put upon us: But amongst all, there was none that had such fantastical
imaginations as Love; for he makes the old grow young, and the young old, and
all in the twinkling of an eye. This History, which is fuller of truth than I
wish it were, will make this so evident, that it cannot be denied, as by the
sequel of my discourse you will find.

The first Picture.
BEhold there a Shepherd, sitting upon the ground, with his back against an
Oak, (...) legs acrosse, and playing upon Bag-Pipe. That is the Shepherd
Damon, whose perfection of face gives him the title of Fair. This young
Shepherd fed his Flock upon the banks of Lignon, descended from one of the
best Families about Mount Verdam, and nor far off in kindred from the old
Cleontine, and Leonida's Mother, so consequently my Allie. Observe how his
face, besides the beauty of it, does lively represent a person, whose cares are
only to content himself; for you cannot find the least cloudy imagination in
his brow. Then on the contrary, remove your eye, and observe those
Shepheardesses that are about him, then you will judge by their composure of
face, that they are not without much pains: For, as Damon's spirit is quiet
and free, so these Shepheardesses have hearts extremely passionate toward him;
and yet you see, he will not daigne to bestow a look upon them: And therefore
there is placed by him on the right hand, that little boy, with a Bow, and a
Torch in his hand, his eyes bound up, his back winged, and upon his shoulders a
Quiver. This is Love, who being much offended at the disdain of this Shepherd
to these Shepheardesses does swear that he will be revenged of him. And for the
imbellishment of the piece, observe well the shadows and proportions of every
part; observe how the arm of the Shepherd, does as it were, stir and blow his
Bag-pipe which is betwixt his arm and body, and how the Pipes end at which he
blows, has a little lost his color; the reason of it is, because the mouth
of the Shepherd has worn it away. Look upon the left hand, and see how his
Flocks do feed; see how some lie down in the shade, and those two Ra^^^s
running against each other with all their force. The duty of the Dogs is not to
be passed by unobserved, how like Sentinels, they are placed upon hills, and
ready to run upon any necessity. Do but look well upon the curious industry of
the Painter, for whereas Dogs that are dull, and sleep without care use to lie
round, and hide their heads often under their paws; these here do lie after
another manner, to show, they do not sleep, but rest themselves only; for they
do lie upon their four feet, with their nose upon them, and eyes always open.
But let us look upon the other Picture.

The second Picture.
THis is quite contrary to the other; for that is all Disdain this Love: That
shows only pride and scorn, in this appears nothing but humility and
sweetness; And this is the cause of it: Look well upon yonder Shepherdess,
which sits under that shade, how fair she is, and handsomely dressed. Look how
the gentle wind whistles her hair backward, and makes it spread upon her
shoulders: It is the fair Shepherdess Fortune, in whose favor Love promises
revenge upon Damon, who is that Shepherd which is next her, leaning upon his
Sheephook.

Observe those little Cupids which are all so busy about them, and each of
them attentive upon what he does; see how one of them is taking measure of the
Shepheardesse's eyebrow, and gives it unto another, who having stolen some of
that Beautie's hair is making a Bow string of it for his Companion; see how he
sits upon the ground and twines it betwixt his finger and his thumb; and that
he may the better twine it a third fetches him a handful of a Lovers tears, to
wet his fingers. See how another is bending his Bow, setting the one end of it
to the ground, the other to his breast, and leanes upon it to make it bend.
Cupid, who is a little higher, having in his left hand a Bow, and right hand
behind his ear, as if he were ready to let an Arrow fly; see how he draws
back his arm, lifts up his elbow, his three first fingers open, and the rest
close, and so levells at a mark, which he hits: for the poor Shepherd, whom he
shot at, was so wounded, that nothing but death can cure him. But look on the
other side, and see how Anteros, with Violets and Roses, dresses the arm and
head of the fair Shepherdess Fortune, and tying a Chain about the neck of the
Shepherdess, gives the end of it unto the Shepherd. This represents unto us,
that the merits, love, and services of this Shepherd, which are denoted by
those flowers, do oblige Fortune unto a reciprocal love of him. And if you
think it strange, that Anteros here should be represented bigger than Cupid, it
is to let you understand, that Love which proceeds from Love, is always
greater then that from which it does proceed. But lee us pass to the third.

The third Picture.
LOok here upon your pleasant River of Lignon, see how it has a double source,
the one coming from the Mountains of Cervieres, and the other from the
Chilmasell hills, and meet a little below the Merchants Town of Boinge. How
well the Channel is drawn? how the River runs crooked, and the banks full of
Offers? Do you not know the Wood there, which joins to the great Plain, where
the Shepherds use to feed their Flocks? If that tuft of Trees on the left
hand, where the River cringles it self like unto a Serpent, and makes a half
Moon in another, seem strange unto your eye, and is not so at this hour, you
must know, that the Picture notwithstanding is true; for since it was drawn,
some Trees are decayed, others cut down, and others grown in their room. Then
look a little lower the River, and behold a flock of sheep feeding in the
shade; that is the flock of Damon, whom you may see there in the River up to
the Middle: Observe how that young copps of Trees do bid resistance to the Sun,
and as it were, rejoice, that they have another under them and yet, such is the
piercing curiosity of the Sun, that it finds a passage between some leaves,
for some of its rays: Take notice how well the shade and the rays are
represented. But certain it is, that the Shepherd cannot be surpassed in
beauty; look well upon the delicate proportion and symmetry of his face; his
tall and proper stature; and see how every part is painted in the height of
perfection; although he stoopes a little to reach the water, and with his right
arm washes his left, yet for all that, you may easily perceive his perfect
beauty. Then cast your eye upon the other side of the River, and there you may
behold ugliness in its height, as on this side you did beauty: for there
amongst those dirty Rushes, you may see the Sorcerene Mandrague, looking upon
the Shepherd as he is bathing himself; see how she is dressed, as it were, in
spite of those that look upon her: her rufled hair, her foul and naked arm,
and her pitiful petticoat, tucked up higher then her ugly knee: I believe,
and so would any that she was going to conjure. But see here the strange
effects of Beauty. This old Hag, with one hip in her grave, with her little,
lean, wrinckled, and meager face, and hair as gray as old age could make it;
she is not ashamed to fall in love with this young and lovely Lad: If there be
any sympathy in Love, as they say there is, I wonder where it could be betwixt
Damon and her; look what an ecstasy she is in, how she lifts up her hoary head,
and withered hands, and intending to smile makes a miserable mouth: But be she
as ugly as she is, she intends to love and court this Shepherd. Then lift up
your eyes a little higher, and see how Venus and Cupid in that cloud, looking
upon this new Lover do seem as if they laughed at it. Certainly this was some
wager, which that little god had laid with his Mother, that he could make this
withered stump bestir her self in Love; or if it were not upon a wager, it was
to show by this old hag, that dry wood burns better and sooner then green; or
else, to show his power upon this aged Monument, he would try what heat was in
his Torch, with which, it seems, he can inspire new souls; and, in a word,
make life revive, and come out of the grave.

The fourth Picture.
Pass then unto the next, and you shall see night very well represented; See
how in that gloomy shade, some Mountains do a little appear, but so, as you can
hardly tell what they be. Observe how these stars do seem as if they twinkled;
there is Ursa major, which though it have seven and twenty stars belonging to
it, yet the judicious workman has represented clearly unto us but twelve; and
of that twelve, but seven that shine clear. There again is Ursa minor; And
consider, that though all these seven stars do never hide themselves, yet one
of them is of the third Magnitude, and four of the fourth; and yet to us, they
seem all of the same proportion. There is also the Dragon, unto which belongs
thirty and one stars; yet thirteen only to be seen, five of which are of the
fourth Magnitude, and eight of the third. There again is Adrian's Crown, which
has in it eight stars, whereof one is more splendent then the rest. Behold
there the Milkie way, by which, the Romans say, that the gods used to go and
come from heaven. How well those clouds are represented? how in some places
they cover the sky with a dusky thickness, in others less, as they are more
or less in height, so in clearness. Now let us consider the Story of this
Picture: Look upon Mandrague in the midst of a Circle, with a wand in her right
hand, and an old worm-eaten book in her left, with a candle of green wax, and a
pair of rotten spectacles on her nose; see how she seems to mutter her mouth
awry, her brows like clouds, and every action seems to groan out her
affection: Observe how her feet, her arms, her left side is naked, being on the
same side with her heart: All those phantasmes which you see about her, are
Demons and Spirits, which she conjures up unto her by her charms, to know of
them what she should do to make Damon love her* They tell her of his affection
unto Fortune, and that there is no better way, then to tell him, that this
Shepherdess loves another and not him; and in order to that, it is requisite,
she should presently change the virtue that is in the Fountain of Loves verity.
Before you go any further, observe the art of the Drawer; see the effects of
Mandrague's candle in the dark, how light it is on her left side, and how dark
it is on the other side of her face, as if it were two different complexions.
Then see what a difference the shadow of this candle makes amongst the Demons,
some in darkness, some in light, as she does turn her self. Observe again the
Painters art in drawing his distances, somethings at hand, and some afar off;
Mandrague here is far off at the Fountain of Loves verity. But for your better
understanding, be pleased to know, that a little before, there was a fair
Shepherdess, the Daughter of a very cunning Magician, was secretly
desperately in love with a Shepherd. Whether it was, that the charms of
Magic had no influence upon the charms of Love, or that he was so attentive
upon his studies, that he did not mind her; but so it was, that after a most
extreme affection, and disdain of the Shepherd, she took it so to heart, that
she dyed, and all her Fathers skill could not help her: At which the Magician
being extremely sorry when he understood the occasion, to eternize her memory,
he changed her Tomb into a Fountain; which he called the Verity of Love,
because whosoever looked in it, he should see his Mistress, and if she did
love him, he should see her and himself together; and if she did not love any,
then she should appear alone. And this is the virtue that Mandrague would
change, to the end, that when Damon came to look into the Fountain, he might
find that his Mistress loved another, and so his affection unto her might
die, and she her self might possess it. See how she did inchant it, what
Characters she makes about it, what Circles, what Triangles, and od Figures she
uses. Before she began to conjure, she called all her Devils about her, to
her aid; yet Love being stronger then all they, they durst not attempt any
thing against him, only counseled her, to betray these two faithful Lovers,
and to forbear that quality for a certain time. Now since the virtue of this
Fountain did sust come unto it by a Magician; Mandrague, who excelled all her
Predecessors in that Science, might easily obtain that request. But let us
pass to the next Picture.

The fifth Picture.
THis Piece contains two actions: The first is Damon, when he came unto this
Fountain, to be satisfied in those doubts into which an angry Dream had put
him. The other, when being deceived by the art of Mandrague, and saw that the
Shepherdess Fortune loved another, in despair, he killed himself. Now let us
see how these things are represented: See Damon there with his Faulchion, for
he was in his hunting equipage; observe how his Dog follows him, look how that
observant Animal eye's his Master; for whilst he looked in the Fountain, the
Dog fixed his eye upon him, as if he were desirous to know what it was which so
amazed him. Mandrague had in a dream let him see Maradon, a young Shepherd,
who taking one of Cupid's Arrows, opened Fortune's breast, and took away her
heart. Damon, as all Lovers are, being in much doubt, as soon as ever he waked,
got up, and went to the Fountain, to see whether his Mistress still loved him.
I beseech you observe very well his amazement, if you compare his face which is
in all the other three Pictures, with this, you shall find a strange
alteration. Those two faces which you see in the Fountain, is the Shepherdess
Fortune's, and the other the Shepherd Maradon's, which the Witch caused to be
represented rather then the other: and so Damon believed his Shepherdess
loved Maradon, which belief made him resolve upon death. Do you see how the
water seems to tremble, that is caused by poor Damon's tears, that had dropped
into it. But let us pass on to the second Action: The dead man whom you see
lying upon the ground, is poor Damon, who being desperate, killed himself with
his Falchion. His action is very naturally done, with one Arm engaged under his
body, being surprised with the suddenness of the fall, and having no strength
to recover himself; his head hanging over his right shoulder, his eyes half
shut, and half turned upwards; his mouth open, his teeth apparent, and so all
signs of a sudden death: A man quite dead is not represented, but a man
betwixt life and death, as if there were a medium. Look how the blood is
running out of his wound; I do not think you ever saw any thing more naturally
represented. But let us see what is in the other piece.

The sixth Picture.
NOw be pleased to look upon the sixth and last Piece; which contains four
actions of the Shepherdess Fortune: The first is a Dream which Mandrague
caused her to have; The other, how she went unto the Fountain to clear her
doubts: The third, how she complains against the Inconstancy of her Shepherd:
And the last is, how she dies, which is the conclusion of this Tragedy. Let us
look upon all these particulars: Look upon the Rising of the Sun, observe how
long the shadows are; how the sky is not so clear on the one side; see how
clouds and mists are expelled; and how those little Birds do dress and prune
themselves against its approach. Pass your eye a little further, and see the
Shepherdess Fortune asleep in her bed and how the Sun shines through the
window upon her naked breast: Also the sleeve of her smock being loose, the
beauty of her Arm as high as the Elbow is to be seen. See how the Demons of
Morpheus do hover about her; all which are so many servants unto Mandrague,
and inspire her with a mind to go unto the Fountain of Loves verity; which
accordingly she did, having dreamed that her Shepherd was dead; and therefore
she came to the Fountain of Loves verity, to know the truth: She had no
sooner cast her eye upon the water, but she saw Damon; but, alas, she saw by
him the Shepheardess Melinde, a fair Shepheardess, and one who was never
suspected to love Damon: yet, though he neither did love her, she was by this
Sorcery to appear: See how Fortune bewails the accident in the very same place,
where Damon was almost dead. Behold how sadly she sits against yonder Rock; her
arms crossed upon her breast: It seems as if she sighed, and her heart panted,
her eyes looking up to heaven, asking revenge upon the Persidie which she
believes Damon to be guilty of; and because her passion was extreme, she
complained against him in a very loud tone: And Damon, who you see near her,
though he was at the last gasp, yet hearing the lamentation of his
Shepheardess, and knowing her voice, did call unto her. She hearing a faint
hollow voice, went toward him. Oh heavens! how the sight of him did amuse her?
and forgetting the occasion of her coming thither, when she saw him in that
condition, she asked who had used him so: It is, said he unto her, the change
of my fortune: It is your Inconstancy which has deceived me with a show of
affection. To be brief, it is the happiness of Maradon, whom I saw in the
Fountain next you; and do you think it possible I should live and see you
love another? Fortune hearing this, Oh Damon, said she, this Fountain is an
errant Liar; for it has also showed me Belinde next you, whom I see dying for
the love of me. Thus these two Lovers found out the falsity of this Fountain,
and being more assured than ever of each others affection, they dyed in each
others Arms; Damon of his wound, and Fortune for grief of his death. Behold
there the Shepherdess sitting against a massy Rock, and Damon leaning his
head in her lap, taking his last farewell, and bidding her, Adieu. See how
indulgent she is about tying up his wound, and stooping to kiss him, whilst
her lap is full of blood. That old hagg which is next them, is Mandrague the
Witch, who finding them both dead, cursed her Art, hated all her Demons, tore
her hair, and extremely grieved at the death of these two faithful Lovers, and
her own contentment. Look a little further off, and see how Cupid weeps, his
Bow and Arrows broken, his Torch extinguished, and his eyes swimming in tears
for the loss of these two faithful Lovers.

Celadon was all this while very attentive unto the discourse of the sage
Adamas, and often blamed himself for want of courage in not using the same
remedy Damon did. And because these considerations made him very mute, Galathea
taking Celadon by the hand, and going out of the Grotte, she said thus unto
him; What do you think, Celadon, of the effects of Love? I do think, said he,
that the effects of Love are simplicity and folly: And it is a popular error,
wherewith every one is apt to cover their ignorance or excuse their faults,
always to attribute those effects unto some Divinity, when they do not know
the causes. Why, said the Nymph, do you think, there is no Love? If there be,
replied the Shepherd, it must be nothing but sweetness: But be it what it
will, Madam, you speak of it unto one that is the most ignorant person that
lives: For, besides my qualities, which will not permit me to know much, my
dull capacity, renders me incapable. Then the said Silvia replied unto him,
Celadon (said she) I have seen you in a place where all in it have thought you
not so ignorant in matters of Love. Fair Nymph, answered he, in what place
soever that was, there was much beauty in it, if you were there: but as too
great a fire rather burns than warms, so your beauties are too high for our
Rustique hearts; for they do rather make us admire than love, and adore rather
than serve. With such discourses as this, all this fair company went homeward,
where Dinner waited for them.

As soon as day did break, Leonida, according as it was resolved upon over
night by Adamas, her companion, and Celadon; did come unto the Shepherds
chamber, to dress him in those clothes which her Uncle had brought. But the
little Merill, who by Galathea's command did always stay with Celadon, as well
to be a spy over the actions of Leonida, as to wait upon the Shepherd, did a
long while hinder their design. At last, some noise or other that was made in
the Court, made Meril run out to see what the matter was. Then Celadon did rise
immediately, and the Nymph (see what love will do) did help to dress him for
without her he knew not how to put his clothes on handsomely. Presently after
Meril returns, yet Celadon hearing him, went into a Wardrobe, and he was no
sooner entered but Meril asked where Celadon was? He is in the Wardrobe, said
the Nymph, and will come out presently, what would thou have with him? I
would tell him, said the boy, that Amasis is coming hither. Leonida was a
little surprised, that she could not finish what she had begun; yet that she
might go and give Celadon some counsel she said unto Meril, Go little Meril,
run and acquaint thy Lady, lest she be surprised: The Boy ran as fast as he
could, and Celadon came out laughing at the news: Oh why do you laugh, said the
Nymph, her coming will hinder your going out? Come, come, said he, make haste
and dress me; for amongst so many Nymphs I shall the more easily steal away.
But whilst they were very busy at their work, Galathea entered, and upon such a
sudden, that Celadon could not get into the Closet. You may well imagine how
both Leonida and Celadon were surprised at this accident: Yet the crafty
Leonida seeing Galathea enter, she held Celadon, and would not let him hide
himself but turning toward Galathea, and seeming much troubled Madam, said
she, if you do not use some means that my Lady come not hither, we are all
undone; for my part I am doing what I can to disguise Celadon in a woman's
habit, but I am afraid I shall not have time enough. Galathea, who knew not at
the first what to think of this Metamorphosis, did much commend this witty
invention of Leonida's, and when she saw Celadon so well disguised she could
not choose but laugh, and said unto Leonida, Friend, but for you we had been all
undone; for we could never have hidden Celadon amongst so many Nymphs as will
come with Amasis; but now we are well enough, and may safely show him unto all
your companions, who will take him for a woman. Thus Galathea, after it was
agreed upon that Celadon should say he was Cosen unto Adamas, and called
Lucinde, went out to meet her Mother. I must ingenuously confess (said
Celadon, after she was gone) I was never in my life so astonished as at these
three accidents. First, at the coming of Amasis. Secondly, at Galathea's
surprising us; and thirdly, at your sudden invention. Shepherd, said Leonide,
what I do, proceeds from my desires to rid you out of your pain; and I would to
the gods you knew my heart, then would you find what happiness I wish you. By
way of gratitude for so great an obligation, said the Shepherd, I cannot choose
but tender you my life, since you have preserved it. Thus they talked till
Meril came into the Chamber, and seeing Celadon almost dressed, he was ravished,
and said no live person could know him; for he that was continually with him,
had he not seen him dressing, should have been mistaken. Who told thee, said
Celadon, that I was disguised? My Lady, said he, and commanded me to say your
name was Lucinde, the Cosen of Adamas, and to acquaint the Druide with it, who
could not choose but laugh when he heard it, and promised to do as my Lady
commanded him. In the mean time, Amasis was come out of her Coach, and met
Galathea at the stairs foot, with Silvia and Adamas. Daughter, said she unto
her, methinks you have been too long in solitude, and I am come to disorder
you a little. The good news I have received from Clidaman and Lindamor, does so
rejoice me, that I cannot contain my joys alone, and therefore I am come to
make you a participant with me, and would have you go with me unto Marcelles,
where Bonefires shall be made through every street. I do much rejoice at your
happiness, Madam, said Galathea and wish it may continue eternally: But truly,
Madam, this place pleases me so well, that I have no desiring Genius to leave
it. No more you shall long, replied Amasis, but because I will not go thither
until night, let us walk together, and I will acquaint you with the news I
have received. Then Adamas made a low reverence, and said, Certainly, Madam,
your news is very good, since you are stirring so early to impart it unto your
Daughter. I have received it (said she) two or three days since, but found
that I could not enjoy the contentment of it alone, and truly the news deserves
to be divulged. Thus they talked until they came into the Garden: when as they
began to walk, Amasis took Galathea on one side, and Adamas on the other, and
then she proceeded thus.

The History of Lydias and Melandre.
Considering the strange variety of accidents which are caused by Love,
me-thinkes it must needs be confessed, that the Wheel of Love does turn about
as fast as the Wheel of Fortune, and that Passion causes as many changes and
alterations in humane affairs; as any thing else. The examples of these are so
frequently before our eyes, that it is impertinent to instance them: And yet
when you have heard this which I intend to relate, you will confess you never
heard of any more remarkable. It is known unto you, how Clidaman by hazard and
Lot became a servant unto Silvia, and how Guyemant in bringing a Letter unto
her from his Brother fell in love with her. And since that, I believe you are
not ignorant of their design in departing both together to go unto Merovea:
Nor how I sent a great number of the young Cavalrie under the conduct of
Lindamor after them: But I believe, you do not know what they have done since
they went. And therefore I do at this time intend to make a relation of their
voyage unto you, for it is worthy of knowledge. As soon as Clidaman came unto
the Army, Guyemant who was known, brought him to kiss the hands of Merovea and
Childerick, under the notion of a young Cavalier, descended from a noble
Family, who desired to serve them. He was received with open Arms, especially
coming at a time when the enemy did menace them with a Battle. But when
Lindamor came, and it was known who Clidaman was, he was honored and carrassed
beyond all expressions; for he had already so signalized himself, that both
friends and enemies did know and esteem him. Amongst other Prisoners which he
and Guyemant took (for they always went out together in any enterprise) there
was one amongst them that came out of Great Britane, so handsome, but so sad,
that he moved Clidaman to pity him. And because his imprisonment made him seem
extremely sad, one day he sent for him; and after he had asked him several
questions of his Being and Quality, he asked him the cause of his sadness,
telling him that if it did proceed from his imprisonment, he ought like a man
of courage to endure it, and thank the heavens that he fell into their hands,
since he was in a place where he had all civil treatment, and that his want of
liberty proceeded only from the command of Merovea, who had charged that no
prisoners should yet be ransomed, yet he would do his best endeavor to
procure him his liberty. The young man thanked him, but it was with a deep
sigh; which Clidaman more wondering at, did ask him the cause. Unto which he
answered; Sir, this sadness which you see in my face, and those sighs which so
often steal from my breast, do not proceed from my imprisonment which you
speak of, but from another more strict than it; for my ransom will ere long
disoblige me from this, but nothing less than death can bring me out of the
other. I should also endure it with patience did I not foresee my own death,
and the ruin of the person who keeps me so close in prison. Clidaman did by his
speech imagine that it was Love which troubled him, and by himself considering
the pain of his prisoner, his pity moved him to promise him that he would
procure his liberty as soon as possible, knowing by experience what passions
and perplexities of mind uses to accompany them that are deeply in love. Sir,
said he unto him, since you know the power of Love, and that your noble
Country makes me believe, that what knowledge soever you have of me, you will
not alter your good will unto me; therefore upon a promise not to discover
me, I will tell you a thing which will make you wonder. Then Clidaman
promising secrecy, he began thus.

Cavalier, be pleased to know, that this habit which you see me wear is not
my own; but Love, that is able to metamorphise women into men, has made me
assume this dress; for I am not a man, but a woman, one that is descended from
as good a Family as any is in Britain, and my name is Melandre, who, conducted
by strange fortune, is fallen into your hands. There was a man whose name is
Lydias, that fled out of his own Country, and came to London, having killed a
man in Duel, and, to avoid the rigor of the Law, was forced to forsake his
Country. Being in London, as it is the custom of our Nation, he found so much
civility and courtesy, that there was not a house of any noble note, where he
was not familiar; and amongst the rest, he was as free to my Fathers house, as
he could be unto his own. Now because he intended to stay there, until he
could safely return into his own Country, he intended (the better to conform
himself unto the British humor, where every one has a particular Mistress)
to seem as if he were in Love: And in this resolution, (I cannot tell whether
good or bad) he fixed his eyes upon me; and either out of affection or
convenience, he began to profess himself my servant. I will not tire you with
a long discourse upon those dissimulations, those courtships, and those oaths;
that he used unto me: But so it was, that after a long address of courtship,
(for he stayed there two years) his handsomness, his courtesy, his discretion,
and his valor, had such an influence upon me, that I did love him without any
dissimulation. I should blush to confess thus much, did I not think you a
person that has tried the force of Love; or to tell you, that the beginning of
my love was the end of my tranquillity. Things being thus, it happened, that the
Franks, after they had gotten the better in so many Battles against the Roman
Emperors, against the Goths, and against the Gauls, they turned their Arms
against the Neustrians, and brought them unto such terms, as they were foroed
to send unto London, their ancient Allie, to demand aid, who, according to the
Alliance made between them, did grant them aid, by the consent of the King and
States. This news was presently divulged throughout all the Realm, and we, who
were in the chief City, first heard of it. Lydias began to think upon his
return the very first hour, assuring himself, that his Countrymen, being in
need of such as he, would easily absolve him from the death of Arontes: Yet,
because he ever promised me, that if he went, he would carry me with him, he
concealed his design from me, either as intending to deceive me, or else
fearing I should hinder his departure. Yet, as there can be no fire so closely
covered, but there will be some smoke; so he could not so closely hide his hot
desire of departure, but I heard of it. As Soon as I came to the knowledge of
it, the first time I saw him, I took him aside: Well Lydias, said I unto him,
are you then resolved I shall not know your intentions of leaving me? Do you
think my affection so feeble, that it is not able to follow the worst of your
fortune? If your affairs do urge you to return into your Country, why should
you not let me go with you? Ask my Fathers consent unto our Marriage, I am
confident he will be glad of our alliance; for I know he loves you. But,
Lydias, do not perjure your self so much, as to leave me here desolate behind
you; for if you do, the gods will punish you. Unto all this, he faintly
answered, That he had no thought of returning, but that he valued his presence
with me above all affairs, and that I did him wrong to doubt of it; but his
actions should force me to confess it. Yet, for all these fair words, this
perjured man went away within two or three days after, with the first Forces
that went out of great Britain, and took his time so justly, that he came to
the Seaside just as they were Embarquing themselves, and so he Embarked with
them. We were presently advertised of his departure; yet, I was so persuaded
that he loved me, as I was the last that did believe it, so as he was gone
eight days before I could ever believe, that a man so well descended as he
was, could be such a deluder and ungrateful man: but at last, many days being
past, and I never seeing nor hearing of him, I began to think my self
deceived, and that he was really gone. You may well imagine I was much troubled
at it, when falling sick upon it, I was in such a condition, as the Physicians
not knowing my disease, gave me over for dead: But Love having a mind to show
himself a better Doctor than Aesculapius, did cure me by a most strange
Antidote; and see how contrary his effects are unto our resolutions. When I
knew of the flight of Lydias, for so it may be called, I found my self so
offended, that after a thousand invocations of the gods, as witnesses of his
perfidies, I swore, that I would never love him, as often as he swore that he
would love me; so as it may be said, both of us were perjured; for when my
hatred was in the height of fury, a Ship coming in from Calice, to bring news
of the Armies happy landing, I heard, that Lydias passed over, with intention,
to fight under the Banners of the British Forces; but as soon as the Governor
of that place, who was a Cozen unto Arontes, was advertised of it, he did
imprison him, as being already a person condemned, and that he was quite
undone; for the Governor had very great credit amongst the Neustrians. That
indeed there was a way to save him, but it was so difficult, that none durst
attempt it; and it was this: As soon as Lydias was seized upon, he asked the
Governor the reason, why a Cavalier of so great a reputation as he was, would
not rather revenge his quarrels by the way of Arms, rather then by the way of
Justice? For, it is not the custom of the Gauls to have any recourse unto
Justice, but unto Combat, in points of honor; and such as do not so, are
reputed cowards and dishonorable. Lypandas, for so was the Governors name,
did answer him, that were he not already condemned by Justice, he would try it
with him by Arms; but it being a dishonor to him, to fight with a man that was
dead in the Law, if he had any friend that would undertake the Quarrel for him,
he would fight with him upon this score, that if he were overcome, he would set
him at liberty; and if not, then Justice should have its course: And that his
kindred or friends might have the more time to prepare themselves, he would
keep him a month in his power; if none came to present themselves in that time,
then he should be delivered up to be punished according to his merits. And that
no advantage might be on either side, the Combat should be with Sword and
Dagger in their shirts. Now Lypandas, being reputed one of the valiantest men
of all Neustria, there was none so stout as to undertake this Combat: also the
friends of Lydias not being advertised of it, they could not do him this good
office. Oh Sir, what strange apprehensions had I, when I heard this news? I
must confess, I was never in all my life so confused in my thoughts, no, not
when this perfidious man left me. But though I knew, waves do beat in vain
against a sturdy Rock, yet, I must pay the tribute due unto Love, and arm my
self in this quarrel, though it did cost me both honor and life: And after I
had long, but in vain, lamented the loss of the unfaithful Lydias; at last, I
must think upon his preservation And in order to that, being transported with
this new Fury, or rather, this old Love newly revived, I resolved to go unto
Calice, and advise with the kindred and friends of Lydias about it. Then taking
order, as secretly as possibly I could, for my voyage, one night I stole away
in this habit you now see me have; but so bad was my luck, that I tarried above
a formight for a ship The heavens know what became of Parents when they heard
of my departure, for I never heard of them since: great is my fear, that my
Father's old age will never brook this cross; for he loved me as tenderly as
himself, so as I have since wondered a hundred times, I should ever undertake
this voyage: but, the truth is, it was Love, not me, that was the cause. But to
return to our discourse, after I had waited above fifteen days for a passage,
at the last I met with a ship which went for Calice, when there was not above
five or six days of Lydias his term to expire. I was so sea-sick, as I was
forced to keep my bed two days; so as there was but a very little time left,
to consult with the friends of Lydias, not knowing where to find one of them,
nor where they dwelt. Imagine how this did trouble me, so as I thought my self
rather come to see him die, than any way to help him to live. Oh ye gods! how
will ye dispose of us? Tears did night and day flow from my eyes. At the last,
the very day before the expiration of the term, being resolved to die with
Lydias, or before him, I resolved to enter into Combat with Lypandas. What a
resolution, or rather despair, was this? I had never handled a sword in my
life, nor did well know in which hand I should hold the sword, and in which the
dagger; yet was I fully resolved to enter the Lists against a Cavalier, whose
profession was fighting, and had gotten the title of Brave and Stout: But all
these considerations were nothing unto me, who was resolved to die before him,
whom I loved above my life; and though I knew that I could not save him, yet
was it some satisfaction to me, that I should give some testimony of my
affection. One thing did exceedingly trouble me, which I endeavored to avoid,
which was, that if I should be known unto Lydias, this would hinder my design,
for we were to fight without Armor; which to remedy, I writ a note unto
Lypandas, by way of challenge, and desired him, that since we were both of us
Cavaliers, it would be handsome, if we used such Arms as Cavaliers do, and not
to fight naked like desperate people. To which he answered, That in the morning
he would be in the field, and that I should come Armed, as he would; yet, it
should be in his choice which way they should fight. The next morning I
presented my self in the field, armed Cap a pe, but so loaded, that I could
hardly stir; those who saw me stagger, did think it either fear of fighting, or
weakness, as indeed it was. Presently I saw Lypandas come prancing, as if he
would kill me with his looks; but I was not astonished, until Lydias was
brought upon a Scaffold, to see the fight. I did so extremely pity him when I
saw him in that condition, as I stood stock still a great while, and could not
stir: At last, the Judges carried me unto him, to know, whether he would accept
of me for his Champion. He asked me who I was? Then counterfeiting my voice as
well as I could, I said unto him, Let it satisfy you, Lydias, that I am the
only One that will undertake this Combat for you. Since it is so, replied he
certainly you are a person of great valor, and therefore I do accept of you.
So when I was going away, he said unto me, Cavalier, be confident, that your
quarrel is most just. Then I retired, with such full resolution for death, that
I stayed for nothing but the sound of the Trumpet, to summon us unto the
Combat. Upon the first sound, I set out but my Horse did so jog me, that in
lieu of carrying my Lance as I should have done, I let it fall which way
fortune would, and it fell so luckily upon my Horses neck, that in lieu of
hiting Lypandas, it ran his Horse into the body, who being wounded ran
presently away in spite of his Master and fell dead under him. Lypandas was so
over-eager of doing bravely, that he missed his blow. As for me, my Horse ran
even whither he pleased; for I had enough to do in holding me by the Pommel,
lest I should fall. And hearing Lypandas bidding me turn again, and upbraiding
me for killing his Horse, I turned my horse back, after I had got my sword in
my hand, as well as I could though with much ado: But my Horse, as soon as he
was turned having more courage then his Rider, began of himself to gallop, and
ran furiously upon Lypandas; and he stepping aside, ran his sword into my
Horses body as he passed by, and presently I perceived him to shrink under me;
and having lost my stirrups, he fell under me, and so far off Lypandas, that I
had time enough to get out of the Saddle, and recover my self from my Horse:
Then came Lypandas toward me, with his sword up ready to strike at me: and I
must tell you that had not Love born up my Arms better then my self did, he
had dispatched me; but seeing him so furiously make his blow at my head, Nature
had taught me to hold up my left arm, for otherwise, I had never remembered my
buckler that was upon it; but his blow upon it was with such fury, as it struck
it against my face, and made my eyes to sparkle. When he saw me stagger, he
offered another blow more heavy then the first; but such was my fortune, that
holding up my sword, his and mine clashed together: and both of them broke.
Lypandas seeing both of us upon the same advantages, did say unto me, These
Arms are equally favorable unto us, I will try whether others will do the
like, and therefore let us cast off our heavy Armor, and fight in our shirts,
for I will have the Combat so decided. Cavalier, said I unto him, by what is
past, you may see your self in the wrong; our quarrel is not mortal,
therefore release Lydias, and let the Combat alone. No, no, said Lypandas in a
rage, both Lydias and you shall die. Then I will try, said I, whether I can
retort that Sentence upon your own head. Then getting as far off Lydias as I
could, for fear of being known, I put off my Armor, with the help of those who
brought us two other swords and daggers. And when my doublet was off, I took a
sword and a dagger, and went into the middle of the Lists: I must tell you,
that I had much ado to hide my breasts; for my shirt, do what I could, did not
so hide them, but the fullness of my Papps were palpable to be seen; but that
was the farthest off every ones imagination and as for Lydias, he could not
know me; for being in man's habit, and the weight of my Armor having put me in
o a very high color, I was much altered. At last Lypandas and I were within
ten or twelve paces one of another. Now did I look for nothing but death, being
assured, he would run me through at the very first push: But the fortune of
Lydias was so good, for it was his life I only feared, that this high-minded
Lypandas running extreme violently at me, he chanced to stumble, and his head
fell at my feet, and at this fall he received two wounds, with his own weapons;
the one with his dagger, that ran him through his right arm, and the other
with his sword, which cut him just over the eyes. As for me, I was so frighted
with this fall, that I thought my self dead and him too; and therefore
stepping back two or three paces, without doing him any hurt, I thought to
vanquish him more by my courtesy then valor, and said unto him: Rise
Lypandas. I will not hurt you when you are down. He being much stunnyed with
his fall at first, did afterward rise, thinking to run upon me with all the
strength he had: but one of his wounds had blinded him, and the other took away
the use of his arm, so as he could neither see nor hold his sword: Which I
perceiving, I took courage, and lifting up my sword I ran unto him, saying:
Yield thy self, Lypandas or else thou dyest. Why should I yield my self, said
he, for the conditions of our Combat were not so; let it suffice, I set Lydias
at liberty. Then the Judges coming in, and Lypandas having ratified his
promise, they led me out of the Lists in triumph: But fearing lest I should
receive some wrong in a place, where Lypandas had all the power, after I had
put my Armor on again, I went to Lydias, with my Helmet pulled down, and said
unto him: Lydias, render thanks unto the gods for my Victory; and if you desire
to have any discourse with me, I will go unto the Town of Regiaque, where I
will stay for you fifteen days, for after that term, I must go about some
business, which will carry me far from hence. You may enquire for the
sorrowful Chavelier, for under that name and notion I pass. But I beseech
you, said Lydias, shall I not now know unto whom I am so much obliged? No, said
I unto him, it will not be good neither for you nor me: And so I left him. Then
providing my self another Horse, I came to Regiaque, where I stayed. As soon
as I was gone, this false Lypandas did imprison Lydias more close than before;
and when he was charged with his promise unto me, he did evade it, by saying,
That it is true, he promised me liberty, but he did not tell me when: and
therefore it should not be this twenty years, unless upon a condition, that I
should become a Prisoner in his room, and so pay the ransom of his liberty
with the loss of my own. Lydias told him, that this was the height; both of
ingratitude and perfidie. This did so offend him, that he swore, unless I came
within fifteen days, and put my self into his hands, he would transfer him
over into the hands of Justice. And when Lydias instanced his perjury to him. I
have long since, said he, sworn unto the Neustrian Lords, to maintain Justice,
and I am more obliged to keep my first oath, than my second. The first day
passed on, and I did not think much; but when I heard no news of Lydias, I
sent a man to enquire of him: by him I understood what Lypandas had done and
the term he had set: And though I did foresee his cruelties, yet I resolved to
get Lydias out of his hands, nothing being so dear unto me, as his
preservation; and by fortune, the very same day you took me Prisoner, I was
going unto him; and all the sadness you see in me, and those deep sighs you
have observed to escape from me, did proceed, not from your imprisonment, (for
that is sweet unto me, compared with my expectations of the other) but they
proceed from my fears, that this unworthy Lypandas will put Lydias into the
hands of his enemies, who gape for his life; for of those fifteen days that
were prefixed, ten of them are already past, so as I am out of all hopes to do
this good office for my poor Lydias. Upon these words, her tears hindered her
tongue, and she was forced to be silent, with so many apparent signs of
sorrow, that Clidaman was moved unto compassion, and to comfort her, said thus
unto her: Courageous Melandre, do not let your spirit droop for this, but rouse
up the generosity of your soul: The gods, who have preserved you in greater
dangers, will not let you sink under less. You may assure your self, that I
will use my utmost power to give you your desired contentment. But since I am
under a Prince whom I would not displease, I must obtain your liberty from him,
and will promise you, to solicit him with all my power. So upon these fair
promises, he went immediately to Childerick, and beseeched him, he would be
pleased to favor him so far, as to mediate unto the King his Father, for the
liberty of this young Prisoner. The young Prince, who loved my Son, and knew
that his Father would be glad to oblige Clidaman, went presently to Merovea,
who granted his Sons request. Then, because the time was short, he went
immediately unto Melandre, and having drawn her aside, said thus unto her.
Sorrowful Cavalier, I hope now you will change that Epithet, since better
fortune begins to shine upon you: The heavens begin now to smile upon you; and
in testimony of what I say, know, that now you are at liberty, and may dispose
of your self as you please; the Prince of the Franks has given me the dispose
of you, and the duty of a Cavalier obliges me, not only to give you your
liberty, but to offer you all the assistance I am able. Melandre hearing this
unhop't for language, did leap up for joy, and casting her self at his feet,
did kiss them by way of gratitude: and when she saw that she was to pay no
ransom, which she could never have paid in the compass of that fifteen days:
Noble Cavalier, (said she) you do make it appear, that you do know what it is
to Love, since you are so pitiful unto such as are possessed with it: I pray
the heavens to make you as happy, as you are courteous and worthy of all good
fortune. Needs would she have gone away that very night, but Clidaman would not
permit her, because it was dark; yet the next morning, as soon as day did
appear, away she went, and never stayed, until she came at Calice, where, by
good fortune, she arrived the very day before the expiration of the time. She
had made her coming known unto Lypandas that very night, had she not been
jealous of his perfidie, whom she was to deal withal; and she stayed until
the morning, to the end, there might be more witnesses of the wrong he should
do her, in failing of his promise. The day being come, and past noon, when all
the principal men of the Town, to honor the Governor, came unto his house,
in comes the sorrowful Cavalier, and presents himself unto him: At the first,
he was not known, for none had ever seen him but in the Combat, where fear had
altered his countenance; and now every one drew near to hear what he would say.
Lypandas, said he, I come here to summon you, to be as good as your promise,
from the friends and kindred of Lydias; otherwise they tell you by me, that
they will publish you unto the world, for a false and perfidious
promise-breaker. Stranger, answered Lypandas, go and tell them, that Lydias is
yet better then he shall be within these few days; for before this day be don,
I will transfer him over unto such hands, as will revenge my quarrel. As for
my promise, I think my self to be absolved from it, by putting him into the
hands of Justice. As for any new conditions I do insist upon my first, which
is, that he with whom I fought, do put himself into my hands, to the end, I
may have my will of him, and release Lydias. What will you do with him, said
he, when you have him? When I once have him, answered he, and when I am to
render you an account of my actions, then you shall know. Since it is so, said
the sad Cavalier, send for Lydias, and him whom you desire shall put himself
into your hands. Lypandas, who did extremely desire to be revenged upon his
enemy, sent for Lydias: Lydias, who knew this to be the last day for his
term, did think this sending for, had been to transfer him over into the
hands of the Law: But though he did foresee a certain death, yet he did
rather desire it, than to see him who had fought in his cause, in any danger.
When he came before Lypandas, he said thus unto him; Lydias, this is the last
day that is prefixed you to bring your Champion into my hands: The young
Cavalier is come hither to that end, which if he do then you are at liberty.
Melander all this while did so turn her face from Lydias, that he could not
know her and so said thus; Yes Lypandas I have promised, and I will perform: I
would you would be as punctual in all your promises: But it is no matter, I am
he whom you desire, and who values not any cruelty or rigor you can use
against me, so my friend here may be out of his pain. Then every one fixed
their eyes upon her, and remembering the actions she used when she fought, they
knew her to be the same. Her beauty her youth, and her affection moved every
heart unto pity, but Lypandas, who being extremely incensed against her
commanded her presently to prison, and to let Lydias go. Lydias seeing himself
so infinitely obliged, would not suffer it, but Melander came to him, and said
in his ear, Go Lydias; as for me, I know how to get out easily when I will; Go
and serve Merovea, and particularly Clidaman, who is the procurer of your
liberty; and tell him you came from me. It Is impossible I should go, said
Lydias, before I know who you are. I am the sorrowful Cavalier, said she, and
that is enough, and you need know no more.

Thus Lydias went with an intention to serve the King of the Frankes, since he
who twice saved his life would have it so: But in the mean time Lypandas did
expressly command, that Melander should be well guarded, and shackles put upon
her hands and feet, not caring if she had dyed with the misery. Judge in what
a sad condition this young woman was; her victuals were bad, her lodging
miserable, and all accomdations wanting: So as if her affection had not been
some comfort unto her, it was impossible she should have lived so long in that
misery. In the mean time it was divulged throughout all Neustria, that Lydias
by the procurement of a friend was released from his imprisonment at Callice,
and was gone to serve the King Merovea, and thereupon was declared a Traitor of
his Country. Yet he failed not to go unto Merovea's Camp, where he found out
which was Clidamans Tent. As soon as Lindamor and Guyemant saw him, they ran to
him, and embraced him with abundance of love and courtesy, at which he was
extremely astonished; for they took him for Ligdamon, who a little before was
lost in the battle which they had with the Neustrians, and was so extremely
like him, that any one would have taken the one for the other. At the last,
being known to be Lydias, Melanders friend, he was recommended unto Merovea,
before whom Lydias related the whole story of his imprisonment, and the
courtesy which he had received from an unknown Cavalier: Also how he came by
this unknown Cavaliers command to serve him, especially Clidaman. After the
King had received him, and given him thanks for his good will unto him; Clidaman
spoke to him, and said, Is it possible, Lydias, you should not know him that
has fought for you and is now in prison to release you? No certainly, said he,
I do not know him. This is the strangest thing I ever heard of, said Clidaman,
did you never see any that did resemble him? Not that I remember, said Lydias,
and wondered. Then said Clidaman, I shall relate unto the King a story, the
most worthy of compassion that Love ever caused: Then he related how Lydias
went into Great Britain, the courtesies he received there, the affection of
Melandre to him the promises he made to carry her into Neustria with him when
he went away, his flight, and his imprisonment at Callais. Poor Lydias was so
astonished to hear so many particulars of his life, that he knew not what to
think: But when Clidaman related Melandres resolution to assume man's habit,
and to sight a Duel with Lypandas, and all that I have formerly related, every
one was ravished. Oh heavens! said Lydias, is it possible I should be so blind?
What should I do to answer this obligation? You can do no less, said
Clidaman, than give that life to her which she has preserved. That is little,
answered he, unless accompanied with affection. Whilst they were thus in
discourse, every hearer concluded, this noble act of this Woman's, deserved,
that this great Army should go and assault Callais for her sake. I protest,
said Merovea our Army cannot be better employed than in the rescue of so
virtuous a Lady. Night being come, Lydias told Clidaman, that whilst he was at
Callais a prisoner, he discovered a weak place in the Walls of the Town, where
had he but a few men, he could infallibly enter. This being reported unto
Merovea, it was approved of. So Lydias had given him five hundred Archers, and
three hundred Men at Arms for the execution of this enterprise. In conclusion
(for I will not relate all particulars) Callais was taken, Lypandas imprisoned,
and Melandre released out of her captivity. But, I know not how it came to
pass, nor why, yet as soon as all was quiet, after the Town was taken, Lydias
and Melandre went away, and it was never since known what became of them. In
the mean time, poor Ligdamon has been most miserably tormented for Lydias;
for, being taken prisoner by the Neustrians, he was mistaken for Lydias, and
condemned to death. Clidaman procured Merovea to send two Heralds at Arms,
purposely to let them know that they were mistaken, but they would not believe
it. Thus was Ligdamon put into a den of Lions, where they say he did things
beyond Man: but doubtless he had dyed amongst them, had not a fair Lady
demanded him for her Husband, which custom did at that time save him, but he
dyed presently after; for he loving Silvia, would not marry that Lady, but
chose death rather than her for, just upon the very Marriage, he poisoned
himself; and she also, (...) to be Lydias, did poison her self in the same
Cup. Thus poor Ligdamon dyed, so lamented by every one, that his very enemies
did pity him: But Love had a most notable way of Revenge upon Lypandas; for
when he knew Melandre to be a woman, and remembering her virtue, beauty, and
affection, he fell so desperately in love with her, that the poorman had no
other consolation but to talk of her. My Son sent me word, that he
endeavored to get his release and hoped to obtain it.

Thus see, said Amasis, how they live in the plenitude of Honor, and none in
all the Army more esteemed than they. I pray heavens to continue their good
fortune, said Adamas: And whilst they were thus talking they saw Leonida,
Lucinde, and the little Meril coming toward them; I say Lucinde, for so it was
agreed Celadon should be called. Amasis, who knew her not asked who she was? It
is one that is Cosen unto Adamas (answered Galathea) her name is Lucinde, one
that is so fair, and every way so virtuous, as I desired her to stay with me
some certain days. She seems, said Amasis, as good as fair. I do believe,
Madam, said Galathea that her disposition would be very pleasing unto you, and
if you think good she shall go with us unto Marcelles. By this time Leonida
was come so near that Lycinde bowed her self, and kissed the hand of Amasis
with so good a grace, as any one living would have taken her for a woman:
Amasis did her the honor to kiss her, and said that any who had a relation to
Adamas were as dear unto her as her own children. Then Adamas began to speak
lest if the disguised Lucinde should have answered, her voice might betray her;
but he needed not to fear that; for she knew so well how to feign her
voice, as it did rather help to deceive them. However at this time she suffered
Adamas to answer, and after a low reverence she went amongst the other Nymphs,
watching her opportunity how to steal away. At the last, Dinner time being at
hand, Amasis went into the house, where finding meat upon the Table, every one
dined with a merry heart, except the fair Silvia, who did most sadly resent the
death of her dear Ligdamon.

When Dinner was done, some of the Nymphs had a mind to play; others to view
the house; some to walk in the Gardens, and others to fit and discourse in the
Chamber of Amasis: Leonida seeming as if she would make her self ready for her
going with Amasis, went out of the Chamber, and presently after Lucinde
followed; and then seeming as if they would walk, they went out of the Castle,
having most of the Shepherds clothes under their Petticoats, and when they
were got into the thick of the Wood, the Shepherd undressed himself, and
putting on his own clothes, he thanked the Nymph for her good assistance,
offering her in exchange, his life and all that did depend upon it. Then the
Nymph with a deep sigh said unto him, Well, Celadon, have I not performed my
promise? I pray remember yours also. I should think my self, said Celadon, the
most unworthy man that lives, if I did not perform all my promises unto you.
Then, Celadon, said she, remember what you swore unto me; for I am resolved to
put you to the Test this very hour: Fair Nymph, answered Celadon, dispose of me
as far as I am able, as freely as you can of your self; for I am fully resolved
upon obedience. Have you not made a promise unto me, replied the Nymph, that I
should search into all your life past, and if I found any thing which you could
do for me, you would do it? And he answering that it was true, then Celadon,
said she, I have done as you did bid me, and though they say Love be blind yet
I have so much light left in me, as to know that you ought to continue that
love which you have so often promised unto your Astrea; for disgusts of love
will not allow any one to be perjured or unfaithful, and therefore ye ought
not to fail in your duty, though they have treated you ill. The faults of
others can never excuse or wash away our own. Love therefore the fair and happy
Astrea, with as much sincerity of affection as ever you did: serve her, adore
her, and more if it be possible; for Love requires extremes in his sacrifice.
But yet, I know, that the good offices which I have done you, does deserve
something. And because Love can never be paid but with Love, you are obliged to
pay me in the same coin, if no impossibilities do intervene. But since one
heart is not capable of any more but one love, let me be paid with what it can:
And since you cannot love me as your Mistress, I would have you love me as your
Sister; and ever hereafter to love me, cheerish me, and treat me in that
manner. Celadons contentment cannot be expressed, after he heard this
language; for he confessed it was infinitely his own desire: And therefore,
after he had given the Nymph a Million of thanks for her affection, he vowed
to receive her as his Sister, and under that notion to do whatsoever she
commanded him. And so they parted extremely well contented and satisfied one
with another. Leonida returned to the Castle, and the Shepherd to his voyage,
shunning all such Plains where he thought he might meet with any Shepherds of
his acquaintance. And leaving Mount Verdun on the left hand, he went unto a
little rising ground, from whence he could view most of those places where he
was accustomed to feed his Flock, where Astrea was wont to come unto him, and
where they used to shade themselves from the scorching Sun in the heat of the
day. Briefly, this Prospect presented to his eye, all those contentments which
he had been so long deprived of: And in contemplation of them he sat down
under a shady tree, and sighed out these Verses.

A Prospect.
Yonder Is the place my fairest Sun
Did bliss me, before the day begun:
Whilst the other like a sluggard slept,
Or out of drousie bed was crept;
She crowned with Violet and Rose,
Did there her early self repose,
And with her self such light did bring
As made those fields appear a Spring.
The other Sun with his hot rays
Such over-scorching heat displays,
As dryes and withers every plant,
And makes the Ploughmans heart to pant.
My Sun with influence so sweet
Such only as have souls do greet;
On those she never heat imparts,
But burns only Lovers hearts.
Yonder Is the Fountain which does claim
From Sycamors, a borrowed Name;
There did my Shepherdess Divine,
Whilst her fair hand was linkt in mine.
Answer my Love in equal flame,
Celadon shall never forget the same.
For there he vowed to her, and swore
Eternally her to adore.
Under yond spreading leaved tree,
Which shaddowed both her and me,
Purest vermilion there did seek
For harbor in her lovely cheek
When she did blush for shame, to hear
A Shepherd swear, that she was fair.
No, no, said she to me, for I
Fair would be only in thy eye.
But O, thou hollow Rock, where we
So often have been in secrecy:
Where is that Love which we did vow,
And what becomes of it now?
Did she and I the gods adore,
And all in vain their help implore?
Have I not reason to complain,
Since she does pay me with disdain?
And thou old Tree, whose barkie leather
Defends thee from the stormy weather,
To thee I do address my plaint,
And do this sad divorce lament.
How often did we our Letters hide
Within thy old worm-eaten side?
But now, alas, too plain I see
Both thou and she all changed be.
These thoughts and imaginations had kept Celadon longer in that place, but for
the coming of a disconsolate Shepherd, who pitifully lamenting his loss,
came toward him, sighing out these Verses.

Upon too over-soon a Death.
YOu that my weeping eyes do see,
Did you but know what misery Has swelled my heart,
In lieu of blaming me you would
Add all the sorrows that you could, And take my part.
Within the gloomy shade of death
The fairest that had ever breath Inhabits now.
Why should not destiny, so tart,
As well my body as my heart, That place allow.
No sooner she her self did show
Amongst us mortals here below, But she was gone:
So as it seems she was sent
Only to make us all lament, And her bemoan.
As loving I vy clings about
A withered Tree when life is out, Even so would I:
And live contentedly I could,
If close to her but cling I could Until I die.
Celadon having no mind to be seen by any that could know him, when he spied
this Shepherd a good distance off, he concealed himself behind a thick bush,
and when he was past, he followed him at an unseen distance, until he saw him
sit down, and then he crept so near that he could hear all his sad
complaints. The humor of this unknown Shepherd sympathizing with his own, it
swelled him with a curiosity to know something from him both concerning his own
Mistress, and his also. Therefore going to him, he began to speak thus, Sad
Shepherd, I do wish thee joy with all my heart, since I can do no more, I
hope thou will take my wish in good part; and in requital of my love, I pray
thee tell me whether thou do know Astrea, Phillis, and Lycidas; and if thou
do, then tell me all thou know of them. Kind Shepherd, answered he, thy
civil language obliges me to pray, that thou may never have any such occasion
of sorrows as I have: And I will freely tell thee all I do know concerning
those persons you mention, although my own grief forbids me to meddle in any
other business but my own. It is about a month or six weeks, since I came into
this Country of Forests, not as many do, to try what the Fountain of Loves
verity will show me; for I am but too certain of my sad fate; but by the
commandment of the gods, who from the fertile banks of the famous Siene, sent
me hither with assurance that I should here find a remedy against my
miseries: And ever since I came, I have taken up my lodging in such Villages as
seemed most agreeable to my condition and humor, with a resolution to stay as
long as the heavens shall permit me. This design has moved me to enquire of
all the Shepherds and Shepheardesses of these parts: I am able to satisfy you
in any thing you desire to know of them. All I desire to know, said Celadon, is
to be satisfied how they do. All of them, said he, are well; but they are all
troubled very much at one act of blind and fickle Fortune; and that is, at the
loss of one Celadon (a Shepherd altogether unknown to me) who was the Brother
of Lycidas: This lost Shepherd was so loved and esteemed of every one, that he
is generally lamented by all, especially by those three persons whom you named
unto me. It was conceived that this Shepherd was a devoted servant unto
Astrea, and it was the enmity of their Parents which hindered them from
Marriage. How is it reported, said Celadon, this Shepherd was lost? It is
variously reported, answered he; Some speak as opinion leads them, others
according to circumstances and appearance; and some, as others do report: So
as it is diverse ways related. As for me, I came hither into these quarters the
very same day he was lost; and I do remember that every one was so affrighted
at the accident, as none knew how to make a perfect relation of it. In
conclusion (and that is the best received opinion because Phillis, Astrea, and
Lycidas themselves do say it) that this Shepherd sleeping close by the River
side, he fell in, and Astrea also, but her clothes did save her. Celadon
imagining that they had prudently invented this report, to take away occasion
of talking ill upon the accident, he was very glad; for his fears always
were, that reports would reflect much upon Astrea's honor, and therefore he
asked him further; But what do they think, said he, is become of this
Shepherd? That he is dead (answered the sad Shepherd) And I assure you,
Astrea takes it so sadly, that though she puts the best face of it she can,
yet every one says, it is almost incredible, that she should be so much
changed; however, for ought I see, she is so fair that (except Diana hinders
her) I never saw any fairer, except my dearest Cleon, and indeed they three may
well be compared together. Every one, said Celadon, will speak well of his own
Mistress; and Love has a quality, not only to blind, but to change the eyes of
Lovers; so as there was never any Lover that thought his Mistress ugly. This,
answered the Shepherd, were something, if I were in love with Astrea or Diana;
but since I am ever incapable of that, I may be a competent judge: And you who
seem to doubt of this Shepheardesses beauty, you must needs be either a
stranger, or else some ill-willer. I am neither of those two, said Celadon, but
truly I am the most miserably afflicted Shepherd that is in the whole world. I
shall never grant that, said Tircis, unless you except me: For if your misery
proceed from any thing else but Love, the pain cannot be so great as mine,
since the heart is the most tender part we have, and is most sensible of any
sorrows: And though your misery do proceed from love, yet it must needs submit
unto mine; for of all the miseries in love, despair is the most intolerable;
disdain, anger, hatred, jealousy, absence, or any thing is short of death; for
this pale Goddess with her fatal hand, does cut away both hope and life; so
as I the most miserable amongst all men living, do complain of a misery
without any remedy or hope. Celadon answered with a deep sigh, Oh Shepherd,
how much do you err in your opinion? I do confess that the greatest miseries
are those which do proceed from Love, of which I have had a full experience:
But I cannot by any means allow that those miseries which are without hope are
the most sad; nor indeed do they deserve to be resented; for it is a mere act
of folly to weep for a thing which cannot be helped. And Love, answered he,
what is that but a mere folly? I will not enter upon that, said Celadon, before
we have done with the other; for that alone will take up much time. But I pray
tell me, Do you lament this death out of love, or not? Certainly out of love,
answered he. If it be out of love, answered Celadon, then I have heard
Silvander, and all our learned Shepherds say, that Love is nothing but a
desire to enjoy that beauty which you find in the person loved. It Is very true,
said the stranger: Then, replied Celadon, Will any reasonable man desire a
thing which cannot be had? No certainly, said Tircis. Then, said Celadon, the
death of Cleon ought to be the cure of all your grief; for since you confess
that desire never ought to be where there is no hope of obtaining; and that
Love is nothing else but a desire; Death, which puts you out of all hopes to
enjoy, ought by consequence to put you out of all desire; and desire being
dead, all Love should die with it. The sad Shepherd answered, that whatsoever
he said, he was sure that his misery was most extreme; and because he would not
revive the memory of his dead Cleon, he would not argue the matter any longer,
only thus far he said, Shepherd, that which comes under sense is more
certain than that which is only in opinion: And therefore all those reasons
which he alleged could not convince him of that which he was so sensible of: So
recommending him unto the tuition of Pan, Celadon and he parted: And Solitude
being most suitable to a Lovers thoughts, Celadon went on through the Woods
until he came to the Bridge of Boutresse: and passing over the River there,
he was in doubt which way to wend; but this was his full resolution, to obey
Astrea, who had forbidden him to see her, until she did command him. At last,
being come near Bonleiu, the habitation of the chaste Vestals, he was ashamed
that he had so rashly approached that place; and therefore intending to go
farther off, he went into a Wood, so thick and boggy, that he had much ado
to get out again. This forced him to draw nearer the River; for the thin
gravel was less troublesome to him than the thick mud: So walking along,
until he was weary, he looked for a convenient place to rest upon, intending
to keep so close until night that none should see him: At the last, he cast
his eye upon a little Cave, whose entrance on one side toward the River the
water had washed; and the other side was so covered with Trees and Bushes, as
those in the way could not see it; nor had he himself taken notice of it, had
he not gone along the River side. The place did so please him, that he
resolved to pass away the rest of the day in it, and not to come out of this
Grotto until night: And therefore he began to trim it up as well as he
could, removing the Rubbish which the River had brought into it. The place was
nothing else but a Rock, which the water beating upon, had by degrees worn
away, and made a Cave, and that in such various Rooms, as if it were done on
purpose; so as stooping a little, he entered into a room like a Bedchamber:
the place was about six or seven paces in length, and as much broad: It was
about the height of a man, though in some places, the points of the Rock were
troublesome, which the Shepherd did by degrees break off with a Flint: Hec
contrived himself a place like a bed, which he covered with Moss; and having
fitted all things in this manner, he laid his coat, and such things as troubled
him, upon his bed, and then looking upon the ground, he found a Letter, which
he knew to be from the fair Astrea, which he did let fall. He rouzed up
himself, as out of a deep sleep, and came into the entrance of the Cave, where
looking upon the dear paper which he held in his hands, after a hundred zealous
and amorous kisses, he said; Oh thou most dear paper, heretofore my great
joy, and now the occasion of my most bitter sorrows: Upon this, opening it,
the first thing that presented it self to his eye, was Astrea's Character
joined with his: This did so freshly revive the memory of his former
happiness, as now he was reduced almost unto terms of despair. Oh ye
Characters, (said he) too true testimonies of my misfortune, why are you not
separated from mine, to wait upon the will of my fair Shepheardess? Time was,
when you might have done me good service; but now, that such fatal dysasters
have separated us, why are you here? Perhaps it is to make it appear, that the
heavens shower all their dysasterous influences upon me, but can never make my
will distinct from Astrea's. Upon this, he sat down upon a great stone, which
he had rouled out of the River, to the entrance into the Grotto; and then,
after he had wiped away all the tears from his eyes, he read these ensuing
words.

Astrea's Letter unto Celadon.
HEavens grant, Celadon, that those assurances which you have given me of your
affection, may continue for ever: And I do passionately desire you to believe,
that I do hold you more dear than if you were my Brother, and am yours to my
very grave.


These few words of Astrea's, caused abundance of misery unto Celadon; for
after he had many times read them over, they did make his wounds to bleed
afresh; for, he recollected into his memory one after one, all the favors that
ever this Shepherdess did him, which moved him unto so much regreet, as had
not night approached, he had not suffered his eyes to cease from crying, or his
tongue from complaining, against what his heart suffered; but darkness caused
him to enter into his Cave, and being very weary with walking and grieving, he
fell asleep. Two days were past, before this sad Shepherd ever thought of
eating; for he was so taken up with sad thoughts, and his mind was so full of
melancholy, as he never thought upon any meat, but was so distempered with
tears, that his eyes seemed two Fountains: and had he not feared offending the
gods, in causing his own death, and wore, in thereby losing the Idea of his
fair Astrea, doubtless he had ended the course of his life; but seeing he was
constrained unto it, he did visit that bag of victuals which Leonida had
furnished him withal, which provision lasted him many days; for he did eat as
little as possible he could: At last, he was constrained to have recourse unto
roots and fallads. All the day long, if he saw none near his solitary
habitation, he would walk upon the gravelly shore, and often engraved the cause
of his sorrows upon the bark of Trees; sometimes he would engrave Astrea's
Characters and his own; then upon a sudden would he deface them, saying, Thou
art deceived, Celadon, this is not a time for Characters: for thou art still
constant, and, to thy grief all things else are changed. Let all those
testimonies of past happiness alone; and if thou will needs be writing in
Characters, engrave with them thy tears, thy sorrows and thy death, as most
suitable unto thy condition. When night came, then his sad thoughts came
fresher into his memory for darkness being more sit for it, his imagination was
the stronger; nor did he ever retire, unless it was night and if the Moon
shined, he would walk all night long, and sometimes sinde himself asleep under
a tree in the morning. Thus this sad Shepherd, leading this disconsolate life,
he was grown so pale and lean, that he was not knowable; and sometimes when he
went unto a Fountain to drink, he would wonder to see himself in the water;
his hair was grown all into disorder, his eyes shrunk, his nose sharp and long,
so as it was a wonder he should live. Oh! had Astrea seen him in this sad
condition, what abundance of content would it have been unto her, to see by
undeniable arguments, that she was perfectly loved by the most faithful and
complete Shepherd of all Lignon.

The Moon had been twice at the full, since Celadon escaped out of Galathea's
hands; and still, in obedience to the commands of Astrea, he durst not present
himself unto her, but senlked himself in his Grotto: And though three months
were completely past since his loss, yet, the resentments of it were so fresh
in the soul of his Shepherdess, that all her prudent circumspection was not
able to conceal it, from such as had any observance over her. It seems, heaven,
as a punishment upon her, denied her that remedy, which Time usually affords
unto those that are subject unto sorrow; for, in lieu of allaying the
bitterness of it, she did daily discover new occasions, and matter for her
grief, and when any resentments did divert her memory of them, her eyes would
then six themselves upon no objects, but such as were sad; which to avoid, she
kept her self most commonly in her Cabin: But, her greatest affliction was,
she was deprived of that consolation, which is found, even in the greatest
misfortunes; I mean, she could not lay the fault upon any but her self, nor
could she find out any excuse to turn it another way: And certainly, it had bin
absolutely impossible for her to have lived under such a load of griefs, if the
society of Diana and Phillis had not helped her to bear the burden; for the
presence of real friends, is doubtless one of the most sovereign remedies
that grief can receive; and these two real friends not being ignorant of it,
they had so great a care of her, that one or both of them were continually with
her; they would pull her out of her Chamber by force, and carry her into the
most unfrequented places, for unto others they would not, lest they should meet
with some accidents, which might bring Celadon afresh into her memory; so as
these kind Shepheardesses did sweeten many an hour, and stole many a bitter
minute from Astrea.

Silvander on the other side, under pretense of a feigned address unto Diana,
did fall so extremely in real love with her, as he has been an excellent
example unto all the Country, and, at his own expenses taught them this
Doctrine, that Love will not be jeasted withal. He finds now so many
compulsive causes of love in that Shepherdess, as he admires he should be
acquainted with her so long, and love her no sooner: And though this task of
courtship which he had undertaken, was the Origin of his disease; yet, he made
no complaint, because Diana, without any offense, allowed him liberty to
express his passion; for such was the violence of his love, that if it had not
been allowed some vent, it would have broke him, and he could not possibly have
lived without it. When he consulted with himself, he plainly saw, that he had
made a disadvantageous change, especially when he remembered how happy he was,
an absolute Master of himself; often did he muster up all his arguments drawn
from reason, to rid himself from this new servitude; and when he found that
reason was too weak to do it, he would arm himself with violent resolutions
against it. But alas! look how often he tried all these ways so often did he see,
that it is in vain for any man to strive aganst the ordinances of heaven; and
that whosoever is wise, will rather comply and submit his will thereunto. And
therefore every morning and night, when civility denied him Diana's company, he
used to retire himself from all manner of company, as well, because all the
world without her was irksome unto him, as to consult more freely with
himself, and to consider, which way he had best take, to effect his desires:
And though he saw many impossibilities in the pursuit of his affection yet, for
all that, he could fix upon no resolutions, which concluded not in advantage of
his love: If at any time he started a design to make a retreat, Oh, how
suddenly would his heart give a check unto himself? If he determined to
pursue, Oh, what difficulties, what rubs, and how many Martyrdoms did he
foresee? What shall we do, Silvander, (would he say to himself) since both
pursuit and retreat are equally impossible? Then would he say in answer to
himself: Thy best way is to do, as the heavens they would have thee. Can it be
imagined, that the heavens would ever have made her so admirably fair, but
only, that all those who see her, should love her? And since in going both
forward and backward, thou find equal impossibility, choose that course
which is most agreeable to the will of heaven and to thy self. She is made so
fair, purposely to be loved and adored; and for my part, I will far sooner quit
my life, then her service. What then needs any further consultation, since the
will of heaven and my own, do so well agree upon it?

As he was in discourse with himself, he chanced to be near the pleasant River
of Lignon, opposite to a Rock, which resounded an Echo, that distinctly
answered to the last syllable of every sentence: And therefore, after much
turbulency of spirit, he roused up himself, as if awakned out of a dream, and
said, Why should I thus turmoile my self in so many ravelled contrarieties?
The Echo which inhabits in this place, will tell me what it has heard from
the mouth of my fairest Shepherdess; and therefore it is the most infallible
Oracle which I can consult withal. Then clearing up his voice, he began to
enquire thus of it.

ECHO,
TEll me, where goes my cries and care,
Thou blabbing Daughter of the Air?
To the Air.
Do think my heart, which Torments nurse,
A better End will meet, or worse?
Worse.
What then does mean that charming eye,
Which seems to love eternally?
A Lie.
If so, then what will me recover,
And from my Error me deliver?
Leave her.
How! leave her, say thou, to another?
How can I leave her, when I love her?
Love her.
The best advice that thou could frame:
But, did Diana say the same?
The same.
Had she but said, that she did Love,
Oh! then I should most happy prove?
Happy prove.
And so I should, could I but find,
That thou were sure this is her mind?
This is her mind.
Although Silvander knew well enough, that he was his own Answerer, and that
the Air being beaten by his voice into the concavities of the Rock, was
reverberated into his ears; yet could he not choose, but resent great
consolation from the auspicious Answers which he received; conceiving, that
nothing was governed by Chance, but all by an Allwise Providence, and therefore
he believed those words which the Rock returned to his ear, were inspired into
his tongue by some good Demon, that loved him; so as in this opinion, he
followed the custom of all Lovers, who use to flatter themselves in what they
desire, and find such hopes out of very bare appearances, in which there in no
appearance of reason. After he had given thanks unto the Genius of the Rocks,
and to the Nymphs of Lignon, he intended to go and present himself unto his
Shepherdess, at the field of Mercury, for there she used to call, in her way
to Astrea; and as he winded his course that way, he espied afar off the Nymph
Leonida, and the generous Paris, who hearing his voice turned toward him, as
well to enquire of the Shepheardesses Astrea Diana, and Phillis, as to enjoy
his good company: For though Paris did well enough know what affection he bore
unto Diana; yet did he love and esteem him very much, because he could never
believe, that that wise and discreet Shepherdess could prefer him before
himself, by reason of the grandeur of Adamas, who for his quality of Grand
Druide, was, next unto Amasis, the most honored by all the Country: never
considering, that Love uses not to measure by the Ell of Ambition or Merit,
but by opinion only. Silvander, whose education in the Phocencian and
Massellian Universities, had completely civilized, though the meeting of Paris
was but half pleasing to him, yet he turned to the Nymph and him, to salute
them. I need not ask you (said Leonida unto him, and smiled) what thoughts
entertained you in this solitary place, for I am sure, that Diana was the
chief: But I would gladly know, why you do prefer the thoughts before the
fight of her; and what occasions does invite you from her presence? I will not
deny, Madam, said he unto her, but that those pleasing thoughts whereof you
speak, were my deer companions, as well in this place as every where else, when
I am absent from Diana: But, that I should think them more deer unto me then
the sight of her, give me leave to tell you, that though it ought to be so, yet
I have not obtained so much Mastery of my self; and though you now see me
without her, it is only to pass away more sweetly in contemplation those
hours, which her r^past does constrain me to be absent from her: And indeed, I
was just now going unto her, at the field of Mercury: for now is the time she
uses to be there, in her way to Astrea, and my intention was to wait upon her.
And we (answered Leonida) came with resolutions, to spend the remainder of this
day with those fair Shepheardesses; and therefore I beseech you, Shepherd,
conduct us thither; and by the way, tell us, why the thoughts of her you adore,
ought to be more dear unto you then her presence, which is the first cause of
them? For my part, I conceive it so discordant to reason, that I cannot imagine
how it should be.

Silvander, in obedience to her commands, showing a Pathway which was a nearer
cut thorough a great Meadow, began thus to reply; The question, Great Nymph, is
of no such great difficulty to be understood, if it be but taken as it ought;
for it is most certain that the eyes are the doors by which Love first enters
into our souls. If any do fall in love upon report of beauty and perfection
of absent parties, that is either a love not lasting: nor violent, being rather
a shadow than any real love; or else the soul which received it, had some
grand defect in it self; for reports having commonly as many falsehoods as
truths, that judgment which builds upon any such uncertain foundation, cannot
be found, nor proceed from a well-tempered soul; but as that which produces a
thing, is not the same which gives it nutriment, and makes it grow up to
perfection, so it may be rightly said of Love. Our Ewes bring forth their
Lambs, who at first do seek a little nutriment from their Milk, yet it is not
that Milk which brings them up unto perfection, but it is a more solid
nutriment which they receive from the grass which they feed upon: So likewise
the eyes may conceive and produce a green infant-affection, but there must be
something more solid and substantial to make it grow unto perfection, and that
must be by a knowledge of the virtues, beauties, merits, and a reciprocal
affection of the party loved. Now this knowledge does take its original indeed
from the eyes, but it must be the soul which must afterward bring it to the
rest of judgment, and by the testimonies both of eyes and ears, and all other
considerations, concoct a verity, and so ground upon it. If this verity be to
our advantage, then it produces in us such thoughts, whose sweetness cannot
be equalled by another kind of contentment than the effects of the same
thoughts. If it be only advantageous to the party loved, then doubtless it
does augment our affection, but yet with violence and inquietude: and therefore
no question but absence does augment love, so it be not so long as that the
very image of the party loved be quite effaced; Whether it be that an absent
Lover never represents unto his fancy but only the perfections of the person
loved; or whether it be, that the understanding being already wounded will not
fancy any thing but what pleases it; or whether it be that the very thought of
such things does add much unto the perfections of the party loved: Yet this is
infallibly true, that he does not truly love, whose affection does not augment
in absence from the person loved. For my part (answered Leonida) My judgment
is much different from yours, and I have ever been of opinion, that absence is
the greatest, and most dangerous enemy which Love has. Presence, replied the
Shepherd, is without comparison much more, as we may see by daily experience;
for you shall find a hundred loves that change in presence, for one in absence;
and to demonstrate, that presence is more enemy unto love, consider, that if
one absent cease loving, its cessation i^ without any violence of struggling,
and the change is only because the memory is by degrees smothered with
oblivion, as a fire is with its own ashes; but when love breaks off in
presence, it is never without a noise and extreme violence, and (which is a
strange argument ^o prove my assertion) converts that love into a greater
hatred than if the love had never be^n* And that proceeds from this reason; A
lover is always either loved or hated, or held in a degree of indifferency; if
he be loved, as abundance is apt to glut, so love being laden in presence with
too many favors, grows weary: If he be hated, then he meets with so many
demonstrations of that hate every minute, as at length he is forced to ease
himself If he be in a degree of indifferency, and finds his love still
slighted, he will at length, if he be a man of any courage, make a retreat,
and resist the continual affronts which are put upon him; whereas in absence,
all favors received cannot by their abundance glut, since they do rather set
an edge upon desire: And the knowledge of hatred entering into our souls only
by the ear, the blow smarts not so much as that which is received by sight: and
likewise disdain and slight, be much more tolerable in absence than in
presence; doubtless therefore absence is much more fit to preserve affection
than presence is. I must needs confess (answered the Nymph) that there happens
many accidents in presence which destroys love, that absence is exempted from.
But for all that, you cannot persuade me, but that I must needs think the sight
of the party loved, does augment love much more, than by not seeing her; for
carresses and favors are the food of love; and those which are conferred in
presence, are far greater, and more sensibly obliging, than any others. I
thought, Madam (answered the Shepherd) that I had already sufficiently
answered your demand; but since it is your pleasure to desire more clear
reasons, I shall endeavor to give them. It has already been said, that Love
does first begin at the eyes, but it is not the eyes that does nourish it:
Beauty and goodness without any more, give it a growth in us, when they are
once known: Now the knowledge of this Beauty indeed comes first by the eyes;
but when that knowledge is once in our souls, we may love afterward without
the help of eyes, which you will easily grant if ever you were in love:
Consider, and tell me, would you lose your love if you lost your eyes? No,
certainly, and therefore you must needs confess, it is not your eyes which
does preserve your love. As for the knowledge of goodness it is produced either
by actions, or by words, both which do stand in need of presence, to be first
known, but afterward not at all; for that knowledge is afterward preserved in
the secret Cabinet of the memory, whereupon a soul does afterward sufficiently
feed. Then I believe you know, Madam, that the more knowledge one has of the
party loved, the more does love increase; but then, it is apparent, that the
turbulent motion of the senses, do infinitely hinder the clearness of the
understanding; and as the plummets of a Clock, the one cannot ascend unless
the other do descend, so when the senses are up, the understanding part must
needs be down and so the contrary, when the senses are absent, the
Intellectuals are best present, and does work more perfectly than they would if
they were disturbed by any objects of the eye, which is able to do nothing
else but look, and desire, and sigh. If you would think seriously upon any
matter, has not wise Nature taught you to put your hand upon your eyes to the
end that the sight should not divert the understanding another way? And
therefore hence you must needs conclude with me in my argument, and confess,
that Love digests it self better in absence than in presence. But if it be so,
said Paris, how comes it to pass that all Lovers should so passionately desire
the sight of them they love? It proceeds from ignorance, answered Silvander: He
cannot attribute unto himself the name of a Lover, who thinks his love so
great that it is impossible it should augment: If any be of that opinion, he
will never seek after any means to increase it, nor be in any quest of
further knowledge, but rests himself contented with as much only as his eye
can afford him, without any deeper contemplation. But, O great Nymph, what a
vast difference there is betwixt a love that is nourished by the eyes, and a
love that is nourished by the understanding? As much doubtless as the soul is
superior to the body, so much is the understanding to be preferred before the
eyes. And absence in such is so far from diminishing love, that it augments and
begets fresh and violent desires to augment it; and contemplation of a Beauty
does imprint it deeper into the fancy than any eye can. If it be so, said
Paris, I wonder you do not absent your self from Diana, to the end you may
the more love her. I told you before (answered Silvander) that I ought to do
so, but that I have not yet obtained so much mastery over my self; for,
generous Paris, we are all but men, I mean all imperfect; and the imperfections
of humanity are not upon a sudden removed: We are all sensitively inclined, and
love to see, taste, smell, and touch, and must needs hanker after these corporal
senses. This is the point unto which I have not yet arrived, and unto which I
ought. Reason will forbid such considerations, and bid us act all by the
intellectual faculties: Nature bestowed the senses upon us only for
instruments, by which the soul may receive the knowledge of things, but not to
be our companions in the pleasures and felicities of them, as being altogether
incapable of so great a good.

This discourse had continued longer, if they had not by chance heard Phillis
sing near the field of Mercury: She was sitting with another Shepherdess
under a shady tree, looking upon their Flocks as they were feeding until the
heat of the day was over. As soon as Silvander heard her tone he turned his
head that way and knowing them, he turned his head again so suddenly, that
Leonida could not choose but smile. What do you hear and see said she, which
causes you to turn your head so quickly away? I have seen, Madam, said he, her
whom I never see without sorrow: Phillis I mean, the most cruel of my enemies,
since she is the cause of my servitude. At the very same time, Lycidas was
walking the same way, and was upon them before he was aware. Jealousy which
made him fly all company, made him shun Silvander more than any other; but now
Civility constrained him to salute Leonida and Paris, and being invited to
follow them, though at first he would have desired their pardon with some
frivolous excuses: But Leonida, who loved him for Celadous sake, was so
importunate with him, that he was forced to make one in the company: And Paris,
who was very desirous to know where Diana was, did ask him, if he knew who it
was that was with Phillis under that shady Tree. Lycidas, who had not yet taken
notice of them, looked, and then answered, that it was Astrea. Then going on
their way, Leonida resumed the discourse, which she had begun with Silvander;
And why Shepherd, said she unto him, are you so offended against that
Shepheardess? for though she be the cause of your love, yet is she also the
cause of your becoming a more accomplished man: And I believe you will confess
that love is able to add much ornament unto our souls; and if it be so you
are rather much obliged unto her. I must needs confess, answered Silvander,
that I believe without Phillis, I had not fallen in love; but I must tell you
withal, that she is the cause that I have lost my liberty, and am less my own
than hers whom I adore: And I must also tell you, that liberty is of so high a
price, that I am not so much obliged to her for making me more accomplished, as
I am disobliged to her for the loss of my dear and desirable freedom. But,
added the Nymph, by her means you may perhaps obtain the affection of her whom
you adore and love. And a well born soul, as yours is, will set such a value
upon that, be it at any rate whatsoever, as he cannot complain against her who
is the cause of it; A well born and generous soul, replied he, will not upon
any terms thank her who is the cause of her servitude; for servitude, be it in
what degree it will, is still servitude. At the first when Lycidas heard
Phillis named, he stood still with much attention, but after he had heard all
the discourse and replies of Silvander, he did believe that he really loved
her; and not being able to hide his Jealousy as he desired, he could not choose
but say unto him, I beseech you, Shepherd, tell me, Do you indeed love this
Shepherdess so much as you seem to do? Silvander, who never thinking of
Lycidas, had talked thus unto Leonida, and knowing that this question did
proceed from Jealousy, he had a mind to keep him still in his doubt, and
therefore would not either deny, or confess what he asked, but only said thus
unto him; I beseech you, Lycidas, tell me what you do think? I see answered
he, so many dissimulations, that my judgment cannot determine any certainty
upon them. Since my dissimulations, said Silvander, do blind your judgment, I
beseech you tell me, what is your desire? My desires, answered Lycidas are not
any thing dependant upon you, whose actions are very indifferent unto me: and
therefore, I refer them unto your own imaginations. Since you are not pleased
to acquaint me with your will, said Silvander, if I do any thing which shall
displease you, blame your self only, and arm your self with patience. Lycidas
would have replied, and perhaps somewhat sharply, if Leonida, who foresaw it,
had not hindered him with an excuse that she was desirous to hear Phillis sing;
for they were so near as to hear her words, which were these,

A Song against Jealousy.
CUpid with left hand shot awry,
His Bow did start, his Arrows fly
Most commonly too low or high,
And fails in his Archery.
Or if he hit the mark, I fear
That all his Arrows poisoned were,
In lieu of Love did Frenzy bear;
For Jealousies no other are.
If Lovers needs must Jealous be,
And from such venom never be free,
Then fie upon it, my Prayer shall be,
From Love good Lord deliver me.
Silvander intending to make Lycidas as Jealous as possibly he could, and
seeing Phillis very attentive upon her Song, also Astrea upon those thoughts
which this Song revived in her memory, he left Leonida, and ran unto her; fell
down upon his knees, kissed her hand, then rose up and acquainted her with the
coming of Leonida and Paris. Phillis had not so much leisure as to check him
for his rude intrusion, because Leonida was so near, that she was forced to
rise, and pay that civil duty which was due unto her. Silvander offered to
lead her by the arm, but she seeing Lycidas in the company, did repulse him,
which was no small wound in the soul of the jealous Lycidas, who perceiving that
Phillis saw him, did believe, that she repulsed him only, because it was in his
presence. But after all complements of all sides were performed, all of them
sat down under a shady tree, and Silvander resolving to add fuel unto the
jealousy of Lycidas he fell down upon his knees before Phillis: Well, my fair
shepherdess, said he unto her, how long is it your pleasure our war shall
continue? What term have you limited unto my services? How long will you
delight in those pains which you have caused me to endure? Though you do employ
all your Art and Arms against me, yet, I hope in the end the victory will be
mine. Phillis knew well enough, that this shepherds speeches had relation only
unto the wager that was between them, who should love Diana best, and therefore
received his expression, in that sense they ought to be understood. But
Lycidas, who thought that this wager was only an invention betwixt them, to
umbrage their affection, he took it in another sense. Which she plainly
perceiving, she cast her eyes always upon him, and to undeceive him in his
opinion, answered Silvander in this manner: Shepherd, Shepherd, there is no
such necessity of using all my power to vanquish you, in the wager that is
betwixt us, and therefore I dare assume so much confidence as to tell you, that
I shall get the victory. Silvander knew what Phillis designed, and therefore,
by way of contradiction, answered her: None can be ignorant of your power and
Silvander, the least of any Shepherd about L^gno^, since he has so often
resented the effects of your beauty. If it be so, replied she, you are like
unto those that blind themselves with looking at the Sun, when as the Sun is
not in any fault, nor ever minds them. Ah Shepheardess, answered he, whosoever
does behold the Sunshine of your eyes, and is not blinded, is unworthy to
behold it. I cannot tell (said Phillis, and blushed at his words) what your
design is in speaking thus, but I am sure, our Mistress shall be acquainted
with these dissembling expressions, which, since the wager is to be determined
very shortly, I am very confident will cost you very deer, and then you will
feel the smart of over late repentance. Do not think, Shepheardess, said he,
that I shall ever repeat of any expressions of my affection to you, but on the
contrary, I ought rather to be sorry, that I have been so long without any
declaration of it, and ought not to fear the menaces wherewith you threaten me.
Phillis knew well enough, and Astrea also, that he mocked her; but that was no
satisfaction to the suspicion which these words did kindle in the mind of
Lycidas, who perceiving how Phillis was netled at them, was the more fortified
in his opinion. At the last, she said unto him. I think, Silvander, that you
have laid a wager, that you would displease me with this language; or else you
come to practice upon me what you shall say unto your Mistress. If that be his
aim, said Astrea, his best way would be, to be plain, and speak unto you, as
if you were Diana her self, and not to dissemble so unto you. Nay, nay, said
Silvander, that is all one, my aim is to let her understand the quality of my
affection. And then he prepared himself to proceed. I conjure you said
Phillis, by her, whom of all the world you love most, to let me be quiet, and
content your self, that I do know more of your affection, then you can
express. These conjurations, said he, are too powerful to be contradicted,
and the declaration which you have made too advantageous, not to content me;
and therefore since it is your pleasure, I am silent. You do oblige me by it,
said Phillis, for I cannot endure your language; it is more fit you went and
helped Diana, whom I left in her Cabin, much troubled about her beloved Lamb
Floretta, which is dead, or near it. If you command me, replied Silvander, and
will undertake the charge of my flock till I return, I will go unto her. Nay,
said Phillis, if that be all, I do command you; and will undertake the charge
of your flock. Then Silvander, as if he durst not disobey what she commanded,
went unto the place where Diana was, leaving Phillis very glad of his
departure, and Lycidas the most jealous Shepherd in all the Country: For,
though Silvander's language did much displease, yet, the displeasures which he
observed in Phillis, were much more stinging; and her conjuring him by the
person whom he most loved, was most of all offensive to him: But her taking the
charge of his flock upon her, this action pierced him to the very heart and yet
the poor Shepherdess did all this, only because she thought Silvande^'s
language was offensive unto Lycidas. Thus see, how our designs do sometimes
produce effects quite contrary to our intentions.

Mean time Silvander coming to the Cabin of his Shepherdess, he found all
that Phillis had said was true; for he found Diana sitting upon the ground,
with her beloved sheep in her lap, which seemed to be dead, sometimes rubbing
it, sometimes putting salt into its mouth, but all to no purpose, for the sheep
tumbled upon the ground, and lay for dead, which grieved the Shepherdess very
much, for she loved it above all the rest. When she was out of all hopes, and
perhaps accused some of her neighbors of Witchcraft, for looking upon it with
some malevolent eye; Silvander came in, and after a salute asked her, what she
did upon the ground? You may see without asking me, said she if you do but look
in what a condition my dear Floretta is in. The Shepherd kneeled down, looked
seriously upon it, and stopped its nose with one of his fingers, to hinder it
from breathing: But as soon as it was let alone, after a little faint sneez, it
began to turn round about until it fell. Silvander having discovered its
disease, looked very jocundly upon Diana: Trouble not your self, fair
Mistress said he unto her, your beloved Floretta will recover again; it*
disease is not caused by any Witchcraft, but rather by the heat of the Sun,
which having offended the brain, has caused this disease, which is called the
Vertigo, a convulsion of the nerves, which have their scource from the brain,
and causes them to go round. Time doubtless will cure it, without any other
Physic; but yet I know a Simple, which grows in the next Meadow, which will
be an infallible cure, which, if you please to give me leave. I will apply.
Please (said the Shepherdess, glad of the good news) yes with all my heart;
and that I may be acquainted with that herb against another time, I will go
with you. I shall be most glad of that, replied he, in a double respect; the
one, in doing you an acceptable piece of service; the other, in having your
company, which I shall think the best bestowed part of my time. Upon this, they
left the sheep in custody of those in the Cabin, and went to gather this Plant:
Diana all the way gave the Shepherd thanks for his good will: And Silvander
having by chance observed the Plant as he came, he went presently to it again,
and gathering a good quantity, they squeezed the juice of it into the ears of
the Sheep, which had no sooner received it, but it immediately began to shake
its head, and after two or three sneezes, it began to bleat, and call for the
rest of his fellows, and began to eat. But Silvander taking it by the neck,
did put it into a room by it self, and wished Diana not to let it come out all
that day, by reason of the Sun's heat. Diana not contenting her self with the
cure of her beloved sheep, and with the knowledge of the herb, would yet by any
means know the name of it. The Plant, replied Silvander, has many names; some
give it the name of Cla^e, others Cleer-eye, or All-good; and we call it
Scarliol, or wild End've. But I beseech you, why are you not as careful to
preserve all that is your, as this beloved sheep? When I see them ill, said
she, I will apply the remedy, not only unto my own, but unto any's else, as soon
as I can. I would you were as willing to do so, replied he, as I see you are
the contrary. Good Silvander, replied Diana, do not spoil the courtesy you have
done me in curing my deer Floretta, by injuring me with such a thought: but we
had better go, and seek out my Companions, who doubtless are all in much
trouble for me. Upon this, she went to the field of Mercury, full of joy for
the cure of her sheep; and by the way she understood, that Leonida and Paris
were with those Shepheardesses, unto whom she went: Presently after, she saw
them all coming toward her; for Paris hearing of Diana's grief, desired all
the company to go unto her, and try if they could give any good advice for the
cure of her sheep: But when they saw her coming afar off, they stayed,
supposing the sheep to be either cured or dead; and as chance was, it was just
in the field of Mercury, where four ways met: And because the basis on which
the statue of Mercury did stand, was raised above the level three steps, they
sat round about it, and some looking one way, some another, Leonida espied two
Shepherds and a Shepherdess, coming, as it were from mount Verdun, who
seemed to be at some odds; for the actions of their hands, arms, and all
parts, did show them to be in some passionate dispute, especially the
Shepherdess, who thrust from her sometimes the one, and sometimes the other,
and would not hear them: sometimes they stood still and held her, as if they
were desirous to make her the judge of their controversy; but she still struck
away their hands on both sides, and then ran away from them, until they
overtook her again. Had they not sometimes kneeled down before her, and
otherwhiles submissively kissed her hands, to stay her; one would have thought
by her flight, that they would have offered some violence unto her. And drawing
near this statue of Mercury, without taking any notice of the good company that
was about it, Leonida showed them unto all the company, and asked, if any knew
them? I have often seen them, said Lycidas, in the Town next adjoining unto
mount Verdun: They are not originally of that place, but strangers, whom the
fortune of their Parents constrained to come and dwell in this Country. If you
desire to see a young springing beauty, give great hopes of rare perfection,
look but that Shepherdess in the face; and if you could by any means invite
them to relate the difference that is betwixt them, I am confident it would
prove an excellent diversion: for they are both in love with that
Shepherdess, and she will not entertain either: It was once my chance to hear
some of their disputes from their own mouths, and in my judgment it was worthy
of notice. The Shepherdess is called Celida, he that is the taller on the
right hand, is called Thamires, and the other Calidon. Lycidas had no sooner
said this, but the strangers were so near them, that every one perceived the
reports of Lycidas concerning Celida to be most true; for the luster of her
beauty was so admirable, as it attracted all eyes upon her; and though there
might be found some nice defect in her beauty, yet any one might judge that
time would bring it unto exact perfection. Whilst every one was in a censorious
contemplation of her, Leonida, prompted by the report of Lycidas, was very
desirous to know their difference; therefore she advanced toward them, and
after a civil salute, invited them in the name of all the company, to sit down
and rest themselves upon the stairs where they did sit. Celidea, who was full
of civility, and knew what reverence was due unto the Nymph, and also very glad
to avoid the importunities of the two Shepherds, she did most willingly accept
of Leonida's offer: And when all were taking their places, Diana came unto
them, and after all civil salutations, she sat down amongst the good company.
Lycidas not being able to endure, that Silvander should sit next Phillis; he
stole out of the company before any took notice of him, and went to entertain
his own sad thoughts in the thick of the wood. Then Leonida, having caused
Celidea to sit next her on one hand, and Astrea on the other, Diana sat next
the stranger, and Paris next her. And because Phillis had taken her place next
the sad Astrea, Silvander was with Thamires and Calidon; and though they did
not sit about the statue, yet their backs were toward the fair Shepheardesses,
and could not see them. Paris and Phillis did sit a little turning from them
yet so, as by a little turning their bodies, they could both see and speak unto
them. Being thus ranged, Leonida seeing Celidea's modesty would not permit her
to speak, and intending to inspire her with more confidence, she thus broke
silence Although, fair Celidea, you were unknown unto us by sight; yet the fame
of your beauty has reached all our ears, which swells us all with extreme
curiosity, to know both you and your fortune. Lycidas has partly acquainted us
with the difference that is betwixt you and these two courteous Shepherds; but
since there goes various reports of it, we should be extremely glad to hear the
truth from your own mouth. Madam, answered the stranger, I shall be very loath
to requite your civility with a tedious History of our dissentions; but, if the
knowledge of it will any way contribute unto your service, I shall most freely
do it. Although the relation and remembrance of things past, be nothing
pleasing unto me; Yet, great Nymph, I cannot choose but desire, that you might
entertain the time with some other, and some better discourse. Madam, said
Calidon, since this shepherdess is unwilling to undertake the satisfaction of
your knowledge, I beseech you impose the task upon me; let me be the Relator
both in the presence of her and Thamires, to the end they may correct me, if I
deviate from the truth. Great Nymph, said Thamires, since it is I that am most
interressed in the business, it is most reasonable you should receive it from
my mouth. Upon that account, replied Celidea, it belongs most unto my self to
be the relater, for you are both combined against me. I find no reason in
that, said Calidon; for though, fair Celidea, you are against us both, yet both
of us are for you: And as for Thamires, I would have him know, that he who has
most wrong, has most reason to complain: And, great Nymph, it is most
peculiarly proper unto me, to inform you, of the extreme injury that is done
me; for it is I whom the fair Celidea has injured, in refusing me, and it is
Thamires that has wronged me, in offering to ravish that from me, which Love
has ordained unto me, and he himself has give me. To return your own
arguments upon your self, said Thamires, it is I that ought to speak, being
the most injured; I, that have reason to complain against Celidea, because she
did once love me, and now does not; and against Calidon, because he is the most
obliged unto me, and yet the most ungrateful. And I, great Nymph, replied
Celidea, have most reason to complain, because I am the But, at which both
their importunities and vexations are shot at, and both of them are resolved to
vex me to death, rather then let me enjoy any quietness; so as if the party
most interressed, must most complain, it is both their parts to be silent, and
give me the liberty to tell my doleful tal^. The dispute had lasted longer, if
Leonida, in a smiling manner, had not put an end unto it: and imposing silence,
she proposed, that the difference might be decided by Lot; and all being
contented, the Lot fell upon Thamires, so as all fixing their looks upon him,
after an humble reverence, he began thus:

The History of Celidea, Thamires, and Calidon.
SInce it has pleased the great Tautates, to make choice of me for a relater
of the dissentions that are betwixt us, I do profess, that though it be the
custom of all interressed persons to speak only what is to their own advantage;
yet I will not conceal and disguise the truth in the least manner, upon this
condition, that when every one has said all they can for themselves, I may
have liberty to allege my own reasons apart. Be pleased to know then, great
Nymph, that though both Calidon and my self do dwell in that Town which
adjoynes unto mount Verdun, yet we are not of that Country; our Fathers and
their Predecessors are Boyens, who heretofore came out of Gaul, with the King
of Beloveses, and went to seek out new habitation beyond the Alps; who, after
they had planted themselves there, and continued many ages, were in the end
expulsed out of those Towns which they had built, by a people called Romans;
some being plundered of all their goods, went into Hircania; others returned
into their own ravaged Country; our Ancestors came into Gaul, and at last,
linked themselves by Marriages unto the Segusians. Thus, wise Nymph, I do
present unto your knowledge, that you may the better judge, how great the amity
betwixt Calidon and me ought to be; for, being both of us Boyens, both
descended from the same stock, and are Cosens, both strangers, and heretofore
both friends; all these circumstances are so many inviting arguments to love
one another. Also, I do ingenuously confess, that I did ever affect him as
dearly, as if he were my own son; I may well be allowed to use that phrase, for
I have done him the offices of a kind and good Father, having educated him
with as much indulgent care, as his own Father, who was my Uncle, could; even
in his Infancy, when he had not so much knowledge as to discern good from bad,
then, and ever since, was my indulgency over him. This fair Celidea was brought
up by the prudent Cleontines, a near neighbor unto my habitation; and though
she was then of an age far unlikely to cause love, (being scarce nine years of
age) yet I must confess, that her Infantine actions did much please me, and
did take me in such an unaccustomed manner, as I suited my self to her own
young sports; and though I was an age of years above her, yet I played with
her, as if I were as young as she: How often have I wished us of an equal age,
and that her time might go forward, and mine backward? How many times have I
striven to withdraw my self from this vain affection? But not having power to
do it, when she came at ten years old, her beauty did put forth such hopeful
budds, as I was then not ashamed at my loving an Infant: And I remember, upon
this subject, I composed these Lines.

Upon a young Beauty.
AURORA, usher to a day,
The fairest in the month of May,
Did never promise one so gay.
And would you early Roses pick,
And Lillies, that are timely, seek?
Behold them springing in her Cheek,
The Sun did never rise so clear,
No^ half so radiant all the Year,
As she, in budding, does appear.
But if her Morning be so bright,
Her Noon, when Beauty is at height,
Will quite eclipse the Sun of light.
If Beauty do begin so soon,
And charm in the Bud, before well grown,
What will it, when the Bud is blown?
I Will venture ods, that then she shall
Inflame both gods, and men, and all
And Mistress be Imperial.
Heaven, I beseech thee, let us find
Her heart like to her eyes, both kind;
Else make our hearts and eyes both blind.
Now because I did foresee, that this Beauty would be the object of many eyes,
and that my heart would not burn alone, I resolved to be the first that should
insinuate himself into her mind: And considering, that her age was not yet
capable of any solid affection, I courted her with childish toys, and
sometimes talked of Love, of Passion, of Desire, and of Flame; not that I
thought her able to resent such things yet, but my end was, only to accustom
her to those phrases, which commonly does more offend the ears of
shepheardesses, then the effects themselves do. I continued this life above a
year, during which time, I would sometimes steal a kiss, sometimes put my hand
into her bosom, and indeed, great Nymph, so tampered with her, that I did
extremely win upon her affection; for, when she came to be eleven years of age,
she loved me, as she her self said, as well as she did her Father; and her
affection growing every day, she vowed unto me, that she loved me much above
the degree of either Father or Brother: And when she accomplished the age of
twelve, she loved me above all the world. And indeed, she was so void of all
malice, and so easy to be wrought upon at that age, as I could have engaged her
unto any thing, if I had not designed to marry her when she was a little older:
But that consideration, together with the real affection I did bear unto her,
did restrain me from all manner of evil thoughts. But, because her simplicity
made me fear, lest any other should deceive her, since many began already to
court her, I was continually laying before her that high esteem which every one
did set upon constancy and fidelity; how contemptible those were, that loved
many; how almost all Shepherds are unfaithful and deceivers, and there was no
credit to be given to their words; nay, that it was a grand fault in any young
woman to hear them. But one day, when she answered me, That if this be a fault,
then she ought not to suffer me to speak as I did; I perceived, that she was
still in her innocent Infancy, since she did not know my aim; and therefore I
read her a loving Lecture upon Love and Amity, telling her, that we came
purposely into the world to love; that without this virtue, there was no
delight in life; that it was Love which made all bitter sweet, and pains
easy; that whosoever was without that quality, were extremely miserable,
because none could ever love them; that she saw before her eyes the example of
her Father and Uncle; her Mother did Love her Father, and her Aunt her Uncle;
but such as love above one, are scorned by every one. But I beseech you,
replied she, are shepherds also obliged to love but one? Doubtless they are,
answered I: And do you not see, that I do love only you? But I beseech you,
tell me, said she, did you never love any one before I was born? and if I
should die, would you not love some other? I could not choose but laugh at this
downright demand, and in answer to it: Know, my Fairest, (said I unto her) that
I did never love any till you did come into the world; and if you should die
before me, my love would die with you, and never live again for any other. And
if you should die before me said she, must I of necessity do the like? If I
must, pray Father teach me how I must bury my Love in your Coffin. Daughter,
said I unto her, and smiled, you must still let your love of me live in your
memory, as I should of you, if you did die before me. But how, said she, should
I love one that is dead? When you did at any time kiss me, and put your hand
into my breast, if I did ask you, why you did so you always answered, that it
was, because you loved me: And when you are dead, must I do the same? Fair
Daughter, (said I unto her, taking her in my arms, and kissing her)
shepheardesses never use to hang upon the necks of those shepherds whom they
love, nor use any such carrasses as testimonies of their loves unto them: It is
enough for them to suffer, and not act such things. I beseech you tell me,
replied she, is suffering ones self to be kissed and carrassed in this manner,
a testimony of love? Doubtless it is, (said I unto her) and therefore they
ought not to suffer any so to do, unless such as they do love. And how do
shepherds express their loves, said she unto me? As I do, answered I, when I
kiss you, and take delight in playing with you. It seems, said she, that when
one would kiss me, and play in that manner with me, I may by that know he
loves me.

I do relate the simplicities of this young Shepherdess unto you, Madam, that
you may the better know, of what nature that affection was which she bore unto
me, and with what indulgent care I brought her up, more like a Father then a
Lover; you may hereby conceive, how much beholding she ought to be unto me, for
not loving her after a vicious manner, nor working upon the simplicity of her
age and disposition; for you may perceive by her Questions and Answers, that
her mind might have been tempered into what Mould soever I would. Perhaps you
will wonder, that I, who was of more solid years, could take any delight in the
conversation of one who was so very young; but if you will please to consider,
that Love is always a child, and takes most delight in youth, you will not
think it strange, that since I must love with a most pure and sincere
affection, an innocent and harmless beauty should be most agreeable unto me.
And the very truth is, it was not I that was the author of this affection to
her, but it was heaven that forced me to love her whether I would or no. For I
did often absent my self from her, and opposed all manner of arguments that
reason could suggest against it, but that did rather augment than diminish my
affection, which in the end grew to a most extreme height. About this time
Calidon returned out of the Boyen Province, and was some eighteen years of age,
or thereabouts. He was taller than usually that age allows any; handsomely
proportioned; his complexion, for a brown, extremely fair; his mind, his garb,
and his discourse, was higher than perhaps his quality required, but yet not at
all proud nor vainglorious. I must confess, that when I saw him so much
improved, I loved him better than I did before: For before, I did love him
only in consideration of Consanguinity, and upon the recommendation of my
Uncle; but when I found him to be so amiable, so extremely well accomplished,
and every way so well improved, that I having neither Wife nor Child, or then
intending to marry, resolved to make him my Heir, after my death, unto all my
estate, which perhaps was not very inconsiderable. And to oblige him unto a
reciprocal good will unto me, I declared as much unto all my Kindred and
Neighbors. Now because I did foresee that dwelling in my house, it was almost
impossible but he should fall in love with the fair Celidea, I gave him a most
strict charge to look upon her only with the eyes of a Brother, and not of a
Lover: He protested with a thousand asseverations and oaths, that he would obey
me in this, and all things else, and would not do any thing in the world that
should displease me: Yet before the Moon had run a full course, he was charmed
with Celidea; and not daring to declare it unto her or me, or any else, after
he had languished a while, he was forced to keep his bed; his eyes shrunk into
his head, his complexion grown yellow, and grown so lean and altered, as he was
not knowable. I brought the most knowing and experienced Physicians in all the
Country unto him: If Fame cried up any man, I spared neither cost nor pains
till I got him. I caused Sacrifices to be offered upon every Altar of the
Country to appease Tautates, Hesus, Tharamis, and Belinus, if Calidon by chance
had offended them. I sent to enquire of every Oracle and Augurer: I sent for
all the Bardi to come and pray with him: I sent also for the best Musicians, to
try if Music would allay the Melancholy which oppressed his soul. To be
short, there was not one sage Sarronide which at my request did not come to
visit him, and give him wise precepts against grief and sorrow. But all these
had no operation; nor could all the tears which I shed by his beds side, get
him to tell me the cause of his disease. Thus languishing in this manner, and
no remedies could do any good upon him, there was an old Physician, a friend
of mine, who hearing of my sorrows for Calidon, came unto me, to comfort me in
my affliction; and after as good and wise advice as any humane Prudence could
give, he bade me resign Calidon and my own will into the hands of Tautates,
and to believe, that if I did it unfeignedly, I should receive more comfort
than I could from all men living. When he was ready to go away, he desired to
see Calidon: We went both into his chamber, he fell into talk with him, and
considered him very seriously he felt his pulse, observed his actions and
gestures; turned him every way to find out his disease: And after he had been
two hours with him; Young man, said he unto him, cheer up, and be assured
that you shall not dye of this disease; I have found out the cause, and I have
known many sick of the same, but never knew one dye of it. Then going out of
the Chamber, he took me aside, and said thus unto me; The age I have attained
unto, is great, and though I have not employed all my time very well, yet not
all unprofitably: I have studied the art of Physic very long, and have
attained unto no mean reputation; I have been employed by many of the best
quality amongst the Boyens, the Seguanonans, and the Allobrogians: Long
experience have I had in my Art, which makes me speak with more assurance than
any that is younger than my self can. Let me tell you, that Calidons disease
proceeds not from the body but the mind; and if his body be sick, it is because
of the near union it has to his sick mind, which makes it resent the pain as
if it were its own, as we see one friend sensible of the pain of another. And
though these kind of maladies be very painful, yet are they not so dangerous
as those of the body; for the mind is not subject to corruption, or dissolution
of parts, but only to change its quality. I tell you this, that you may not
despair of the young man's cure, whose Malady, I think I have very rightly
discovered; And by all symptoms, I find that he is extreme passionately in
Love, and is either slighted, or else dares not declare it. As soon as ever
the Physician said so, I presently apprehended, that certainly it was with the
fair Celidea; and because of my forbidding him, he durst not speak of it. When
the Physician perceived me sad, in lieu of rejoicing at the matter, he asked
me the reason, to whom I answered, that I was more in fear of him than ever,
because his malady was without the compass of my cure, and he might love one I
had no power over, or else a stranger, or perhaps some enemy, and therefore I
saw no reason to rejoice. There is a remedy, said he, against any thing but
death, and therefore never fear but I shall keep Calidon alive; and if you will
please to give me leave to be with him a few days, I shall discover well
enough whether he be in love with any that has any dependence upon you, or with
a stranger. You cannot hope, said I unto him, ever to get it from his own
mouth. No, no, said he, that is not the way; but fear not, I shall bring it
about: Matters of Love be they never so close, may easily be discovered, if
prudent artifice be used.

But, great Nymph, I should be extremely tedious if I should relate every
trivial passage, therefore for brevities sake, I shall only tell you, that
this Physician was for seven or eight days never from Calidons bed side. In
the mean time, he advised me to get all the young Shepheardesses in the
neighborhood to come and see him, under pretense of sorrow for his sickness.
As for the Physician, he was always holding him by the arm, and felt his
Pulse, to know when any caused an extraordinary motion in him. So it was, that
Celidea at that time was gone a journey with Cleontine, and stayed away five or
six days, and therefore she was almost the last of all the visitants, though
the nearest neighbor: I contrived it so, that all my friends and neighbors
sent both their Sisters and Daughters to my house; and when we were almost out
of all hope to discover what I desired to know this way, one came to tell us,
that Celidea was at the door. As fortune was, the Physician held him by the arm
at that time; and his pulse did beat a slower pace than it had done all the
day; but as soon as ever he heard Celidea named, it began to beat as if he were
in a most high Fever. The Physician finding this, did look him in the face,
and saw his eyes more quick and lively than ordinary; his complexion came into
his cheeks, and he saw so great an alteration every way, as he would hardly
stay till Celidea entered for better assurance; but when she entered, his pulse
then did keep a mad man's time, and all parts were different from their ordinary
temper. Therefore drawing me aside, Thamires, said he, It is not Celidea which
enters into the Chamber, but it is Calidons Wife, if you would have him live.
Oh heavens! how those words pierced me to the heart? They struck me dumb, I was
not able to speak one word. Afterward, when I had a little recollected my
self; I asked him, whether considering the condition he was in, it were fit to
marry him? No, said he, it will be enough if you can procure the Shepheardess
to give him some knowledge of her affection; and in the mean time you may talk
with Clcontine, who being wise, will not be against a match so advantageous.

The Physician went away, and left me in a worse condition than his patient. Oh
what strange contrarieties were in my soul? One side bade me yield Celidea
unto Calidon, for friendship sake; Love, on the other side forbade the banes.
But, said Friendship unto me, Calidon will die if you do deny her; and there is
no Physician but this, can cure him: And Love answered, how can thou live thy
self, if thou do not enjoy her? Can thou not surmount a vain passion (said
Friendship) and be ruled by the Laws of Reason? What reason is it, replied
Love, to dye thy self, to make another live? Do you not consider (replied
Friendship) that Calidon is young, and therefore less able than thy self to
master his unruly passion? Will thou that art arrived at grave and stayed
years, show thy self weaker than he, or, to express it a little better, will thou buy a little transitory pleasure, that is past almost as soon as had, at
so dear a rate as the death and eternal loss of Calidon? Away, away, change
thy mind, consider not what thou art, but what thou should be: Think how the
Father of that young Shepherd will reproach thee: Did he not with his last
dying breath recommend his young child then in his cradle unto thy indulgent
care? Did thou not swear he should be as dear unto thee as thy self? Do
thou not remember the many good offices thou receivedst from him? Oh Thamires
do not buy thy repentance at so dear a rate: Repent, repent for shame of an act
so unworthy an ancient Boyen, from whence it is thy boast to be descended, and
let not thy soul be continually gnawed upon by an evil conscience?

I must confess, that these considerations had such a prevalency with me, as I
did once resolve to part with Celidea, and resign her unto Calidon. But, O
Madam, what extreme difficulties did I find in the execution of it? First, to
the end this young Shepherd might recover his health, I begun with him, and
acquainting him with my knowledge of his disease, I showed him my extreme
desire of his cure: At the first, he denied it unto me, but at last he did
confess it with watery eyes, and asked me forgiveness, with so many apparent
signs of sorrow, that seeing his error was by a most compulsive power of
Love, I could not choose but take his fault upon my self. But the grand
difficulty was to speak unto Celidea for she was so far from loving him,
that she did down right hate him. And certainly this hatred proceeded from an
Antipathy in Nature, since she had not the least shadow of any cause for it;
and the Shepherd had so many excellent good qualities, that in all reason they
should rather have gotten love than hatred: And yet she would always say unto
me, that Calidon of all men she knew, should be the last man she would love.
But being resolved to make this overture, so contrary both unto her will and my
own, I was at an extreme puzzle where, and how to begin. At last, I thought it
best to break the Ice by degrees for to bid her downright to love Calidon, was
not the way, both in respect of her affection to me, and disaffection to him. I
went therefore to work by degrees, and now she was not to be treated as a
child: I hinted unto her my extreme sorrows for the Shepherd; how dear his
life was unto me, and how I should never enjoy any delights if I lost him; That
Physicians and all knowing persons told me his malady proceeded from nothing
else but sorrow; and not knowing what was the cause, I could not choose but
desire all them that loved me, to study how to make him merry, or at least to
find out the cause of his sickness: And that she being one whom I loved and
honored most, she was in some sort obliged more than any to endeavor the
cure of this Shepherd for my sake: Therefore I conjured her by our friendship,
to see him as often as she could, and to carrasse and cheer him up, to keep him
from that melancholy which would kill him. She who did really love me, did
promise to do it so often as she conveniently could: And indeed did so, which on
the one side did content me, and on the other did so grieve me, as I did think
I should not live. I had a conceit that her familiarity with him would in time
engage her to liking of him, which afterward might the more easily make her
be persuaded unto love: She having no other design, did only as she
promised, but did not change her mind. However this wrought good effects upon
Calidon, who receiving so many favorable visits, and being so kindly carrassed
above his expectation, did in a short time begin to recover: And though he was
not presently cured, yet there was apparent signs of amendment. Now because
that she was weary of this life, and because I saw my design did not take
according to my thoughts, I intended to oblige her another way. I addressed my
self unto Cleontine, acquainted her with my affection unto Calidon, with my
intention of making him my Heir; I represented unto her the quality of this
young Shepherd, his virtues, and to be brief, with the love he had unto
Caledon, and used all manner of arguments that might advance the match. Judge
great Nymph, if I went not very far, and whether he be not much obliged unto
me. Cleontine thinking the Match to be advantageous, did thank me for my good
will unto Celidea, then gave me her word that she would use all her endeavors
in favor of Calidon; but that the young Shepherdess had a Mother who loved
her exceedingly well, and she could not dispose of her without her consent:
But she would motion it unto her and in the mean time prepare Celidea as well as
possibly she could. Thus, Madam, you see how miserable my fortune was: I
invented all possible ways to deprive my self of the only good that could
render my life pleasing unto me; and I did foresee, that though I did bring it
pass, yet I should reap no contentment by it. Had I obtained for Calidon that
which I did endeavor, what could I ever have hoped for in my life? Had I not
obtained it, how should I have grieved for that Shepherd, who was asdea^ unto
me, as if he had been my own child? This being my condition, which I knew not
whether to term a death or a life one day after I had received Cleontine's
answer, I went unto Celidea, with whom I was not so familiar as formerly: My
dear and fairest Daughter, (said I unto her) Cleontine has acquainted me with
her intention, and I conceive, that you ought to approve of it. Then fearing
she should ask me what it was, I seemed to have earnest and sudden business
to do, and went away, leaving her in a great doubt what it was: But I went away
with a sad heart; for, strive what I could against my own will, I could not
blot her out of my soul; and as often as I fancyed Celidea in the arms of
another, I must confess, that I had not resolution enough to endure the very
thought of it. Imagine in what condition I should have been, if the Marriage
had taken effect, which truly I did most vigorously endeavor for Calidon's
fake?

Then Cleontine, thinking my proposition advantageous for Celidea, she took her
aside, and broke the matter unto her: Then, before she asked her opinion of it,
she told her what was he^^; and the more to induce her, told her, how much she
was obliged unto me, for motioning it unto her. That Shepherdess Madam, can
best tell you, how she started at the motion, especially when she heard that it
came from me: but so it was, that she had much ado to conceal her anger in
Cleontin's presence; yet, giving her a very modest answer, though it were very
far from her thoughts, she referred her self unto her judgment, and the
pleasure of her Mother, unto whom she was never disobedient. In conclusion,
being resolved to marry a Grave rather then Calidon, she came unto me. As Soon
as ever I saw her, I perceived that something did trouble her, for her eyes
trembled in her head; her eyelids frowning and her color higher than
ordinary. But I could not imagine that she should be offended against me, nor
believe, that Cleontine had told her the motion came from me. As fortune was I
was under a great Elm alone, which stood by it self almost in the midst of
Mount Verdun's plain, near the high way. As soon as ever I saw her I did rise
up, and holding her hand as I was went, I was amazed to see her pull back her
arm, and look upon me with an angry eye: Thamires, said she, how dare you take
her hand, whom you have given to another? Was it not enough, and too much, that
you have abused me as long as ever the innocence of my age could endure it? Do
you think your self so subtle, and me so simple, that now, being past a child,
I cannot see your cunning perfidie? When she saw me stand amazed, and did not
answer: Nay, nay, Thamires, said she, never think to deceive me any more by
your words, nor assurances of amity; I am now grown more crafty, and I wish to
god I had always been so then I should not have now so much reason to complain
of you. But go, ungrateful person and cruel, (yea, I may most justly call you
both ungrateful and cruel, since you have so ungratefully forgotten the
reasons you had to love me, and since you have so cruelly abused my innocence
by your craft). Away ungrateful and cruel man! What did you ever find in me,
that should give you any occasion to use me thus? Was there ever any old enmity
between our Parents that you would revenge upon me? Did I ever attempt against
your life? Have I ever spoken against you or any of your friends? Did I ever
fail in my word or friendship? Have you ever found any fault in me, that did
invite you to cast me off? Or, do you now think me not wise, or rich, or fair
enough, for you? If it be to revenge the fault of a Father upon a Daughter,
methinks it, should be an act unworthy of Thamires? If I did ever attempt
against your life, why did you not take mine away at a blow, but put me into
the power of an enemy, with whom I should live a dyinglife every minute? If I
be not fair enough, nor so virtuous as to please you, good Thamires, go and
seek out a better. But alas, why must I as a penance for a fault in nature, be
put into the hands of him, whom nature it self makes me abhor? For gods sake
leave me in the same liberty you found me, when by your craft you began to
deceive me, and content your self with those sorrows I shall have all my
life, for not knowing your design sooner. If ever I failed in friendship, I
must confess, you are just in doing the like. But, Thamires, I beseech you,
lay it in my dish and tell me, wherein I ever failed. Ah! most unnatural
Shepherd, you are mute, and cannot speak a word; Is it for the sham: for the
wrong you have done me? or, have you any new piece of subtlety against silly
Celidea? Go, go, perfidious and disloyal Thamires. This act has put me out of
opinion, that ever you loved me. The knowledge of your tyranny shall keep me
for ever from subjecting my self unto any man in the world. Never think, that
all you can do, shall ever make me Calidon's. Death shall be more welcome unto
me, then the most accomplished Shepherd in all this Country. Let the memory of
this be a sad stain upon thy soul to eternity: And I am confident, the just
gods will see me revenged. In offering to give me unto Calidon, you have for
ever deprived your self of the truest and most faithful affection that ever
was; and never hope it will revive, unless an universal conflagration should
set the whole world a fire, and so kindle this love in me again. Away, away,
there is not a man upon the face of the whole earth, but Monsters, and Tigers,
that would devour me. Upon this, taking from her neck a platted Chain which I
gave her, as she gave it into my hand, she broke it in pieces: Thus, said she,
is our love to one another for ever broken, and never to piece again. She had
no sooner spoken these words, but she ran away with a piece of the chain in her
hand, and left the other in mine, who was in such an ecstasy, that I was not
able to speak one word by way of excuse, nor follow her one step I must
confess Madam, that these words did sting me to the very heart; and when I did
seriously consider what good reason she had to speak them, I could not lay the
blame upon her, but wholly upon my self: However, I kept my self still
constant to my resolution, of endeavoring the contentment of Calidon. He,
knowing that I had spoken of it unto Cleontine, and hearing the report of their
Marriage publicly divulged, he did not much wonder, that his Shepherdess
should never see him; but when Cleontine came to visit him, conceiving it but
fit for her so to do, since their Marriage was so much spoken of; so as in a
few nights he recovered his former health, and got out of his bed, and a little
after out of his Chamber. In the mean time, Celidea was much perplexed and
having no other hopes, but in the tender affection of her Mother, since she saw
I had gained Cleontine, as soon as ever she saw her, she fell down upon her
knees, and would not rise, until she had obtained a promise, never to marry
her against her will. Celidea was so exceedingly contented with this assurance,
as shcould not rest, until she had advertised us of it, thinkinking her
desires not completely satisfied till then. It is very hard to say, great
Nymph, whether I was more sorry, or more pleased; for on the one side, I feared
Calidon's relaps; and on the other, I was glad that none should enjoy Celidea.
But when I saw Calidon, though something sad, yet in health, I must confess,
that I was extremely pleased at Celidea's repulsing him, and did in my heart
commend her prudence and resolution; for I had a conceit, that all she did was
only to reserve her self for me, not imagining her anger against me was so
high, as utterly to extirpate the affection which she bore unto me; so as
recollecting my self, I did confess, that the injury which I had done her,
was not with a design to extinguish my love unto her, (for I never had any
such intention, nor could ever hope to be so much Master of my self) but only
had a mind to sacrifice it unto Calidon's health. So then must the act which I
would have done be phrased: for my aim was only at the saving of his life, and
not at the satisfaction of his pleasures. These considerations being often in
my mind, Love began to be more violent in me then ever; and easily it might,
for having resigned this fair one unto Calidon, only to save his life, and
seeing that he lived still, though she was not his self, I conceived, that my
quitting her having wrought its intended effect, I might very justly fall on
upon my own score as I fell off for Calidon's. Upon this account, I went to the
shepherdess, I showed her the reason why I dealt so with her, and why I did
now dedicate my self wholly to her service, befeeching and conjuring her, to
pardon and forget the fault, if she thought it to be one. To be brief, I used
the best arguments and eloquence I could devise, to advance my cause; but I
found her to be so exceedingly altered, that all my arguments, excuses, and
reasons, could not move her more then they could a Rock, nor obtain the least
glance of a favorable look upon me As fortune was whilst I was speaking to
her, Calidon comes in, and thinking to find me a very good second, he advanced
toward us, to speak to her for himself; but when he heard my words, never man
was more amazed: he durst not then apbraid me with breach of faith and abusing
him; but stepping back three or four paces, with folded arms: Oh heavens!
said he, is there any loyalty in any man living? Is it he that brought me up,
lie whom I call Father, and he, who hitherto has done me all indulgent
offices* is it he, I say, that puts a dagger into my heart, and sends me to my
grave? Unto which I returned a faint answer, showed him the reasons why I
quitted Celidea, and why I did again apply my self to her. But Love did so
transport him into such violent raptures, that there could be no bitter
invective, wherewith he did not asperse me. But the shepherdess did laugh at
us both: Nay, nay, said she, never strive for Celidea, for neither of you have
the least share in her: Not you, (said she, and turned to Celidon) for I never
did love you: Nor you, (said she, and turned to me) because you are extremely
unworthy of that love, which once I did bear unto you. Then she left both in a
confused amazement: We also parted. And ever since, that shepherd has
continued with one of his Kinsmen, and never came at his own Cabin. Three
Moons have changed since this separation, and do both he and I what we could,
we could not obtain one good word from her; but, the more violent we are in our
loves, the more violent she is in her hatred. In the mean time, such is my
extreme affection to her, that it will not admit of the least diminution, but
does still more and more increase: so as did she but know it, I do believe,
that since she did love me before, out of an opinion I loved her, she would
love me much more now, because I do love her now much more than I did then, and
more than any man living can.

Thus Thamires ended his relation; and after a while of silence, he began
again. Now, Madam, said he, as chance was, we met this shepherdess upon the
banks of the River Lignon; and because love continues in us and disdain in her,
we both of us showed her the best reasons we had, to convince her, that she
ought to love one of us. I pleaded, that it was I upon whom her election ought
to be.: Calidon, on the other side, whom I have so much obliged by many good
offices, he very opinioatively maintains, that it belongs to him. Now knowing
that your wisdom can much better understand reason, then I can express, I
would with all my heart, to put an end to our long dissentions, (for we are
already grown the common talk of our Town) that you, great Nymph, would be
pleased to hear our reasons and arguments from our own mouths, and ordain what
you shall conceive to be just, for I shall most freely submit my self unto
your judgment: It would be a work well worthy of your self, it would be
acceptable to the gods, and would infinitely oblige us all unto you. Leonida
thanked him for the pains he had taken, in the relation of of the matter; and
did assure him, that if he, and all those who had any interest in the
business, did think her able to be the Judge, she would most willingly
arbitrate the matter, according to the best of her judgment, upon condition
they would all promise to observe it otherwise, all their labor would be but
lost. Thamires kneeled down upon his knees, and said: Oh, great Nymph, I do
refer my life, my death, and the contentments of them, unto your wise judgment;
if I do disobey your doom, let our Druides excommunicate me from ever assisting
them at their holy sacrifices, and forbid me for ever coming into the sacred
groves, or our celestial woods. For my part; said Calidon, if I do not the
same, may the Misleto of the ninth year be never wholesome unto me, let the
great Tautates animate all his furies against me, and never let me be at rest,
if I do not submit unto your judgment as proceeding from the great god. And
because Celidea stood silent, Astrea said unto her. Are not you pleased, fair
Shepherdess, to be rid of all the importunities which you receive from these
two Shepherds, and refer your self unto the judgment of this great Nymph? I
am most willing to be rid of them answered she; but I am afraid to fall into a
greater misery: And certainly, I should refer the hazard of this judgment unto
any, if the gods had not advised me the last night in a dream, to take another
course: For, presently after midnight, me-thought I saw my Father, who has
been long dead, open my breast, take out my heart, and cast it as a stone in a
sling over the River Lignon; then spoke these words unto me: Go, my child, unto
the other side of the fatal River Lignon, there thou shall find that heart
which so much torments thee, or else a full satisfaction and rest, until thou
come unto me. Upon this, I awaked and therefore I am resolved to pass over
the River, to see if I can find that tranquillity which is promised unto me.
However, Madam (said she, and addressed her self unto Leonida) you may be
certain, that I shall never disobey any command which you shall impose upon me,
since I do believe that the gods will speak by your mouth. Since it is so, said
Leonida, I do promise you all three, to give as just a Judgment, as I my self
would receive upon the like occasion: And that I may not err in my judgment,
Paris and these fair Shepheardesses and Silvander, shall help me with their
advice, before I pronounce the Sentence. And therefore Calidon, said she, show
me your reasons, why you conceive Celidea ought to be yours, and not
Thamires's, who has so long been her Guardian, and brought her up as his own?
That Shepherd then rising up, and after a low reverence, he began in this
manner.

The Oration of the Shepherd Calidon.
OH great god of Love, who by thy unresistable puissance have ravished from me
all that reason was wont to have over my will, hearken I beseech thee, unto the
supplication of the most faithful soul, that ever resented the power which
beauty, by thy means, has over the hearts of men; and inspire me with such
language and reason, as thou did, when I was weary of Celidea's scorn, and
was resolved to decline from her service. Let this great Nymph be moved with my
arguments; let her, whom thou have given me, and who was also given me by him
that had the greatest interest in her, be preserved and kept for me, both
against her own scorn, and against the violencies of him that would ravish her
from me. Were it not in hopes of assistance from this divinity whom I invoke, I
durst not, great Nymph, open my mouth against a person, whom of all men in the
world I am most obliged unto: For I must needs ingeniously confess, that
Thamires, by his sweet indulgency toward me, has more obliged me, than my
Father, who gave me life; the one gave me only a being, but the other a
well-being. Thamires has been troubled with all the vexations of my childhood,
and has brought me up even from my Cradle; he has spared no pains nor cost
in my education, nor care nor prudence in causing me to be well instructed; so
as the Appellation of Father is in all reason his due, and I must acknowledge
my self his Child, having received from him all those indulgencies, which
those names require. And in confessing all these obligations, how can I open my
mouth against him, without incurring the ugly brand of ingratitude? If this
dispute did depend only upon my self, I had rather be in my grave sleeping
with my fathers, and wish that my Cradle had been my Coffin, rather then oppose
Thamires in any thing: Thamires, I say, who has made me what I am: Thamires,
unto whom I owe all I have: Thamires, in whose service, when I have spent all
my life, yet half my obligations are not cancelled. But alas, it is all long
of himself; it is Love which commanded me; he himself also commanded me. Let
Thamires tell me, whether it be possible, that a heart which Love has touched
to the quick, can disobey him in any thing? If he have found this to be true by
experience, then I do conjure him by the god of Love, who has such power over
his soul, to pardon that fault which I have been forced to commit against him;
and that he give me leave to maintain, that all reason ordaines Celidea to love
me, and that there is none but my self that can pretend unto her. For to begin
with the first point, what can Calidea answer if I call her before the Throne
of Love, and if in the presence of this equitable company, I do complain
against her in this manner? This is the fair one, Oh great god of Love, which
presents her self before thee* This is she whom thou have commanded me to love
and serve, upon hopes of such reward as thou usest to give unto those that
follow thee. If from the first minute of my beginning, unto this instant, I did
ever contrary thy will, if I have notalwaies continued in a full resolution to
spend my whole life in thy obedience; Then, Oh Love, who look into all
hearts, and see all my designs, let me be punished as a perjured villain,
and let all the thunderbolts of the great Tharamis fall upon me, as a
perfidious person. But if truth and my words agree, and if never any loved like
me, why do thou suffer her to deceive my hopes? why does she not make good
thy promises? and why will thou let her laugh at all those miseries, which thou
have made me to endure for her? As Soon as ever I saw her, I loved her, and
as soon as ever I loved her, I did dedicate my self and soul to adore her. But
perhaps this affection is unknown unto her, or I have only acquainted the
solitary Woods and Rocks with it. No, no, Oh Love, she has heard my
complaints, she has seen my tears, she knows of my affection, something from
my own mouth, more from Thamires, Cleontina, and other of my friends; but most
of all from the effects of my passion. Has she not seen me in the bed of death
for her? has she not held me by the hand, and pulled me from my grave, saying
unto me, Live, live. Calidon, thy pretensions are not hopeless? And since I
had suffered the very pangs of death, why did she call me from that rest, which
my grave would have given me? If it was to make me die again without pity, it
was extreme cruelty? Must I be punished with a second death, for obeying and
adoring her? But perhaps she will say, that I ought to measure her by my own
Ell, and consider, that as I have not power to quit her and love another; so
she being engaged another way, she cannot disengage her self to love me. Oh
Love, these are only words, bare excuses Let her show the contract of this
engagement, and if thou do not presently adjudge it to be false, then let me
be condemned. She never loved any, but the shepherd Thamires, as she has told
me; but I dare say farther, and maintain, that she never loved this Thamires.
Did she love him? Alas, when? Even when she was not able to love, when her
hands and mind were wholly taken up with childish Gew-gawes; when her desires
could not reach any higher then to be a little Fine, or to make a Baby, and
dress it, and talk to it. Was she not wholly ignorant what Love was? or if she
did at that age love Thamires, or thought it to be love; must she needs love
him still? Alas, alas, such young green affections as that is like our clothes,
to be cast off when we will. Oh! puissant god of Love, how ignorant was she, or
rather, how did she despise all thy statutes and ordinances? Is it not by thy
Laws declared a most capital crime, to think, that ones Love shall ever end?
What then shall we think of this shepherdess, who could not so much as think,
because she was incapable of desire, but who is really retreated from that
love, which she bare unto him, as she her self told Thamires? Can it besaid,
Oh great deity, that she was ever one of thy subjects? Will thou acknowledge
her, or let her enjoy those privileges which she pretends unto, or suffer her
to oppose me? But if it be so, that thy super-abundant goodness, which
transcends the goodness of all other deities, will allow her to enjoy the
benefit of true Lovers, because she flies unto thee for sanctuary, and may
plead, that loving Thamires will not love me, no, nor so much as look upon me,
how can she answer this, that she her self has confessed, she would not love
Thamires any longer? With what excuse can she palliate her impiety? And why
do thou not punish this high disobedience? If thou do not, then she is the
only one, that despising, is not punished; and I the only one, who adoring
thee, does not find the reward of thy accustomed goodness.

I do believe, Oh great Nymph, that Celidea being thus accused before the
Throne of this great deity, she can hardly answer, nor avoid being condemned,
to give me satisfaction for all the pains I have taken, and to render love for
love, whilst Thamires cannot oppose me with any particular interest: For what
interest can he claim in that, which he has freely given me? He has estated
the whole title upon me, and is so far debarred from any right, that he ought
in reason rather to defend and maintain my title, against all men living, since
it was from him I derived my title. But perhaps he will say, that it was his
mere free and voluntary act, without any consideration, but his own love to me,
and therefore is not obliged unto any warrantie. But why, Thamires, do you call
that a mere voluntary act, which you have confessed before your Judge, that you
were obliged unto it by your promises, unto my dying Father, unto whom you were
much obliged for several benevolences? Do you call that a mere free act of
your will, which you were constrained unto to be quit of so many obligations?
Do you think you do oblige your Creditors, by paying your due debts? I must
confess, great Nymph, that Thamires has paid both principal and interest,
which renders him not to be ungrateful; but I do absolutely deny, that there
was nothing in this act which did oblige his will. But admit it so, that it was
an act of his own mere free will, and that he did it of himself; did not the
effect of this will aim at his own peculiar satisfaction? If he do but
consider the debt due unto the memory of my Father, and his aim of obliging me
by this act, of giving Celidea unto me, he will find, that it was not an act
of pure and mere free will, but a way to satisfy himself, by paying that debt
which was due to my Father, and a way to purchase my obligations unto himself;
so as what he has done is but a loan, which I must perpetually pay interest
for, and which he may claim as an obligation upon me to pay: If I should sail
in paying my acknowledgments, he might justly call me ingrate; but he cannot
say that he gave me Celidea freely, since in consideration of himself, and by
the rules of human prudence, he was obliged unto it, and has so debarred
himself, as he is obliged to maintain my claim unto her, against any that
shall hinder me from enjoying her. The god of Love be my witness, Father, (for
so I will call you as long as I live unless you forbid me) the great god of
Love be my witness, I say, whether it grieves me not to the very foul, I
should oppose you in this business. You your self do know, in what a sad
condition you have seen me: You know, how Love had almost brought me to my
grave, and you must needs confess, that it was the power of Love which
compelled me to displease you; such was the force upon me, that I had no free
will unto it at all but was forced by a compulsive necessity unto it: Nothing
else under the Sun could have made me contradict your commands; if there be let
the gods punish me as the most ungrateful person that ever breathed. But
Father, since there was an unresistable force upon me, I beseech you pardon my
weakness, and do not you your self help me to complain against you; for, were
not you the cause of all this? For since it was wholly in your dispose, why did
you bring me from amongst the Boyens before you had married Celidea? Could you
think, that being your Kinsman, I should not sympathize with you, and so be in
danger to love her as well as you? But perhaps you will say, that you thought
your command upon me not to love her, was enough to keep me within the bounds
of my duty, and make me look upon her only as my Sister. But, wise Thamires, I
do wonder you should not remember the follies of youth; and that it is the
nature not only of all those of that age, but generally of all men whatsoever,
to think things that are most forbidden to be most sweet: I admire you should
forbid me loving her before ever I saw her, as if you had a mind to make me
love her by the ear, before she was seen by the eye. What was this, but to
awaken my desires, and to kindle a fire; like a Flint which is stricken, which
before was cold, and had no appearance of heat in it.

But perhaps again you will say, that you did allow me to love her in the
degree of a Sister, and so limit my desires as I should neither offend you nor
my self; you in not constraining me too much, and me in not confining me too
narrowly, but allowing me to keep within your prescribed limits.

But, O great Nymph, consider, I beseech you, what kind of command this was:
Thamires shows me a beauty of an infinite luster, allows me converse with her;
commands me to love her, but will not have my love stir one foot beyond his
limit, nor love her above the quality of a Brother. Oh heavens! what did he
think I was made of? Can Love that thinks the whole universe too narrow a
compass to be confined unto, and who disposes of all our wills according to
his pleasure be hemmed up in such strait limits as he prescribes? Will Love be
ruled and governed by the will of any but himself? But what in the name of
Heaven does Thamires think of me? Does he conceive that I have more power
than either Men or Gods, or the whole World has? It had been but just to have
measured me by himself; and if he could have tamed his own affections and
passions, then might he have had some reason to impose the like task upon me:
But that he who had experience of his own strength, and of Loves power, for
him, I say to command a thing which he himself could not observe, whose age
and experience had great advantage over my green years, this was too much, too
unreasonable. Perhaps again he will complain, that I have not paid him such
respect as is due unto a Father, and that his great indulgency toward me might
very well oblige me unto much more than all this. Alas, alas, does he not
consider, that what I did was done by compulsion; and that I had rather dye
than fail in any point of duty to him? The torments I did endure, when I was in
the very Arms of death, is a sufficient testimony of all this. The grave
Physician found it by my Pulse, and alteration in my complexion: Let him
consider, that such was my respect of him, that I chose death rather than I
would discover the cause of my Malady. If he will blame any, he must blame
Nature, for not giving me power to command my Interior motions, as well as my
Tongue and exterior actions and parts: Alas, I would never have received life
from him but on condition that Celidea might be mine: I do confess that never
man was more obliged unto another than I am to him; I know that never Kinsman
received more indulgent kindness from another Kinsman; nor ever any Child
greater testimonies of affection from a Father than I did from Thamires when he
resigned Celidea unto me: But now at this time, since he offers to ravish her
from me, May I not rightly say, that never man received greater injury from
another? never Cosen more unkindness from a Cosen, nor child more tyrannique
treatment from a Father, than Calidon from Thamires? So as now all my former
obligations to him, are cancelled and changed into so many injuries: For,
Thamires, though it is true, you had a care of me in my very cradle, though
you have brought me up with all indulgent care; though you have declared me
your Heir, yet for all these, if you do deprive me of that thing which far
above all the world is most dear unto me, and which you your self did give me,
do you not give me a death much worse than that which you preserved me from?
And if I do not enjoy that which you would ravish from me; your estate, your
education, nay, my life it self is of no value unto me. Consider, wise
Thamires, that to take back a gift by force, does more offend him that did
receive it, than if being asked it had been denied him; and therefore, wonder
not if I say that this act has cancelled all my obligations unto you. Which to
prevent, I beseech you join with me, and own what I shall say unto Celidea on
your behalf; How is it possible, my fair Daughter (would I have you say unto
her) that Calidons extreme affection should find no acceptance from you? Will
all my persuasions and recommendations of him reach no farther than your ears,
and have no effectual influence upon your soul? Have you not often promised
that I should have the absolute dispose of you? If it be so, why do you not
make good your promise? Did I ever propose any unto you who was not worthy to
be loved? Is he whom I do now motion unto you such a one, or unknown to you,
or without kindred or friends? I believe there is not a Shepherdess in all
the Country, that would not think his amity to be advantageous unto her. The
wise Cleontine thinks it so, and so does your Mother, though out of an
over-fond tenderness she will not command you any thing against your mind: But
perhaps you say, that, Thamires, it is you only whom I love, and cannot love
any other; unto you have I wholly given my self; you have the absolute power
over me, and may do any thing with me but giving me unto another. The heavens
do know, my fair Daughter, how pleasing this declaration of yours is unto me,
and that there is nothing under heaven can be more acceptable unto me: But if
you do indeed love me, you will endeavor to preserve my honor, and love me
under the name of Calidon, who is my very self, and of my very blood. As for
his soul, he loves you as I do, so as there is a sympathy betwixt us: And
since amongst friends, all things are in common, so since I love him, I have
nothing he has not a share in as well as my self: So as if I have any share in
your affection, as you say I have, he must of necessary consequence be a
participant with me. Do not complain against me for this, and say, that I
break faith with you, and change you for another; for I am fully resolved never
to love any but you; you, you only were the beginning, and shall be the end
of my affection. But since Destiny forbids me to enjoy you, and constrains me
to bequeath you unto another, both by the Laws of Duty and Nature, I shall
think it, fair Daughter, an infinite contentment to see you his whom I have
made choice of, whom I have brought up, whom I love, and whom I have chosen,
not only for my Heir, but also for my Companion in all the estate which the
Heavens and Fortune has, or for the future shall give me. You are obliged unto
this by our Friendship, as well as I am by my duty. Love therefore my Calidon,
if ever you loved me, and make it thereby appear, that you are but a Lover, and
Religious toward the Gods, who certainly would never have given me liberty to
part with you against my will, had they not so decreed it in their infallible
Destinies.

Great, and wise Nymph, this is the language which Thamires does, or ought to
use, of which I am only the instrument; And which, as I conceive, is so just,
and so worthy of himself, as I hope he will not disown it. And therefore, after
I have vowed by the great Tautates, that Calidon does infinitely love Celidea,
and that there never was a more faithful Lover than he, I will use no other
arguments or reasons but his own, and so referring my life, my death, my
happiness, my misery, and my All unto your wise discretion I pray unto the
Gods to endue you with all Wisdom and Justice.

Calidon concluding thus with a low and humble reverence, he went unto Celidea,
and falling down upon his knees before her, he waited for her answer. Thamires
he proferred to speak, but Leonida told him that Celidea was to speak before
him, since he had already spoke unto the matter: So, that Shepherd going
again to his place, Celidea, by the Nymphs command, began thus.

The Answer of the Shepherdess Celidea.
I Am so unaccustomed, great Nymph, to speak upon such a subject as this,
especially before so much company, that though I do blush, and express my self
with a trembling tongue, yet I hope it will be no prejudice to the justice of
my cause. Were I not most confidently assured that my reasons not to love this
Shepherd, are in themselves so clear, that they need no manner of artificial
dress to illustrate them unto you, I durst not be so bold as to open my mouth
upon this subject: I perceive the eloquence of Calidon is much above mine; I
want both wit, spirit, and eloquence to gloss a matter as he can: My words are
only simple, and suitable to my reasons; which though not many, yet valid
enough to make it manifest unto you, that since I never did love Calidon, I
ought not to begin at this instant, nor continue that affection which once I
had unto Thamires, since I have so many reasons to the contrary.

But where shall I begin? What Divine Powers must I ask assistance from, in
this dangerous combat? I am assaulted, not by Love but by Monsters of Love. A
combat full of danger indeed, since my well or ill being depends upon it: And
Monsters of Love indeed they are, since they will make me love by force, and
compel me to love and hate according to their wills.

I have heard our great and wise Druids say, that Hercules, whom we see erected
upon our Altars, with a Club in his hand, and a Lions skin upon his shoulders,
was in his time a great Hero, who by his strength and valor quelled Monsters,
and was a great Patron of Truth. From whom therefore in this extreme necessity
should I implore aid, sooner than from this valiant Hero? And the rather,
because as I have heard, he loved a Lady of Gaul; and doubtless will for her
sake afford me the aid I implore. To him therefore do I address my self to
subdue these monstrous spirits, and to furnish me with so much eloquence and
audacity as may make my reasons apparent unto my Judges. I beseech thee
therefore, by thy valor, O great Hercules, and by the fair Galathea our
Princess, I conjure thee to deliver me from these monstrous Lovers, and so to
clear my reasons unto this Nymph, that she may give a just judgment, and keep
me from loving both Thamires and Calidon.

And to begin, what do thou mean, Calidon, by calling me before the God of
Love, whom thou do make both thy Judge and thy God? Do thou think, that he
has any power over us, who are ashamed that his Name should be in our mouths,
though it do reach our ears? A Maid, Calidon, who ever scorned to have any
thing to do with this Love, is now summoned to appear before his Throne to
receive her doom: And can thou expect I will make any other answer, but that
let this God of Love doom what he will I will not obey him? But I prithee tell
me, when I have observed his statutes, and am constrained to live according to
his will, what recompense may I expect from him? only this, to be called the
most amorous Maid in all the Country. A very brave and honorable title indeed
for a maid of any quality, and one that desires to live without a blemish upon
her honor. Therefore, Oh Shepherd, never summon me before his Tribunal whose
Power and Jurisdiction I will not acknowledge, and unto whom I do declare my
self to be an enemy.

If you will have me give an answer, let us both appeal unto Virtue and Reason,
and certainly we need not go any farther than this great Nymph, who is
pleased to take so much pains to hear our differences. Before her I shall
answer unto any thing you have or can object; which as I conceive may be
reduced unto three heads: First, that I ought to love you, because you love me,
and because I knew it: Secondly, because the favors which you received from me
in your sickness, and which, as you say, caused your cure, have obliged me: And
lastly, because Thamires has given me unto you.

But, Madam, that I may give full answers unto all these objections, I beseech
you command him to answer unto my questions, that you may come to the knowledge
of the Truth out of his own mouth. I ask you, Calidon, what allurement did I
use, to make you in love, the first time you begun to love me? When she saw he
stood silent, and gave no answer, she addressed her self unto the Nymph; Madam,
said she, I beseech you command him to answer me: And Leonida appointing him so
to do; You ask me a question said he, which you your self can best resolve;
but since you will needs have it from my mouth, I will tell you; It was the
favor which I received from you, in being pleased to show your self unto me at
the Sacrifice which was celebrated at the sixth of the month. Was I the only
woman that assisted at the Sacrifice (said Celidea) and were you the only
Shepherd of the Town that was there? No, answered he, for almost all the
Shepheardesses and Shepherds of the Town were there also. What one act was it,
I beseech you, replied she, that did attract your affection? In this, answered
Calidon, you must acknowledge that my love was the decree of heaven; You did no
sooner turn your eyes toward me, but as soon as ever I saw you, I loved you,
as if I were forced unto it by some interior power, which it was impossible to
resist. But perhaps (said the Shepherdess) when I knew you did love me, did I
use any art to cherish it, or augment it by any fresh favors? No, said he, my
affection did begin without you, continue without you, and augment without
you, I mean without your contributing any thing unto it but by being your self.
But on the contrary, the first time you knew it (for though I did not discover
it by my words, yet I knew you did perceive it) Oh what harsh treatment did I
receive from you? And what extreme dislike have you since showed? So as if I
be as you say, a Monster of Love, I am so, because it is a thing most monstrous
that a Lover should so long preserve his affection maugre so many rigorous
affronts and causes of hatred; for I may safely say, that every one of your
actions toward me deserves no other name but of Rigor and Hatred: So as it is
apparent when you came to visit me in my sickness, your design was to save my
life, only that afterward you might murder me more cruelly. Then Celidea
replied thus; You see, great and wise Nymph, by Calidons own mouth, that if he
did love me, it was without any contributing to it by me, unless by being my
self; and against that, what remedy can I invent? What would he answer if I
should ask him these questions before the Throne of Reason and your self: Since
Shepherd I never did consent unto any of your addresses, why would you have me
participate in your own troubles, shame, and errors? Is it not enough that I
have all this while endured your importunities without revenge? You do love me
you say, and because you love me, I must love you again: But pray hear what
Reason says; You have loved Celidea, and in loving her, you have offended her,
and what other recompense can you expect from her but hatred? The truth is,
Shepherd, that being unwilling to be revenged of you, as in reason I might, I
contented my self with hating you in my very soul, and for Thamires his sake I
pardoned the rest. If you do object that I do know of your love by your
tears, and by your sickness: Alas, this does not oblige me one jot the
more to love you, but rather to hate you more extremely.

Tell me, Calidon, since Thamires has taken so much care to bring you up in
literature, and travails, in what part of the world have you seen it decent for
a young maid as I am, to love, or suffer her self to be loved? If it be not
the custom in any place of the world, but where Vice is held for Virtue, do
you not infinitely offend in tempting me to that which is contrary to my duty?
You love me, you say, because you cannot choose but do so. Good friend, how am
I obliged unto you, for doing that, which you cannot choose but do? You do
excuse your self to Thamires, for loving me against his will, by saying, that
you are not to blame, because you are forced unto it. Can you think your self
exempt from blame, in sinning by compulsion? and do you think your self worthy
of recompense, for being forced unto a thing, whose contrary deserves a
recompense? Either confess your self culpable toward Thamires, or else cease
seeking a recompense for your forced service, But if you do love me against my
will, am I to be punished for it? Did I ever entreat you to it? did I ever give
you any occasion? You say, No. Will your love be any contentment or advantage
unto me? Shall I become more fair, more virtuous, or ever the better by it? Oh
heavens! Calidon, where are your wits? Are you mad, to ask a recompense, where
a punishment is deserved? Or rather, what an impudent affront is this, before
this great Nymph, to demand ^^vour and wages of me, in lieu of a pardon, and in
lieu of repenting for your faults. I believe you will say, that I should not
have flattered you in your error, nor kept you alive when you were sick by
giving you good language. But, Calidon, have I not good cause to say, you are
an ungrateful man and does not acknowledge the good office I did you, in
misconstruing of it, and taking it in another sense then you ought. Did a
guilty person ever find or think his Judge too mild or sweet? or, did any
offender ever complain, that in lieu of punishment, he received favor and
courtesy? Because I wished not your death, am I blamable for saving your life?
You accuse me for having pity upon you, and showing favor instead of revenge,
and would have me punished for it. Judge, Madam, how his understanding is out
of the way, and how he takes reason the wrong way. But Shepherd, neither blame
me, nor commend me for my act, since according to your own argument, it was an
act forced upon me, which ought neither to be recompensed nor punished. It was
my affection to Thamires, who conjured me unto it by all the obliging arguments
he could devise, which induced me unto it. I see, Calidon, that you do smile,
that I should say, it was my affection unto Thamires, which moved me to treat
you in that manner, because you conceive, that she who a little before did
declare her self such an enemy to Love, cannot now well say, that Love had
such an influence upon her soul. But Shepherd, you are much mistaken, if you
think, that in being an enemy unto Love, I am so also unto Amity and
friendship, or void of that virtue, which makes us think of things as they
ought to be. I have heard say, great Nymph, that one may love two manner of
ways; the one according to reason; the other, according to desire. That which
has reason for its rule, is called virtuous and honest Amity; and that which
suffers it self to be transported with desire, Love. With the first of these
we do love our Parents, our Kindred, our Friends, our Country, and both in
general and particular, all those in whom any virtue shines. As for the other,
those that are infected with it, are transported and distempered, as with a
frenzy Feavour, and do commit so many gross faults, that the name of it is as
infamous amongst persons of honor, as the other is good and laudable.

I shall without a blush then confess, that I did love Thamires, but withal I
must tell you, it was for his virtue. If Calidon do ask me, how I can
distinguish and discern between these two kinds of affection, since the one
does commonly appear in the habit of the other? I shall answer him, that the
wise Cleontine teaching me how to behave my self in the world, did give me the
difference: Daughter, said she, my age has furnished me with experience in
many things, and has taught me, that things are the most certainly known by
their effects; and the better to discern after what manner we are loved,
consider the actions of those that love us; if you find them to be irregular,
and contrary to reason, virtue, or duty, fly them as dishonorable; if on the
contrary you find them to be moderate, and not ramping beyond the limits of
honesty or duty, then cherish them, and esteem them as virtuous. This sapient
lesson, Shepherd, teaches me to cherish the affection of Thamires, and to
fly yours: For what effect does the love of Calidon produce? Violencies,
raptures, transports, and despairs, were never the effects of virtue. If the
love of Thamires be considered, we shall find it to be all virtue: When did he
begin to love me? At a time, when there was no likelihood any vice could invite
him to it. How has he continued this affection? So, as neither duty nor honesty
could take the least exception against it. But why did he give over? For the
reasons which he himself has given. Whether reason do not appear in all this,
I refer my self, Madam, unto your judgment. These considerations moved me to
entertain the affection of Thamires, and reject the love of Calidon. And this
Amity, and nothing else, did enforce me to visit this Shepherd when he was
sick; to give him such good words as might recover him; and all this, as well
to satisfy Thamires, as out of a natural compassion, which all ought to have
one unto another. If I did fail in my love to Thamires, Calidon, for your
satisfaction, I will confess it and repent, with a protestation, to love
Thamires no more, nor fall into the like fault. But I cannot believe, that
therefore I am obliged to love you; for if I should, it would be to correct one
error by committing another, which is worse. Perhaps you will allege against
my defense, that having given the whole disposition of my self unto Thamires,
and he transferring me into your hands, I cannot contradict his disposal of
me. This is an excellent conclusion indeed: I choose you for my husband
presently after you may give me unto another; this is very fine Logic. You
must know, Calidon, that the reason why I gave Thamires all the power of my
self, was, because I did love him, and he loved me; and therefore if he have
any power over me, he must love, that is the implicit condition of his power;
but if he do not, then, the cause ceasing, the effect must needs cease: and
therefore if he do not love me, he has no power over me. But happily you will
reply, that he swears he does continue loving me still, and that it is reason,
not want of affection, which made him transfer me over unto another. I must
answer both him and you, Shepherd, that I do not believe him; and yet, if
reason can so well persuade with his affection, why should not reason have as
much power over my affection? Is there any reason I should love him, whom
nature and reason both forbids me to love? Nature forbids the banes, for since
the first hour I ever sa^ you, there was such a contrariety in my heart, and
such a secret antipathy in it against you, that I disliked every thing I saw
you do. Believe it, Calidon, what I say, proceeds not from any scorn of you,
but from the very truth; I had rather choose to rest in my grave, then live with
you: not but I do know and confess, you deserve a much better fortune; but the
reason is, because Nature does hold me from you with abundance of violence, and
without any cause: And since it is so, upon what pretense can you desire I
should be yours since Nature does forbid it, and Reason likewise, which
neverthwarts Nature? Go, go, Calidon, live in quietness; do not wilfully
endeavor to make two persons miserable; for the truth is, you will be as
miserable by it as my self. If you do love me, let it suffice, that your love
is most troublesome to me, and do not strive to surcharge me with an
intolerable burden, by forcing me to love you. And be assured of this, that
Lignon shall sooner run backward, then you shall find any place in the
affection of Celidea.

This, Madam, is the Answer, which I shall give unto the shallow reasons of
Calidon. But now, I have another more dangerous enemy to encounter withal, who
has better Arms, and who gives more smarting blows: I mean, the ungrateful
Thamires; Thamires, whom I did really love, and whom I thought had loved me as
well as any possibly could. But alas, what would he have now? Can he expect any
thing from her, whom he has betrayed into the hands of her most cruel enemy?
Does he yet hope for any love from her, whom he has most ungratefully wronged?
When color, and upon what ground can he desire me to love him? Is it, because
he did love me, or because I loved him? This, Madam, had been some reason at
that time; but now, since he has left loving me, and would force me to love
another and not himself, why does he urge unto me the time past, which is not,
nor ever will return? The memory of that time is an argument to hate him the
more, since I do find him at this present so unworthy. I do confess I did
love him; but, when he resigned me unto another, he did demonstratively show,
that he neither did nor does love me: And therefore let him not think it
strange that since my affection did proceed from his mine should cease as well
as his; for his was the cause, and mine the effect, and the cause ceasing, the
effect must follow. Why did he cut up a Tree, from which he expected fruit? He
has done me more wrong then I him, since he was the first offender, and yet I
am satisfied, I complain not, I can quit him with a very good will, and cannot
wish he should court me again, because it is a thing impossible to obtain me.
What is it he would now have? Does he not know, that as long as our love was
mutual, I was his, and he was mine, and then by the Laws of Amity he might
dispose of me as his own? If he have given me unto Calidon, how can he pretend
me to be his? If he have any thing to require from me, he must address himself
to him unto whom he has given me; if he can have his consent, I will
afterward consider what I have to do; if he cannot, why does he complain of
me? or ask me, for what he has given away? He has sacrificed me, as he says,
to Calidon's health, manifesting thereby, that Calidon was dearer unto him,
than I was, and in very good time: But can he not be contented, that his
sacrifice is accepted, and that his deer Calidon is recovered from death? Would
he so sacrilegiously recall, what he has dedicated unto the gods? Remove,
Thamires, all such thoughts out of your soul, lest the gods do punish you for
it; and do not hope, that since I have been offered unto the gods for the
health of Calidon, I will ever stoop so low as men again. The truth is, since I
have been so ill treated by the man whom I most esteemed, it would be extreme
imprudence in me, to put my self into his hands again, who knew not how to
make any better use of me Perhaps Thamires would have me again, that he might
some other time save the life of some friend or kinsman; or else courts me now,
to keep me against Calidon fall sick again: But be assured, that my own life is
much deerer unto me, then his life is unto whom you have given me; and
therefore I have all the reason in the world to look unto my self before any
other. If I did bestow some tears at thy departure Thamires, I will laugh at
your return. Oh, how liberal you are, to give away that which is another?
But, Oh you heavens, how just you are, since when you saw me offended by these
two Shepherds, and knowing my innocence, you would vouchsafe to take me into
your protection, and have revenged my quarrel, even by my enemies themselves.
What displeasure does this perfideous man receive, even from him unto whom he
has given me? And what torments does this importunate persecutor of my rest
receive, even from him, who gave him all the right he has to pretend unto me?
What less can be expected upon them, than divine vengeance? And I make no
question, Madam, but you will ratify the doom of heaven, and give sentence on
my side.

Thus Celidea ended, and by making an humble reverence unto the Nymph, did
show, that she had no more to say: And therefore Leonida commanded Thamires to
give his reasons, so as he began thus.

The Answer of the Shepherd Thamires.
I Perceive, great Nymph, it happens to me, as unto him that made a sword for
one, who thrust it into his heart; for I, that educated this Shepherd and
Shepherdess with as much indulgent care as was possible; I that taught them
to speak, and how to live in the world; yet these two do wound me to the very
heart and soul, so as I have no hopes left, but in your favorable judgment. It
seems, they make me the very Butt of their ingratitude, and would have me bear
all their own faults; but, though these aspersions do deeply wound me, yet, I
had rather be the offended, then the offending party: And truly, I am naturally
such a deadly hater of ingratitude, which is the bane of all humane society,
that I had rather receive the blow from the hand of another, then give it.

Perhaps by acknowledging the faults which you both have committed, you will be
ashamed, and repent of the wrongs you have done me, in requital of all my
indulgency toward you: And then, all your gilded language which you have
employed to my ruin, will be a shame unto your selves, since I do still love
you both, and since my affection is yet much above all the injuries you have
done me. Now, my children, I do pardon you, and pass by the follies of your
youth; but then, I do expect you should confess your faults, and acknowledge
my favors, and that you do confess a less affection than mine, could never
pardon such ingratitude. I perceive, Madam, that I do speak unto deaf ears,
and spend my advice upon stones which hear me not. I have hither to applied the
most mild medicines, to see if sweetness would cure them, but since Lenitives
will not do, Corrosives must; and since they continue still obstinate, I must
pursue them with Fire and Sword.

These are the most substantial reasons which Calidon has alleged: You have
given Celidea unto me, and you are obliged unto it by the confidence which my
Father did put in you, by the affection which you professed unto me, and by
your hopes of obliging me. And you have offended me much more in offering to
take her from me after the gift of her; than if you had at the first denied her
unto me: This, great Nymph, is all he has said with such a huge flourish of
words, both against me, against himself, and against reason.

Ungrateful Shepherd, will thou thus trample upon my goodness and indulging
over thee? You say that I did give Celidea unto you; and why I beseech you, did
I give her? was it was because I was weary of her, or only to please you? No,
no, say you, it was only to save my life. Well then, you must confess you owe
your life unto me; and are you not extremely ungrateful in offering to take
his life away that preserved yours? If I did give her unto you only to save
your life, what wrong is it to ask her again, now your life is saved, and you
well? But happily you will say, that though you are recovered, yet it was only
in hopes that Celidea should remain with you; what though you have recovered
your health, since now you are not in any danger? Courtesy and discretion
teaches us, that when in cases of necessity we make use of any thing which is
our friends, we should restore it with the interest of thanks. It seems you are
very far from so much courtesy and discretion, since when I gave you some
hopes of Celideas favor, and gave you thereby your life, now you are recovered
you would take her and them for your own, and endeavor by glosing language to
cover your ingratitude. But, Madam, perhaps he will say, that if I do take her
from him, he shall fall into the same danger he was before: No, great Nymph,
you see by experience that now he is assured Celidea will never be his, he
only grows a little more melancholy; but his life is not at all in danger,
and therefore to save his life being the reason of my act, and not the
satisfying of his pleasure; since his life is saved, I may without offense take
her back unto my self. But admit his life were at the stake, would not my life
be the same? For should I be deprived of this fair one, death would be more
certain unto me than life. Judge, Madam, I beseech you, whether I ought not to
have a greater care of my self than him. If he conceive that I ought to yield
Celidea unto him, to save his life because his Father loved me, and
recommended him unto me, why does he not as well conceive himself obliged to
yield her unto me, since my life is as well concerned, and that upon the very
same consideration of amity which his Father professed unto me; Is it not his
duty to have as great a care of my life as I had of his? He knows, ungrateful
man that he is, I cannot live if I be denied her, and is he not extremely
ungrateful if he do deny her unto me? Is he not unworthy the title of Son
unto him that has so much loved him? Can he think, that because I loved him,
therefore I am obliged to part from the thing which is most of all the world
dear unto me? Is he not unworthy the name of Kinsman, since he does not value
my life? Nay, may I not disown him for a Friend, since he will not do the same
offices for me in my necessity, which I did for him? Nay more; May I not
account him the most cruel enemy I have, since he pursues me against all
reason, with such violent arguments to my very death? The very thought of
Ingratitude from such as we have obliged, is so extremely odious unto all, as I
cannot possibly give punctual answers unto every particular instance of this
Shepherd, who has so extremely offended me. Give me leave, I beseech you,
Madam, to present this offer unto him in a few words; As he ows his life unto
me for yielding Celidea unto him, I will release him of that obligation, so he
will yield her again unto me. And to make it appear that he is out of all
danger, he cannot deny but that it is above a month since Celidea refused him:
She told him that she would never love him; she let him know that her Mother
promised not to marry her against her consent, and at the same time told him,
that heaven and earth should meet before she would contract any affection with
him; yet for all this, ye see he lives, and strives to take away the life of
him that did preserve him. Since he is most certainly assured that Celidea will
never be his, is he not the most ungrateful person in the world, in offering
to hinder me from obtaining her? There is not any hopes for him, and he would
also ruin all mine. Should he desire that another should enjoy this happiness
before me, the whole world would never know the like Ingratitude. I gave him
that which was mine, and he will not let me have that which is not his: I
saved his life by depriving my self of that which was most dear unto me, and
he will refuse that unto me which never was his. But, great Nymph, all these
hot disputes 'twixt him and me, are methinks, to no purpose, since his
misfortune, and my too much affection unto him, has taken from us both, that
happiness which we are disputing about. What right can you have unto Celidea,
since she does not love you? You will say no other, but from your affection to
her, and from my gift. But, Shepherd, what pretense can you have from your
affection, since you see she disdains and refuses you? And what can you
pretend unto by my gift, since I gave you no more than what I had my self to
give? Now all the right that I had, depended upon her own will, and if this
will be contrary unto mine, what power or right had I in it? Therefore,
Shepherd, you can have none, nor make the least shadow of pretense unto any.
Now, I beseech you, let us see what right I my self can pretend unto. Oh
heavens, how great would it be if there was no Calidon in being? An affection
begun in the Cradle, so long carefully continued; a courtship so full of pure
intentions; an affection so violent, and so long in possession of favors; all
these would make my cause very strong, if Calidon were not in the world, or had
no eyes, or else if he could have guided them according to reason.

I must needs confess, fair Celidea (and so I do with tears in my eyes, and
sorrow in my heart) that you have more reason to complain of me than all your
words and mine can express. I acknowledge, that never did any affection
receive a greater affront than yours has by my imprudency; yet who should
endure, nay overcome great difficulties, but those who have strength and
courage? It Is true, I have extremely wronged you, but may not you make this an
occasion to show how highly you can love, by passing by and pardoning such an
offense? What testimonies of your love have you heretofore promised me? What is
it which you have not said you would surmount for my sake? I do now summon you
unto your promises, and put you to the Test; And what greater testimony can you
give, then by this occasion which I now offer unto you? When I did oblige you
by my services, by my affection, and by all manner of obsequious observancie,
you did continue your affection unto me: But this is no testimony of affection,
it is rather an acknowledgement of a debt: It had been a right testimony of
your affection, if you had continued when I did hate you. Fortune would have
this occasion to present it self, though I am extremely sorry for it, to put
you to the trial of your affection; and as a summons to keep your word: I hope
you are not like unto those, who vaunt that they do not fear dangers, yet at
the very first encounter of an enemy, will submit without resistance. But you
objected against me, How can you hope, Thamires, to gather any fruits from
love, since you have cut up the Tree? Oh fair Celidea let me tell you, I had
rather cut away my life than that dear Tree of Love: Nay, though I should
offer it, yet it would be impossible for me to do it. But admit that I had
imprudently cut it up, you know that the Myrtle is the Tree of Love, and why
would you have it to be the Cypress? The Myrtle is of a nature, that the more
it is cut, the more branches it puts forth. Oh that I could see this effect in
your soul, that I might believe there is growing in you this Tree of Love, and
not a Tree of Mourning.

But admit my fault, in guilting you, to be so great as you make it, must my
fault make you to commit the like? If you think so, then you must confess,
that you catch at bad examples, and not at good ones, unless, as I do leave
you, so you leave me, and when I do return unto you, you do return unto me
also: Otherwise, you are more moved with an offense than with a full
satisfaction for it; and evil has a greater predominancie in you than good:
But this is unworthy of Celideas soul, which promises all goodness and
sweetness.

But you say, that since I have given you unto Calidon, if I would have any
thing of you, I must ask him. This would puzzle me to answer, if I had not
heard you say, that it was impossible for me to give you unto him. Now the
matter is brought to that pass, as you must be either his or mine: If you will
not be mine, because I have imprudently given you away, then Celidea you must
be Calidons. Consider whether this change be pleasing unto you: If on the
contrary, you will not be Calidons, then you cannot deny but you must be mine,
since having been mine before, and my gift taking no effect, all right in the
world is, that the thing given should revert unto the first possessor: And you
ought not to be offended with me for offering you as a Sacrifice for Calidons
recovery, because Sacrifices which are offered unto the gods, are always of
the best and most precious things we have. Nor do not think that by continuing
to love you afterward, I do commit any sacrilege, nor do profane any sacred
or holy thing, since we do all love the gods themselves: The greatest command
which they do impose upon us mortals, is to Love them. But for Gods sake do
not say that I ask you only to sacrifice you again for the recovery of some
other: For my desire is only to have you again for my own sake. I do confess
my fault, and will not insist upon any other argument or reason, but my extreme
affection; and will not argue with her any where but before the Throne of Love.
I do here prostrate my self upon my knees, and vow by all eternity, never to
rise as long as I live, unless I be ingratiated into Celideas favor again.

As he pronounced these words, he kneeled down, and his eyes flowed with such a
River of Tears that all the company did pity him, Celidea her self was a
little moved, and putting her hand before her face, did turn her head the other
way.

Then the Nymph, seeing they had no more to say, did rise up, and taking Paris,
Silvander, and the Shepheardesses aside, did ask their opinions upon this
difference: Their opinions did much vary, some to one side, some to another: At
last, and after a long and serious debate, they all returned to their places,
and Leonida pronounced her sentence in this manner.

The Judgment of the Nymph Leonida.
THree things do present themselves unto us, upon the difference betwixt
Celidea, Thamires, and Calidon: The first, Love: The second, Duty: The third,
an Offense. In the first, we observe, three great Affections; in the second,
three great Obligations; in the third, three great Injuries. Celidea has loved
Thamires from her Cradle, Thamires has loved Celidea, though he be elder; and
Calidon has loved her from the first time he ever saw her. Celidea has been
much obliged unto the virtuous affection of Thamires; Thamires much obliged
unto the memory of Calidons Father; and Calidon much obliged unto the
Indulgency of Thamires. Again, Celidea has been extremely offended with
Thamires, for giving her unto Calidon; Calidon no less offended with Thamires
and Celidea: Thamires offended with Calidon for refusing to do the same
courtesy he received; And Celidea offended with Calidon for offering to
constrain her will, and making her to lose him whom she did love. All these
things being long debated, and seriously considered, we conceive, that as those
things which Nature produces, are always more perfect then those that are
produced by Art, so the Love that comes by a natural inclination, is greater,
and more estimable than those affections that do proceed from designs or
obligations. Furthermore, those obligations which we receive in our own
persons, being greater than those in the behalf of another; so it is certain,
that a benefit obliges more than a memory. An offense which has any tincture
of ingratitude, it is much more heinous than a bare offense without it, and
deserves a greater punishment. Now, we do find that the Love of Thamires does
proceed from a natural inclination; for commonly such loves are reciprocal, and
so he loving Celidea, he was loved again: But so is not the love of Calidon,
whose sterile affection produces nothing but hatred and scorn. Moreover, the
good offices which Calidon has received from Thamires, do render him more
obliged, than Thamires can be upon the score of an Uncle. Again, Calidons
offense against Thamires having a stain of Ingratitude upon it, is much greater
than the offense of Thamires against Calidon, since Thamires may almost cover
it with the name of Revenge or Chastisment. Therefore, in the first place, we
do ordain that the love of Calidon do submit unto the love of Thamires: That
the obligation of Thamires be esteemed less than the obligation of Calidon;
And the offense of Calidon greater than the offense of Thamires. And as for
that which concerns Thamires and Celidea, we do declare, that Celideas
obligation unto Thamires is above the offense of Thamires, in respect of his
pure and innocent love; and in respect of his careful and indulgent education
of her, so as she would be ungrateful if she did not think her self much
obliged: It Is true, his offense is not small, when in disadvantage of his
affection, he would needs satisfy the obligations which he thought he owed
unto Calidon. And yet in consideration there is no offense but may be pardoned
by a person that truly loves, we do ordain, with the advice of all those who
have heard the difference, That the Love of Celidea shall surmount the offense
which she has received from Thamires; And that the Love which Thamires for
the future shall bear unto her, shall surpass that affection which hitherto he
has born unto her; for such is our Judgment.

This was Leonida's Sentence, which has since been observed by all three;
though the poor Calidon received it with so much disgust, that but for the
extreme disdain of Celidea, he should hardly have supported it. But his malady
at this time proved to be his remedy, when from a more sound judgment he
considered how much he was obliged unto Thamires, and how great his folly was,
in thinking to make Celidea love him by force. But at the first, these
considerations had not so much power upon him, as to cut off all his hopes at
one blow: which the Nymph wisely foreseeing, and to avoid the complaints and
tears of this Shepherd, as soon as ever she had pronounced the last word of
her Sentence, she did rise up, being partly invited unto it by the night which
came on apace, and she had no more day left than to carry her unto her Uncles
house. Therefore, after she had saluted all the fair Shepheardesses, she and
Paris entreated Silvander to conduct them through the Wood of Bonlieu, lest
they should lose their way, it being very late, and too troublesome for the
Shepheardesses to accompany her.

Thus they parted; and presently after, the Nymph and Paris dismissed
Silvander, and came unto the house of Adamas, as he was ready to go unto his
supper. Silvander as he returned, left Bonleiu on his left hand, a Temple where
many Vestals, and chaste Daughters of Druids do inhabit, under the charge of
the venerable Chrisante, and he went through a Wood so thick, that though the
Moon was up and shined, yet he could not hit his way. And indeed his own
wandering thoughts as well as the darkness of the Wood, did put him besides his
aim: For he was so wholly taken up with Diana, that he minded nothing else;
And walking on, he came at last upon an open place, where he saw the Moon, she
was a little past her Full, and shined very clearly. The Shepherd fell down
upon his knees, to adore her; and because of the conformity in Names between
Diana and her, he loved that Star above all the rest in the Cope of Heaven.
Having thus adored her, and Diana in her, he stood up, and fixing his eyes
upon her, he uttered these Lines.

A Comparison between DIANA and the Moon.
MOst glorious Star that shines so clear
And radiant in the spangled Sphere,
As makes the Night like Day appear,
Just so does my Diana fair.
Like to thy self so chaste, her breast
With so much cruelty is dressed,
As it is fond Acteons best
To court her with no loose request.
Of all the Tapers in the Night,
It Is thou that gives us greatest light:
Of all the Beauties, none so bright,
Diana is the prime delight.
Yet when Diana I think upon,
You do not hold comparison;
For you had one Endymion,
But my Diana never had one.
Oh heavens, (cried he out then) what then will become of thy Silvander, since
she will not admit of any Endymion? Can it possibly be, that Nature, who cannot
choose but be pleased with her workmanship, should not find one in all her
Treasury worthy of her? Can she possibly bestow so much beauty upon this
Shepherdess, and make her incapable of Love? However, they have no eyes; that
are not delighted with so rare a piece of excellency. Does not the gods allow,
that as our hearts receive the greatest blows, so our hearts should resent the
greatest contentment? Did they make her so fair, and not to be loved? Or if we
do love her, did they make her to consume us? Ah! alas, I see, that as this
beauty was made to be loved so it is for her own glory, and for the torment of
those who love her as I do. This thought gave him such a stop, that he left
walking; and after a long agitation of thoughts, he uttered these Lines.

That no Consideration whatsoever, can hinder him from loving his Mistress.
WHy does my thoughts suggest,
And bid me not to love her,
But set my heart at rest,
She Is aimed for another?
If for a Mortal, why
Not I, as any other?
If for a god? then I
Will worship and adore her.
Amongst mortals there is none
Can equal flame with me;
Nor amongst the gods not one
That can more zealous be.
What though this cruel soul
Disdains all them that love her?
Love will at last control,
Or Reason needs must move her.
If Reason will but do it,
By Merit I Will her gain:
If Love will bring her to it,
I Will love and love again.
The Moon then, as if purposely to invite him to a longer stay in that place,
did seem to lend him a double luster. And because he had left his flock with
Diana's, and assured himself, she would out of her curtesy take all requisite
care over it, he resolved to spend part of the night there, according to his
usual custom; for he took abundance of delight, in entertaining himself with
his new thoughts, that retiring from all company, he used to get into some
private valley, or some solitary wood; and day would oftentimes overtake him,
before he began to think of any sleep, making his long and amorous thoughts see
both the evening and the morning. Thus at this time did he wander, choosing that
path which by chance his foot did fall into; and after he had fancyed a
thousand Chimera's, he found himself in the midst of a thick wood, and knew
not where he was; and though at every step almost he stumbled against something
or other, yet could he not give over his pleasing thoughts; all that he saw,
furnished his fancy with some conceit, and fed his imagination. If he chanced
to stumble upon any thing: I found greater rubs (would he say) in my desires.
If he heard the leaves shake when they were moved by some blast of wind: I
tremble more for fear (would he say) when I am by her, and when I would
acquaint her with my real passions, which she thinks to be fained. If he
looked up and saw the Moon, he would say: The Moon in the heavens, and my Diana
upon earth. This solitary place, silence, and the pleasing light of the night,
caused this shepherd to walk so long with the sweet entertainment of his
thoughts, that being got into the thick of the wood he lost the light of the
Moon, which was (...) by the leaves of trees, and desiring to get out of that
gloomy place, he no sooner looked about to make choice of a good path, but he
heard one not far off talking; and though he made choice of that place for
privacy, yet his curiosity invited him to know who those were that passed away
the night without sleep, assuring himself, that they were some that were sick
of his own disease; and making it appear by this, that every thing looks for
its like, and that curiosity has a great power in Love, since, when he was so
sweetly taken up with his own thoughts, that he despised all the world in
comparison of them, except the sight of Diana; yet was he content to forsake
them, to see who these were; so as quitting them for a time, and giving way to
his curiosity, he turned that way from whence he heard the voice. He had not
gone above fifteen or twenty paces, but in the most obscure part of the wood,
he found himself close by two men, whom he could not possibly know, as well by
reason of the darkness, as because their backs were toward him; yet he knew
by their habits, that one of them was a Druide, and the other a Shepherd.

They were set under a Tree, which spread its leaves over a crystal fountain,
whose pleasing murmur invited them to spend part of the night in that place.
When Silvander was mostdesirous to know them, he heard one answer the other,
thus: But, Father, it is very strange, and I cannot sufficiently admire it,
that you should by your discourse intimate as much, as if it must be confessed,
that there are many other beauties more perfect, then the beauty of my
Mistress; which truly I cannot believe, without an unpardonable offense: For
certainly, every one does think his own the fairest; and to confess she is
not, is a crime, both against his Mistress, and against Love. Then he heard
the Druide answer in this manner: My Son, there is no doubt of what I say, nor
any fear of offending her Beauty, or Love; and I am confident, that I shall in
a few words make you understand it: You know, that all beauty proceeds from
that sovereign goodness which we call God, it is a Ray of himself, and
transcends all his other creatures; and as the Sun, which we see, does
enlighten the Air, the Water, and the Earth, with the same beams; so also the
eternal Sun, does enlighten the angelick Understanding, the rational Soul,
and the Matter. But, as the cleernesse of the Sun appears more bright in the
Air than in the Water, and in the Water then in the earth: so the illumination
of God appears with greater luster in the Angelick Understanding, then in the
Rational Soul; and in the Rational Soul, more then in the Matter. Into the
first, he has infused Ideas; into the second, Reason; and into the last,
Forms. The Druide would have gone on, had not the shepherd interrupted him in
this manner: Your discourse, Father, is a little too high, and you do not
consider the capacity of him unto whom you speak; my wit is too dull to soar so
high: But if you will please to make me understand, what the Angelical
Understanding is, what the Rational Soul is, and what the Matter is, of which
you speak, perhaps I shall understand something more. My Son, said the Druide,
Angelical Understanding is that pure Intellect, by which they see that
Sovereign Beauty, and are adorned with all kind of Ideas. The Rational Soul
is that, by which men are distinguished from beasts; it is it by which we come
to the knowledge of things which is called Rational. The Matter, is that which
falls under the Senses, which is imbellished with diverse forms that are given
unto them, and by which you may judge, whether she whom you love, has in
perfection the two last beauties, which we term Corporeal and Rational, and
which we may without any offense say, that there is in others greater beauties
then in hers; which you will understand by a comparison of Bottles, full of
water; for, as the greater do hold more then the little ones, and yet the
little ones are as full as the greater: so it may be said of all things capable
of beauty; for there are substances, which by their perfection of Nature, can
receive much more beauty then others, which yet cannot be termed imperfect,
because they have as much perfection as they can receive. And under this notion
comes the beauty of your Mistress, whom you may say is perfect, and yet
without offense confess, that she has less beauty then these pure
Intellectualls which I speak of. If you be not too much transported with young
and imprudent affections, and set too great a price upon the beauty of her
face, you will set your whole affection upon the beauty of her mind, in which
you will find something so lasting fair, as will give you as much delight and
satisfaction, as the beauty of a face gives you sorrow, and perhaps despair. I
have heard much discourse upon this subject, answered the Shepherd, but it so
much displeased me, that I did not remember it. But I remember, that one of you
Druides endeavored to prove, that the mind, the eye, and the ear, have only
their parts in Love: For, said he, Love is only a desire of Beauty; and there
being three sorts of Beauties, that of the fight, of which the eye is the only
judge; that of harmony, of which the ear is only capable; and that of reason,
which the mind can only discern, it must follow, that the eyes, the ears, and
the mind, have only their satisfactions. If any other Senses do intrude, they
resemble those impudent guests, that come unto Marriages before they be
invited. Oh Son, said the Druide, this is a Doctrine which perhaps is
understood by many, but certainly followed by very few; and therefore no
wonder, that so many vexations and misfortunes do fall out amongst Lovers. For
Love, which most certainly is the greatest, and most holy of all the gods,
seeing himself so many ways offended by such as call themselves his Votaries,
either in contemning his ordinances, or profaning his purity, does very often
chastise them, to the end they may know their faults. For, my Son, what are
jealousies, disdains, slanders, quarrels, infidelities, and all breaches of
amity, but punishments of that great god? Did our desires stretch no further
then discourse, no further then the sight, nor no further then the ear, why
should we ever be jealous? why disdainful? why angry? why enemies? why
treacherous? and briefly, why should not all love, and be loved, since, then,
the possession of another would not one jot lessen our happiness? Then
Silvander heard the Shepherd interrupt the Druide with a deep sigh, in this
manner: Alas, Father, how true is your discourse unto all Lovers, but my self?
for my love is full of purity and chaste desires, as it cannot offend the most
demure Vestall. Let the god of Love be the most severe of all the gods, yet I
am sure, he can find no fault with my affection; and yet for all this, never
was Lover so rigorously treated as I am. Son, said the Druide, many things do
produce different effects, according to the subjects they meet withal. A Line
which is straight, is not made only to draw another straight Line by, but often
to know what is not straight. Those dysasters which you resent, though in
others they are called punishments, yet in you, they may be termed testimonies,
and proofs of your love and virtue, which will at last so turn to your
advantage, as you may with reason say, that you had never been happy, unless
you had been miserable. And in the interim be assured, your Mistress will
repent of her fault, and the wrong she does you. After this, because it was
very late, he rose up, with intention to go away, and took the shepherd by the
hand, who as he followed answered thus.

I beseech you, Father, and conjure you, by your love unto me, not to say my
Mistress is in any fault, much less that she does me wrong; for she having
power to dispose of me as much as my self, you will offend the most perfect
piece that ever nature produced, and will more disoblige me by such language,
then your assistance can please me. Silvander hearkened very attentively unto
their discourse, and though he did very precisely observe all their actions,
yet such was the obscurity of the place, that he could not know them: and
though he thought he knew the Druide, yet, seeing only his back, he was not
certain. As for the shepherd, he was altogether unknown unto him, so as he did
not remember he ever heard his voice before. This incertainty therefore caused
him to follow them, hoping for a better discovery by the Moon, when they were
out of the woods; but keeping at a good distance, lest he should be seen by
them, he lost them amongst the Trees, and never since could tell what became of
them, which being very sorry for, he left not his quest of them until most of
the night was spent; but weariness at the last made him look for a place to
rest in not knowing how to hit the way unto his Town. When Silvander was
asleep, he waked not until the Sun was very high. The Shepherd that
discoursed with the Druide in the night, was as early as Aurora; and the place
of his dwelling being very near, as he was taking his usual morning-walk, he
espied Silvander asleep: He having not been above a month in the Country, and
having no acquaintance with any Shepherd, he was very desirous to know who
Silvander was, and therefore went very softly to him. He no sooner set his eye
upon Silvander's face, but he knew him to be his most intimate friend; the
remembrance of their former acquaintance, and of the pleasing life they had
lived together, caused his eyes to flow in tears: Then retiring back a few
paces, and hiding himself behind a great Tree, lest if Silvander waked, he
should spy him, he looked upon him very seriously, and in a low voice uttered
these words: Oh, my dear friend, and most faithful companion, Silvander, how
glad, and how sad both, does this meeting with thee make me? Our friendship,
that now sees thee so sad, will not let me rejoice at the sight of thee; and
yet the sight of thee brings into my memory that happy life I lived, ever since
I was first acquainted with thee, until that fatal sentence which my
Shepherdess pronounced against me; a sentence which I cannot remember, but
with a sad heart I must needs call for death to relieve me, finding
experimentally the Proverb to be most true, That none are so miserable, as
those that have been happy, and now are not. Who is able without a flood of
tears to think upon my past felicity, and to see my present misery? Upon this,
he was silent; and going further back, because he saw Silvander stir a little,
and looking about him, said these words: Oh fairest Shepherdess, how cruelly
do you treat this poor Shepherd? The stranger knew he was asleep; but not
knowing who was the Shepherd that he spoke of, he went nearer him; and when he
looked him in the face, he found it all tears, which found a passage through
his eye lids, though they were close. Then did he conclude, that it was
himself he spoke of, which he thought to be very strange, when he remembered,
that his humor was wont to be extremely averse unto Love, insomuch as he was
commonly called, The Shepherd without affection: But considering what power
Beauty has, he believed that now he was no more exempted from the wounds of
Love, than other shepherds of his age; and he was the more confirmed in this
opinion, when he remembered, that some had told him of the wager that was
between him and Phillis. This consideration made him look upon him and say: Ah
Silvander! I see thou art now far unfit to give any counsel unto others, and
for ought I see, standst in need of counsel thy self My friendship cannot
choose but pray, that Love would be more pitiful unto him, then it has been
unto me, and make him more fortunate then I have been. Then going gently away,
he went unto the place where he lodged; and he was no sooner set upon his
bedside, but thinking upon his encounter, Silvander's affection unto him came
into his mind, what great familiarity had been between them, and what fortune
it was should bring him into this place. It is, said he, to give a beginning
unto a better life, and to put an end unto my torments. Alas that cannot be,
for nothing can make me less miserable then I am, unless it be death. Perhaps
the heavens, foreseeing the end of my days, conducted Silvander, my best
friend, unto me, to bid me my last Adien, in the name of himself and all the
rest of my friends. This consideration took up his thoughts a good while, and
at last made him resolve upon a thing which never came into his mind before,
which was, to write unto his Mistress; for her severe banishment of him had so
damped his spirit, that he durst not assume so much boldness: But now verily
believing, that his course of life was near an end, he conceived himself
obliged to take his leave of her in some sort or other, before he went out of
the world. Then he took pen and ink, and writ a Letter, and after he had
folded it up, he superscribed it, Unto the fairest, and most loved
Shepherdess in the whole Universe. Then he went unto the place where he left
Silvander, and going gently to him, after he had kissed the Letter two or three
times, he put it into his hand: Oh happy Paper (said he) if thy good Fate do
bring thee into the hands of her, upon whom all my contentment depends, touch
her to the heart; and if thou can not move her to any pity, yet force her to
believe, that though she be changed from me, yet my affection shall ever be the
same to her. And thou Silvander (said he, putting the Letter into his hand) if
love will yet give thee leave to look upon the beauty of her, unto whom this
Letter is directed, give it unto her: Good shepherd, I beseech thee do this
good office for thy friend, as the last that he can hope to receive from thee
or any else Then this shepherd went away with folded arms, and dejected eyes,
until he came to his lodging. Presently after, Silvander awaked; and because
he saw the Sun of a great height, he looked about which way he should take
homeward; and rubbing his eyes after his sleep, he made use of that hand in
which the Letter was; he wondered extremely when he saw it, but much more, when
he read unto whom it was directed. Do I sleep, (said he) or do I wake? Is it a
dream, or is this a Letter which I see? Then looking well upon it: No, no, said
he, I do not sleep, but I have a Letter in my hand, which is directed unto the
Fairest, and most loved shepherdess in the whole Universe. But, if I be not
asleep, why am I ignorant who gave it unto me? Had I it before I fell asleep?
No, no, I had it not. It must of necessity be, that some did put it into my
hand when I was asleep: This may very well be, for there is not one of all the
gods that has not loved the beauties of the earth; the god of Love himself,
who wounds others, has not been exempted; so as it seems, they think our
shepheardesses more fair then their goddesses. Why should I not think, that
some of these Immortalls, or some Faun, or Demi-god, having seen my fair Diana,
is fallen in love with her? Then considering a little with himself: But, said
he, who is it unto whom this Letter is sent? Let us see, certainly it will tell
us. Then unfolding the paper, he read it from the beginning to the ending; but,
when he found the conclusion of the Letter to be thus subscribed, The most
unfortunate, yet, the most faithful of your servants: Oh! cried he, there is
no doubt to be made, but it is my self who writ this Letter: It must of
necessity be, that my good Angel that has a care of my life, having read the
thoughts of my soul, has written them in this paper, that I might show them unto
Diana. The very truth is, there is not any beauty that can cause such violent
passions, as this which I do read, unless the beauty of my Mistress; no Lover
is able to conceive so much affection, unless it be Silvander: So as there is
no doubt to be made, but that this Letter being directed, Unto the fairest, and
most loved shepherdess in the Universe, I ought to give it unto Diana; and
being written, by the most faithful and unfortunate shepherd, it must be
Silvander. Thus Silvander went away in a persuasion, that this Letter was
directed unto Diana; and desiring she should see it, after humble thanks given
unto his kind Angel, from whom he had received this good office, he went that
way which he thought the shortest cut unto his Town, with a design, that if he
did not meet her, to go in quest of her as soon as he had dined; so as not
meeting her, he dispatched his repast as soon as possibly he could, he let
forth his flock out of the fold, which had too long waited for him, and took
the path that conducts to the Fountain of Siccanours, hoping there to hear of
her; and he was not deceived in his hopes, for as soon as he entered into the
meadow adjoining to it, he saw her sitting under a thick bush with Astrea. Love
swelled him immediately with a desire to hear their discourse unseen, since
they seemed to be very serious at their work; and in order to this design, he
crept from Tree to Tree, and from Bush to Bush, till he got so near them
unperceived, that he could hear what they said, having left his flock a little
behind him in the wood, under the tuition of his Dog. In the mean time, Astrea
talked thus unto Diana: Certainly Phillis does not deserve so much favor from
you; and I must confess, that I am a little jealous of her, though I have laid
no wager with her, as Silvander has; for I would not have her, or any else in
the world, have a greater share in your favor then my self. Fair Astrea,
answered Diana, it belongs unto me to beg the favor of your affection, which I
do with abundance of zeal, so as in this I will not yield unto Phillis, of whom
you speak. Dearest Sister, replied Astrea, your merits do so much transcend all
others, as they do render you much above the common rate of Love. But, how
comes it to pass, said Diana, I should be so long with you, before I could
obtain this happiness? I must needs confess, answered Astrea, that I was
either blind, if I had been with you so long, and not loved you; or else I
must confess, we are not Mistresses of our own wills, but that there is some
supreme power which disposes of us all as it pleases: Diana blushed at these
words, and sweetly casting down her eyes, answered her: Your language, dear
Sister, would put me to the blush, if I were not wholly devoted to be yours;
but this will, which you mention, makes me take all that comes from you for
favors, though if they should come from any other, I should esteem them no
better then mockeries. If you should take my expressions in that sense, said
Astrea, you would injure that affection which I do bear unto you, and that
which you have promised unto me. This mutual affection, said Diana, is too
holy and too sacred to be injured; and therefore to obey you, and please my
self, I will believe, that your expressions are commendations of me, which
does proceed not so much from truth, as from your affection to me, which makes
things seem to be greater, then truly they are, and casts a mist before your
eyes. Unless, dear Sister, said Astrea, you hold me for one of a very weak
judgment, you will believe, that they do proceed both from truth, and from my
affection also. As for truth, said Diana, I do set a high estimation upon it;
and as for your affection, I do desire it above any thing upon earth. Upon
these words, they both embraced and kissed each other, with abundance of
zealous affection; which Silvander seeing, he wished himself Astrea a hundred
times, that he might have received the like favors. After this, they set
themselves down again, and falling unto their work again, he thought that he
heard them name him; and therefore, that he might hear the better, he crept
nearer unto them, and saw, that his Mistress was making a bracelet of her
hair. When he was beginning to be jealous, lest any but himself should wear
it, he heard Astrea say: Silvander would be very jealous, if he saw his enemy
in greater favor than himself. I do believe, said Diana, that she did ask it
of me with that design. I do think so also, said Astrea; but you do wrong the
shepherd in it, if you do favor the one more than the other; you are not as
good as your word, because you have promised the contrary. The advantage which
I seem to confer upon Phillis, said Diana, nor the wager it self, is not of
any great importance; besides, the shepherd did never request me for it, as
she did. But I do beseech you, (said Silvander, showing himself unawares) if
he do request one, I hope you will be pleased to bestow it. The shepheardesses
hearing him speak, were much amazed; and their wonder was so great, as they
were a long time before they spoke one word, only gazed upon one another,
fearing he had heard the discourse they had a little before he came.

At last, Astrea began to speak, and told him thus: Fie, Silvander, I wonder
your discretion should be no more, then to harken unto the secrets of others.
Do you so little respect your Mistress, as to steal a hearing, when she would
not have any hear but me? I do not know what secrets you mean (answered
Silvander) but I am sure, that the curiosity which invited me hither, was, only
to hear my own secrets from the mouth of my fairest Mistress; it is from her
that I must be informed and I am very sorry I came no sooner, since all that I
heard informs me no further, then concerning a Bracelet, which, with much
injustice, is intended for Phillis. You need not be sorry, shepherd, (said
Astrea) for coming no sooner, since if you had, your crime, in offering thus
to steal the secrets of your Mistress, had been no less then his, that stole
fire from heaven; and in reason, you could not expect a more mild chastisement.

Oh! answered Silvander, it is not any fear of punishment which can give a stop
unto my just curiosity; for I do so much esteem the means of rendering her
proofs of my affection, as all manner of punishments are sweet unto me, upon
that account. Good Silvander, (said Astrea unto him) how can you think to give
her any testimonies of affection this way? I will tell you, fair shepherdess,
(said Silvander) should I not render her a most infallible testimony, if
knowing what she desires should be secret, I should conceal it? For we now live
in an age, when every one does not only tell all they know, but all that they
do imagine. In so doing, shepherd, (answered Astrea) you do make your
discretion appear. But more affection, said he. As for discretion, said Astrea,
I will allow it; but as for affection, I will refer my self unto her, to whom
it is addressed. I will make answer for her, said he. Would you have Silvander,
who heretofore was a declared enemy to Love, yet now must love and adore; would
you, I say, have him make his love known? But how comes it to pass, fair
Mistress, (said he, and addressed himself unto Diana) that you would not
answer unto what I say, but seems, as if my discourse did not concern you?
Perhaps the reason is, answered Diana, because I must not be your Mistress
above fourteen or fifteen days. If that do trouble you, said he, you may
easily find a remedy, by obliging me by your favors to continue in your
service, as your beauty and perfections have hitherto most really constrained
me.

Ah Silvander, answered Diana, let us talk no more of any favors and service,
since the term of three Months prescribed for your feigned affection, is
almost past; it would be too great a trouble to you, to constrain your natural
inclination any longer.

Fairest shepherdess, answered Silvander, I would not have you believe I do
think your service any trouble; but I Will assure you, that it is abundance of
delight unto me, to do any service upto a person of so great a merit; insomuch,
as though my Nature were contrary unto Love more then it is, yet should I with
abundance of delight, continue in such a service.

Although, shepherd, you should (said Diana, and smiled) yet it is agreed upon
but by one party; for though your natural Genius do incline that way, yet, you
can never hope, that I will. These words did touch Silvander's heart so to the
quick, since he perceived by them, that he had gained a small influence upon
her good will, as he was not able to hide his sad resentments of them; but his
countenance did plainly discover them by changing color: Which Astrea
perceiving: How now, Silvander, said she unto him, what! does your heart fail
you? It were strange, replied he, if such cruel language from my Mistress,
should not extremely trouble me; yet, do not think my heart shall ever fail me,
though she and the heavens have the disposure of all my hopes and life. Is not
this, answered Astrea, rather rashness in you, then courage? and are you not
too presumptuous, in denying such powers? No, replied the shepherd, it is a
most true, real, perfect, and most faithful love which makes me speak so. By
these and the like expressions, Diana perceived, that Silvander did really love
her. Silvander, he did foresee abundance of difficulties, and very small hopes
unto himself. And Astrea did conceive, that Love had laid a foundation of an
exquisite and lasting affection. And though they all three had different
thoughts, yet were they all true, as afterward you shall perceive. But
Silvander interrupting the subject of this discourse, addressed himself unto
Diana: I hope, fairest Mistress, said he, that this Bracelet of your fair
hair, which you have made for Phillis, is only to be rid of her importunities;
and if it be so, you are obliged to favor Silvander as much as her; and lest
you should be taxed with partiality, you ought to treat us both with equal
favor, though the affection which you have caused in my soul, cannot be
equaled by any other. And why not, said Astrea, taking the part of Phillis,
since both sour affections do proceed from the same cause; one grain of corn
produces several ears: Allthough the cause of our affections be the same,
said Silvander, yet the effects may be different. But experience shows the
contrary, said Astrea, for the affection of Phillis has obtained that favor,
which is denied yours. This is not: or want of any love, answered the
shepherd, but for want of good fortune: yet, since the dropping of water upon
the hardest Marble, will, in continuance of time, pierce it; why may not I as
well hope, that my Love and fervency of prayers long continued, may as well
work upon the marble heart of this fair one? Then, after he had looked upon
her, or rather adored her a long while, be fell down upon his knees: If Love,
my fairest Mistress said he unto her have any influence upon beauty, and if
prayers caused thunderbolts to fall out of the band of Jupiter, how is it
possible, that the extreme affection of Silvander, and his most zealous
supplications cannot obtain as much favor, as the shallow affection and
troublesome importunities of Phillis has obtained from you? If it cannot, I
may with as much reason say, that the way to obtain love is not to love; and
the way to overcome an obdurate heart, is not, by prayers and earnest
supplications; but only by dissimulation, and vexing importunities.

Silvander used many other such expressions as these, by which the
shepherdess gathered more assurance, that love had taken root in him. And
Astrea knowing Diana's mind not to be very averse, from granting Silvander
what he asked, would needs oblige them both by one act; and therefore joined
her prayers unto Silvander's, and she prevailed so with Diana, that the
Bracelet which was intended for Phillis, was bestowed upon this Shepherd; yet,
upon a condition, that he should keep it no longer, then the end of the term
which he was to serve her, which she meant was to end within a few days; which
the shepherd with some difficulty assented unto; but remembering, that though
the time of his feigned service would soon expire, yet he remembered also: that
the time which he was to serve her (...) earnest, would last as long as his
life. It is impossible to express the thankfulnes^^ (...) Silvander's soul,
but much more his satisfied resentments: Let it suffice, that he, who
heretofore was wont to despise all manner of favors from Love, and who could
not imagine any could find any contentment in such follies (as he called them)
that he does now confess, that there is no felicity comparable unto this
favor which he now resented. And when he was in the midst of his sweet
imaginations, it seems, Love had a mind to complete his joys, in making the
shepherdess Phillis to enter: For he, whose happiness is unknown to any but
himself, cannot be said to be completely happy; but the more it is known, the
more happy he is, and much the more, when this happiness does not come by
Fortune, but by Merit. As Soon as Silvander saw her, he ran unto her, and in a
most jocund manner, showed her the arm, on which he had already put his most
beloved Bracelet, and passed it often before her eyes, saying: Here, Phillis,
here is the earnest of my ensuing Victory. Phillis, who had been seeking
Lycidas, with a desire to convince him of his jealousy, and could not find
him, was so sad and so weary, as she needed not to counterfeit any anger, nor
change any countenance to testify her displeasure and sorrows, which this
favor might have caused in her. And because Silvander was very troublesome
unto her, not only in this Act, but in being the bellows, which did blow up
the jealousy of Lycidas, she said unto him in as sharp a manner as she could:
This earnest, shepherd, which you show me, is rather an argument of your
little merit, then of any ensuing victory; for so it is usual to do, only to
make all even. What do you mean by that, said the shepherd? I mean, replied
she, that on that end which is too leight, they use to put some weight to
counterpoise it, until the journey be ended; but when they are arrived there,
then they throw away that which was only to make an equal balance. So till we
are arrived at the end of our term, Diana does wisely balance that side which
is the leighter, by her favors; but afterward, she will give her judgment
without any regard unto the weight of my affection, or the levity of your
little love: And then, God knows on whom the victory you speak of will fall.
Silvander smiled, and answered: It is rather the custom of miserable people to
be envious, and lessen the happiness of others, which they infinitely esteem
by their language.

Phillis, without any further reply, left him, and went unto the two
shepheardesses, and was extremely offended at them: And because Diana laid the
fault upon Astrea, and Astrea could not well excuse her self, Silvander began
to speak for them both, addressing himself unto Diana: I beseech you, fairest
Mistress, said he, consider how prudent Love is, and how wisely he governes
the actions of those he is pleased withal. You thought hitherto that Phillis
loved you, and indeed I know none, but have in some sort been deceived by her
dissimulations. Love, who knows all the interior faculties of the soul, and
purposing to undeceive you, has caused you to favor me with this Bracelet of
your hair, not only as a mark of my affection, but also to discover the hollow
affection of this deluder by her jealousy: For as it is a thing impossible,
that two contraries should be at the same time in one place; so much more, that
love and jealousy should be at the same time in one and the same heart.
Silvander's aim was, only to torment Phillis the more; for knowing how jealous
Lycidas was, he doubted not but to trouble her, by proposing, that Love and
Jealousy are inconsistent: And she being touched to the quick could not choose
but answer him thus: Pray, Shepherd, what reasons and arguments have you to
maintain so bad an opinion? Such, said he, as will make you confess your self
of the same; at the least, if you know what the reason is. Love is nothing but
a desire and every desire is hot: Jealousy is nothing but a fear, and all fear
is as cold as ice; and how can you imagine such a cold Child should be the
issue of such a hot Parent? We see, said Phillis, that flint, which is cold,
will send sorth sparks that are hot. Most true, answered Silvander; but fire
never produces cold. Yet by your favor, replied Phillis ashes, that are cold,
do proceed from fire. Yes, answered the shepherd but when the ashes are cold,
the fire is not in them. Phillis was almost non-plust at this reply; and much
more, when Diana spoke. So likewise, said she, when cold jealousy begins,
Love, that is hot ends. Mistress, replied Phillis, my enemy may well get the
victory, if he have so good a Second as your self. Then turning her self
toward Astrea: And you, fair shepherdess, said she I may justly think you a
very ill friend, if seeing me assaulted by two, you will not take my part.
Astrea answered very sadly: I do hold it for a thing so certainly true, that
jealousy may proceed from love, as not to bring it into any doubt. I will not
dispute it, lest I should be forced to confess, that I my self did not love,
because I was jealous as I do see you are forced to confess, that being jealous
of Diana, you do not (...) her; or at the least, being in doubt whether
jealousy may proceed from love, you are not well assured whether you love her
or no. I do kiss the hand of this fair and just shepheardess, said Silvander,
who, without respect of persons, speaks with so much truth in my advantage. If
you be obliged unto me, said Astrea, then surely you do think, that I did speak
partially in your favor; for none are beholding unto him that speaks truth,
more then to him that pays a debt justly due. Most true, answered Silvander,
if it be taken in the rigor of justice but we do live in an age, wherein so
few do follow virtue simply and clearly, as we may think our selves obliged
unto those, that will but acknowledge any benefit, although they are obliged
unto it. But what can you argue against that experience which we daily find,
said Phillis unto him? For I know a shepherd, who after he had loved long, and
fell into extreme jealousy: yet afterward recovering out of it, did continue
his affection long after: Can you say, that this was a fire extinguished, which
produced these ashes? It is not impossible, (answered Silvander) but one that
is well may fall sick, and after that sickness, grow well again; nor, that a
fire may be put out, and afterward kindled again. Affection that was long hot,
may be put out by cold jealousy, and that jealousy being gone, it may become
as hot as ever it was before: But it cannot be, that health and sickness, hot
fire and cold ashes, love and jealousy, should be in the same subject at the
same time. And for a full clearing of this truth, let us observe the effects of
love and jealousy, and by them judge, whether the causes from whence they
proceed, have any conformity together. The effects of Love is an extreme desire
in our souls, to see the person loved, to serve her, and to please her, as
much as possibly we can. The effects of jealousy, is a fear to meet her whom
we love, a carelessness to please her, and a disdaining to serve her: And who
can think such contrary effects can proceed from one and the same cause? If we
do, we must confess, that nature will destroy her self, if she will have
contraries to consist together. Phillis would gladly have answered, but she was
so non-plust, as she knew not where to begin; at which Diana could not choose
but laugh, especially when she considered the jealousy of Lycidas. And to add
more matter for her perplexities, she did purposely speak in this manner:
Jealousy is a sign of love, as old ruins are signs of ancient buildings,
which are the greater, the more magnificent the Edifice was: And therefore, a
great jealousy cannot proceed from a little love. But, as we cannot give the
name of buildings unto these ruins, so jealousy cannot be called love. And if
I may judge by my own humor, if I did love, I should not have power to be
jealous. And what would you be, said Phillis, if he whom you should love,
should love another? His enemy, answered Diana, I would say, hate him: And
though I do foresee that such an accident would displease me, yet, it would be
more, for being deceived so long, then for being so soon forgotten. But, if
that shepherd should be jealous of you, said Phillis, what then would you do?
I would use him so, answered Diana, that he should never love me again. But
suppose you should desire he should love you, said Phillis, what way would you
take? The way of a Precipice, answered Diana; for I should then think my self
worthy to end miserably, if I should love one, whom I knew did not love me. Oh!
Diana, said Phillis, how freely you speak? Nay, Phillis, said Diana, how
passionately you dispute? If you have need of a remedy against this malady,
either take that which I would give you, or arm your self with patience to
endure any displeasure that can befall you, and be assured, the number of them
will not be a few.

Thus these fair and discreet Shepheardesses discoursed with Silvander, And
because Astrea thought that if it continued any longer, it might breed some
distaste, she had a mind to interrupt them; therefore she rose up, and seemed
very desirous to walk, so as taking Diana by one hand, and Phillis by the
other, she motioned to walk, saying, they had been sitting too long. Then
Silvander as he was officious in waiting about his Mistress he scattered the
Letter which was put into his hand in the Night time: and Phillis having still
her eye upon him, It sell no sooner upon the ground, but she took it up, he
not perceiving her; and carrying it unto Astrea, would needs read it before she
would restore it to him again. But as soon as ever she and the sad
Shepherdess did cast their eyes upon it, they conceived it to be the hand of
Celadon. This apprehension did touch Astrea so to the heart, that leaving Diana
with Silvander, and taking Phillis aside, she was constrained to sit down upon
the ground. Phillis seeing her countenance much changed asked her how she did,
and what was the cause of her so sudden alteration? Oh my good Sister, said
Astrea, what a strange trembling has surprised me? and what a perplexity has
the sight of this Letter put me into? Did you not observe how every Character
does resemble the writing of my poor Celadon? Suppose it be (said Phillis, who
desired not that Silvander should take notice of her disorder) why should you
wonder so at it? Perhaps it is one of his Letters which Love will restore unto
you by the hand of Silvander, as being most due unto you. Alas, my dear
Sister, said Astrea, me-thought I saw him this very last night so sad, and so
pale, that I started, and so awaked out of my sad Dream: She would have gone
on, when Diana and Silvander came unto them, very sorry to see her face so much
and so soon altered. But Phillis, who would by all means hide this surprise
from that Shepherd, did make a sign unto Diana, and then addressing her self
unto Silvander, Shepherd, said she, Astrea has a very great desire to impart
her mind freely unto Diana, if you were not present. Oh my enemy, answered he,
our hatred is not so great as to make me uncivil unto Astrea: I know it is not
fit that Shepherds should hear all the secrets of Shepheardesses, and
therefore I will retire into the next Grove, and wait there until you call me.
And so making an humble reverence unto Diana, he went into the Wood. And not to
be idle, he took his knife, and began to cut Letters upon the barks of trees.
In the mean time, Diana understood from Phillis, how the sight of a Letter,
which fell from Silvander, and seemed to be the hand of Celadon, had troubled
Astrea: Then showing it unto her, and she looking upon it a long time very
seriously; It would be very welcome news which Silvander has brought, said
Diana, if it was Celadon that writ this Letter; for most certainly it is very
newly written, it is so fresh, as if it were written this very hour; so as if
this be Celadons hand, be assured he is not dead: But let us see what is
within, perhaps we shall learn more in it. Then opening the Letter, they found
these words.

To the most Fair, and most loved Shepherdess in the whole Universe, the
most unfortunate, and the most faithful of all her Servants wishes that
happiness which Fortune has denied unto himself.
MY superabundant affection will never consent I should give the name of pain
and torment unto that which your command has caused me to suffer. But I may
say, that the condition wherein I am, which perhaps another would find
intolerable, does content me, since it comes with an injunction from you. If it
be your pleasure to continue your sharp commands any longer, I shall be still
all obedience: So as though I cannot assure you of my fidelity in this life,
yet all the blessed souls in the Elizian fields do know, that I am the most
faithful, yet the most unfortunate of all your servants.


Ah my dear Sister, said Astrea, It is Celadon who writ those words: I know it
by his style and manner of writing; but perhaps it is long since it was
written. It bears no date (answered Diana, who held it in her hand) but I see
by the writing that it is very fresh; you may see the dust how it sticks upon
the Ink still, as if it were newly cast upon it. Sister, said Phillis, there is
no better way, if it be discreetly carried, than to know from Silvander the
place where he found it, or who gave it unto him. Sister, said Diana unto the
sad Shepherdess, if you can but hold your countenance, that he may not see
the alteration in it, I am confident we shall learn all from him. And because it
will be difficult to recollect your self upon a sudden, I will go my self
and talk with him, and you may follow after me. So she went unto Silvander,
whom she found engraving Anacrosticks upon the Names of his Mistress and
himself, upon the first tree he found. But before he began to work in bark, he
had engraven upon a soft stone at the Root of a Tree, a Dial, whose trembling
Needle was turned toward the North, with this Motto, I am touched; signifying
thereby, that even as the Needle of a Dial being touched with an Adamant, does
always turn that way, because, as some Philosophers hold, the Element of the
Loadstone is there and by a puissant and natural sympathy does attract every
part of it self unto it self; so his heart, being touched with the beauty of
his Mistress, does turn it and all its thoughts toward her: And the better
to explain his conception, he added these Verses.

The Needle of a Dial Northward turns,
If touched by Adamant:
My Heart touched by Diana, burns,
And after her does pant.
When she was come unto him, he had just finished these Characters; and when he
saw her, he turned himself in a very jocund manner toward her, and said: Oh
my fairest Mistress, what good Fate sent you hither unto me? Better Fate then
you could expect, answered she; for I am not only come my self unto you, but I
have left behind me two of your greatest enemies. Since it is so, answered he,
I do much more fear your blows. My blows, said the shepherdess, do not
offend; or if they do, it is only such as would have them do so. It is very
true, said Silvander, they do indeed offend none, but those as would have them
do so: but yet that is the reason, why there are so many wounded; for all those
that see you, do desire to receive your wounds. The blows which are desirable,
replied Diana, need not be feared. Your wounds, answered Silvander, are
desired, but not desirable; and are terrible, but not terrifying. When I did
say, that I feared them, it was rather to show what I ought to do, then what I
did. I shall but laugh at you, said Diana, if you know your own good, and will
not follow it. But to leave this discourse, pray tell me, shepherd, from whom
this Letter is, and to whom it is directed? Silvander not knowing how he lost
it, returned this answer: My heart, and your eyes, if they did but look in a
glass, would answer for me, that it is directed unto you, as, Unto the most
fair, and the most loved shepherdess in the whole Universe: And your severity
and my affection may tell you, that it comes from me, The most unfortunate, yet
the most faithful, of all your servants. But, (said Diana unto him, and then
Astrea with Phillis came to them) if this Letter came from you, why did you not
write it? Because, said he, I found a better Secretary than my self; and I
must needs ingenuously confess, that there is something supernatural in it,
since I found my own conceptions in it, without writing them; and since you
have it, and I never gave it unto you: But, my good Angel, who was my Scribe,
seeing I was too slow in presenting it unto you, did steal it from me, though I
did stay only for an opportunity of privacy to present it. And why so, said
Diana? Do you think I will receive any Letters in private, which I would refuse
in public? My intention of privacy, replied Silvander, was in consideration of
my self, and not of you, because I had rather receive a denial from you
without a witness, then before the face of my enemy: But I see, that he who
assumed the boldness to write of me, has found out a way to let you see it. I
shall receive your excuse, (said Diana) upon condition, you will tell me, who
was your Secretary. This last night, (answered the shepherd) after a long
meditation and entertainment of my own thoughts, I chanced to fall asleep in a
wood not far distant hence; and in the morning when I awaked, I found this
Letter in my hand: At the first, I was much amazed at it; but after I had read
it, I conceived, that some good Angel which loved me, and had read the same
thoughts in my imagination, did write them in this paper for me, to present
them unto you. Phillis, who had wit at will, seeing Diana mute, did ask him, if
he knew the way unto the wood. No, said he, if there be none but you that would
go unto it: but, if it be the pleasure of my Mistress, I will wait upon her
unto it; and I assure my self, that the Trees which heard me almost all the
night, will relate the discourse which I had with my self amongst them. Astrea
being very desirous to see the place, did make a sign with her eye unto Diana,
that she should take him at his word; who thereupon asking, whether they had
time enough to go and return, and being answered, Yes, she entreated him, to
conduct them all thither. Silvander, who was full of civility, and who desired
nothing more passionately, then to do any service unto his fair Diana, did
freely consent to show them the way. So Diana turning toward the
shepheardesses, purposely to umbrage Astrea's design, did very particularly
entreat them, they would be pleased to go along with her, and they should
command her as much another time. Astrea, who was very glad, that Silvander
took Diana to be the Author of this design, did answer, That she would most
willingly follow her, whithersoever she was pleased to go. So committing the
charge of their flocks unto one of their neighbors, who came accidentally,
Silvander took the shortest way to the wood, and conducted them thither.

Where the way was narrow and bad, Silvander always went before; but as soon as
they came into the Meadow, which is often watered by the River Lignon, he
waited upon his Mistress, and led her by the arm. She, who had Phillis on the
other side, who was betwixt her and Astrea, did accept of her shepherds
service with a very good will, lest the length of the way should weary her; and
giving him her left arm: You, Silvander, (said she) I make use of you in this
voyage as my Servant; and of you, Phillis for my Companion. Phillis desiring to
make Silvander talk, that the company might be the less weary, and who would
not have a word, so much to her advantage pronounced by Diana, to pass
unobserved, she addressed her self unto the shepherd, and asked him, what he
thought of this favor? That it is greater, answered Silvander, then we
deserve. But, replied Phillis, how do you take the difference that she puts
betwixt us? As a faithful Servant ought to take what is pleasing unto his
Mistress, said Silvander. But you, said the shepheardess, who are so great a
stickler against jealousy, have not you some sparks of it your self, in
seeing the great favor which your Mistress has conferred upon me? I do
perceive, said he, that you measure my affection by your own, since you think
any thing that pleases my Mistress, can displease me: But however I were a
mere simplician in matters of Love, if I did not think the favor she has done
me, to be a very great honor unto me, and disadvantageous unto you. Diana
hearing this answer, smiled; and Phillis, who expected another kind of an
answer, was so surprised, as she knew not what to say, but looked earnestly
upon him: yet, he beginning to walk; Phillis, said he, that smile is only a
cloak for your ignorance; I have not yet made you understand, neither by my
words nor my actions, any of Love's mysteries; but I do not accuse any, except
the defects that are in your affection. If I do not understand these mysteries,
said Phillis, you might accuse me of ignorance, but not of defect in affection,
since understanding is not an act of will, as affection is. You are mistaken,
said the shepherd, and this is one of those mysteries you are ignorant of, and
whereof I do not accuse either your understanding faculty, or your will, but
this fair Diana. How, said Diana, do you make me culpable of the ignorance of
Phillis? I do not think you culpable, fair Mistress (replied Silvander) but I
do say, you are the cause (as I have learned from an ancient Oracle) by which I
understand (said he, and turned toward Phillis) that I am better loved by our
Mistress then you are. Astrea, who had not yet spoke: This discourse (said she)
is the most obscure, and the reasons the most intricate, that ever I heard.
Will you but please to give me leave, said Silvander, I am confident I shall
clear them unto you, and make you confess them as well as my self: And for
your better understanding, I say once again that the reason why Phillis does
not understand the mysteries of Love, is because she does not love enough, and
that for this defect in her love I ought not to accuse her will but Diana
only, as an ancient Oracle tells us, by which I know, that she loves me more
then she does Phillis; and this is the reason: When you desire to know what is
the will of the gods, unto whom do you use to address your selves, to come to
the knowledge of it? Doubtless, said Phillis, unto those that are Priests in
their Temples, and whose office it is, to wait at their Altars. And why do you
not rather address your self, said Silvander, unto those that are more knowing
than unto those Ministers of the Temple, who commonly are ignorant in every
thing else but their Office? Because, said Phillis, the gods do more freely
communicate themselves unto those that are entered into those mysteries, and
more familiar about their Altars, than unto any strangers, though they be more
knowing. See (said Silvander then) the power of Truth, which constraines you to
speak it against your intention: For if you do not understand the mysteries of
the god of Love, is not that a sign you are a stranger unto him? For you
confess, that the gods do communicate themselves more freely unto those who
serve in their Temples, and wait at their Altars. But which way should they
serve at the Altar of the god of Love, unless it be by Loving? Hearts are the
only sacrifices which are acceptable unto that deity* Do you not see then
Phillis, that if you be ignorant in these mysteries, it is not a fault in your
understanding, but in your love* And if it should be so, (said Phillis) which I
will never grant, how can you accuse Diana for any defects in my affection? Is
she not fair enough? or, are not her merits sufficient to make her self loved?
This, said Silvander, is a second mystery of that god which I will explain unto
you. Diana has no defects neither in beauty nor merit, but she is all
perfection; the defect is only in your self, that you do not love enough, and
that your love does not equal those admirable excellencies which you see in
her: But, it is impossible you should love her in that height, because she does
not love you, according to the Oracle of which I spoke. Venus seeing her Son so
little, did ask the gods, what she should do to make him grow: To which
question she received this answer, That she should get him a Brother, and then
he would grow to full proportion; but as long as he was alone, he would never
grow. Do you not see, Phillis, that this answer was given against you, and in
favor of me? For, if your love be little, and a dwarf, the reason is, because
it has not a Brother. If mine, on the contrary, do excel the highest, it is,
because Diana, my most fair Diana, has given it one, whom he loves, whom he
honors: nay, whom he adores. And do you think, Silvander, replied Phillis,
that she does love you better then she does love me? It can be no more doubted,
answered the shepherd, then truth it self The gods do never lie, Oracles are
the interpreters of their will. How dare you tax an Oracle with any untruth?
No, no, Phillis, since I do love this fair Diana better then you do, most
certainly she does love me better then she does you; otherwise, the gods would
be impostors, and not gods. Many have been deceived, said Phillis, in the
understanding of Oracles. It Is true, answered Silvander, but when that is, the
contrary event does presently discover it and so they remain not long
undeceived: But, the Oracle of which I speak, is answered by such conformable
effects, both in you and me, that it would be impiety to doubt it; since, do
what you can, you cannot make your love so great as mine: And to confirm it the
more, is it not a common received opinion, that whosoever will be loved, must
love? Why, shepherd, (said Phillis, and interrupted him) do you think by
loving much, to make your self much loved? If you would give me leave to
expound this mystery unto you, said Silvander, perhaps you would be as ready to
confess it, as you have been to interrupt me; but this is all I will say, if
the way to get love be to love, then there is no doubt, but that Diana, who
constraines me to love her with such ardency of affection, does love me
extremely. Phlllis was dumb at this, not knowing what to answer the shepherd,
who indeed defended his cause but too well. Astrea whispered Diana in her ear:
Never credit me again, (said she in a whisper) if this shepherds jest do not
turn to earnest, and if he do not, like children, who play so long with their
finger about the candle, that at last they burn themselves. Diana answered,
that such a thing might perhaps be, if I were as capable of burning, as he is
of being burned; but, since he himself is only in the fault, let him only bear
the punishment: as for me, I do not intend to participate with him. This talk
had continued longer, if Phillis had not interposed, and chid them for taking
Silvander's part. We did not take his part, answered Diana; but we may well
say, that you are too weak to argue with him, for his knowledge is much above
yours. But I would gladly know, said Phillis, how he can conceive, that what
you said unto him at the beginning, was more advantageous to him than to me;
for, I do apprehend it to be a greater honor unto me, since you did thereby
chose me to be your Companion. She did confer that honor indeed upon you,
answered the shepherd, but her affection upon me. No, no, replied the
shepherdess, under the name of Companion is both affection and honor
comprehended, for they do almost signify the same thing. You may as well
assert, answered Silvander, that affection and flattery are the same, and not
contrary. If that person whom you love best should tell you, that your
perfections do transcend any goddess, would you not say, this is gross
flattery? And why, poor deceived thing that you are, do you not think the same
of Diana, when she says, that you are her Companion? For, as you your self
expound it, that Companion signifies, one like her self; and her perfections
are so transcendently above all other women, as there cannot be a greater
difference between men and gods, then betwixt you and her. Poor blinded
Phillis, do you not see, that this sweet word which is so pleasing to you, is
only pure flattery, which my Mistress is pleased to put upon you, to
acknowledge in some sort that shallow affection which you bear unto her? For,
since she cannot love you, she will give you satisfaction in this coin. In
taking you for a Companion, she shows flattery, and flattery shows small
affection: On the contrary, in taking me for her Servant, she shows the good
will she bears unto me, since I am capable of that favor, if any mortal man
be. Oh impudence! (cried out Phillis). Oh love! answered Silvander. Why,
replied the shepherdess, do you think your self worthy to serve her, whose
merits are above all mortals? The greatest gods, said the shepherd, are
served by men, and are pleased with their service and duty: Then why, if I be a
man, as I hope you do not question, will you not permit me to serve and adore
my goddess, especially, since she her self requires this holy duty from me?
Phillis standing mute, and considering well of Silvander's reasons, she knew
not how to answer one word, but did really think, that Diana did confer a
greater favor upon Silvander, then upon her; and therefore addressing her
speech unto her: Mistress, said she, upon consideration of my enemies reason,
I find, that he is in the right, and that you have conferred more favor upon
him than me: Is it possible, you should do it intentionally? If you did, I
shall have a just occasion of complaint, and take it ill, he should be so much
advanced above his merit. I see, said Diana coldly, that opinion has a greater
power of you then truth, and you are guided only by it: Within this quarter of
an hour, you were boasting of the favor which I did you, in preferring you
before Silvander: And now, this opinion being changed, you complain of the
contrary, so as I am afraid, that your affection also is nothing but opinion.
No question of it, said Silvander; for every word she has spoken is an
argument of it. Is it any argument of Love, Phillis, to find fault with the
actions of your Mistress? If they be to my disadvantage, said she, would you
have me to think well of them? It were but your duty to conform your self, and
strive to get more love then you have, said Silvander. Would you have Diana
conform her self unto your will, or ought you to conform your self unto hers?
I wish to the gods, said she, that I had as much advantage over her, as it
seems she has given you over me. If it were so, said Silvander, pray tell me,
which of you two should be the Mistress and which the Servant? Truly,
shepherdess, I do not think you ever received the least scratch in Love's
War. Astrea, who silently heard their difference, was at last constrained to
say thus unto Diana: I think, wise shepherdess, that this shepherd will take
away from Phillis the use of her tongue. No, said Silvander, it is rather Love;
for hitherto she thought that she had loved, but now she sees the contrary.

Thus those fair Shepheardesses deceived themselves in the length of the way;
and the Sun shining very hot, they asked Silvander, how far it was yet unto the
place which he conducted them unto; and understanding that they were about the
mid way, they resolved to rest themselves at the next Fountain, or the next
good shade they come unto; and Silvander told then, that they should presently
come unto such a one, where they should find a Cherry tree full of ripe
fruit: In order to this resolution, they doubled their pace; but meeting with
Laonice, Hylas, ^^^cis, Manduates, and Thirsander, they stayed awhile. These
shepherds and shepheardesses were walking together, seeking for cool shades,
and pleasent Fountains, for they were strangers; and having no flocks to keep,
they passed away the time as pleasantly as possibly they could: And intending
not to part that day they walked up the banks of the delectable River of
Lignon. Now these two Companies being met, Hylas presently left Laonice, and
came to Phillis, and she left Astrea and Diana, and went to him; at which
Silvander was not sorry, thinking himself in more absolute possession of his
Mistress. Tircis seeing Astrea alone, for Thirsander did lead Maduntes, he
addressed himself in a humble manner unto her, and offered his service in
leading her: She, having a great esteem of that shepherd, especially because
there was a conformity betwixt their fortunes, did very willingly accept of his
offer; so as every one had a Companion, except Laonice, who, as I told you
formerly, having an extreme desire to be revenged of Phillis and Silvander, all
her aim was, to watch an occasion of doing them some mischief: And to
compass her design, she kept a spying eye upon all their actions, hearkn^^
unto all their discourse, especially when they spoke low, or in secret; and
when (...) by their gestures, that they spoke any thing affectionately. She had
formerly (...) partly a cause of the jealousy of Lycidas, and had since
learned much of Sil^^^^^^ and other shepheardesses, yet more from her own
suspicions then any else: But (...) much more, and became so knowing, as it may
be said, she knew all (...) as well as themselves. Also, there being none in
the company who suspected her design, she had more free access to hear, none
taking any notice when she (...) them. After she had (...) upon all the
shepherds and shepheardesses, and (...) Companion to divert her she got as
near as she could unto Silvander, who led Diana; (...) to whom she wished most
ill, and having already an opinion of their being in love the passionately
desired to discover more. Diana, who had no design at all upon Silvander,
though she did wish him better then any shepherd of Lignon, did not care
whether her words were heard or no: And Silvander took no heed, because he was
so attenive unto what his Mistress said, as he did hardly see the ground he
trod upon, which gave Laonice a better opportunity to hearken. Silvander then,
as soon as he was alone with his Mistress: Well, my fairest, (said he unto her)
what do you think now of Phillis and me? I do think, answered she, that Phillis
of all persons in the world, is the worst liar; and that of all the shepherds
I know, Silvander is the best dissembler: for certainly, you can counterfeit a
passionate part the best of any living Ah shepheardess! replied Silvander, it
is an easy matter to counterfeit what one does really resent. This, replied
Diana, is that which confirms what I say: I could never believe, that a
feigned passion could be glossed with words and actions, so resemblant unto
truth. Ah Diana! said he, how far short are both my actions and my words of
declaring the truth of my affection? Could you but see my heart as well as my
face, you would have a better opinion of me. I must confess, the wager betwixt
Phillis and me has been a cause, that I have had the honor to be often (...)
you: But, I cannot keep my self within the confines of our wager. Oh my
fairest Mistress, do not be here it possible I should: Your perfections are
too high to be loved, only by a seeming to love. Heavens be my witness, and I
attest all the sacred duities of these solitary places, that I do love you with
a most real, perfect, pure, and eternal affection.

The reasons why this shepherd spoke thus, was, because he saw, that within a
few (...) his term of (...) months would end, and that after it, he should
find more difficulty to express his affection, knowing the humor of this
shepheardess well enough, so as he resolved to make use of his time: And though
it did but further his design very little, yet was it not altogether in vain;
for by this he had accustomed his shepheardess unto such discourse which
perhaps i^ not one of the least acts, whereof an advised Lover ought to make
use for custom renders things easy, which at the beginning astonish us, and
which we think impossible. Diana hearing this language, though she thought it
true, yet would she not seem to believe it; but continuing as she begun, This,
shepherd, said she, does more confirm main the opinion I had of you; and you
may believe what I say to be true, if you do observe how faintly I hear and
answer you; for did I give any credit unto your words, be certain, that the
first word you should speak unto me, should be the last word that I would hear.
Silvander would have answered, had he not been prevented by an encounter.
Astrea and Tircis went first, Phillis and Hylas next, Mandonte and Tersander
after them, Diana and Silvander the next; and after them, the sly Laonice. In
this order, they followed the path which Silvander showed them, and without
much noise they came into a very pleasant Wood which was in their way. The
discourse of Astrea and Tircis being only upon things indifferent, they espied
in the thick of the wood, under a shade, three shepheardesses, with the
generous Paris, the son of Adamas: the shepheardesses were unknown unto Astrea;
as for Paris, he was of late grown so familiar amongst all that company, as
there was none in all that Town, which did not both know and love him. His love
unto Diana brought him unto that acquaintance, and to make himself more
plausible, as often as he came to see his Mistress, he put on the habit of a
Shepherd, and with his hook in his hand, frequented that company, as if he had
been of the same quality: Such power has Love, to free the most generous
souls from all ambition. And because one of those shepheardesses did at that
time sing, Astrea and Tircis stopped, and turning toward those which followed
them, did make a sign, that they should make no noise: But because the Song
was almost ended, they heard only this last verse of it.

By Thought or Deed did I offend?
By Deed, I near did condescend:
And if by Thought I did amiss,
Ple swear my thought a Traitor is.
The voice of this shepherdess was so ravishing, that all the company were
very sorry they came not till her song was ended: But Hylas leaving Phillis, to
get a little nearer, he no sooner set his eyes upon them, but he kn^w them: Had
any observed him, they might easily have seen, that these shepheardesses were
not unknown unto him; yet, that he might hear what they said, he constrained
himself as well as he could: Then he heard her that sung, say; Generous Paris,
since we have satisfied your curiosity and desire, we hope you will acquit your
self of your promise made unto us. I shall never deny you (answered Paris) any
thing, that is within the compass of my power. Then taking a Lute, which these
shepheardesses had, he sung this Song unto that Instrument.

A Song.
1.
WHen Hylas did the splendid eye
Of Phillis, his fair Mistress, spy:
Was ever such a glorious Queen,
(Said he) unless in heaven seen?
2.
Fair Phillis, with a blushing Air,
Hearing these words, became more fair:
Away, said he, you need not take
Fresh Beauty, you more fair to make:
3.
Then with a winning smile and look;
His candid flattery she took.
Oh stay, (said he) it is done I vow,
Hylas is captivated now.
4.
If he for liberty complain,
Let him (said she) take it again.
It Is more divine (said he) in you,
That conquer can, and pardon too.
5.
A captive Prisoner is blessed,
When he does fear to be releast:
That Lover's happy, who does cry,
When any does his bonds unty.
As Soon as this Song was ended, these strangers asked him, who Phillis, and who
Hylas was? If you did ever hear, said Paris, of the Plain that is called
Forests, and in it, of the delectable River of Lignon, certainly you have
heard the names of the fair Shepheardesses, Diana and Astrea: This Phillis, of
whom you enquire, is a deer Companion unto them; as for Hylas, I can tell you
nothing, unless it be, that he is a stranger, but of the sweetest and most
jocosive humor, that ever my conversation cop'd withal; for he was never
tired with the service of any shepherdess, but still will quit her after six
days courtship, before any distaste shall be on any side. Did he not dwell in
a place called Camargue (said one of these strangers) which is in the Roman
Province? And Paris answering, Yes; Oh then, said she, you need not tell us any
more, since we know both his Name and Country; as for all his other conditions,
we know them well enough to our own costs: And after she had paued awhile, she
began again in this manner.

The History of Palinice, and Cercenea.
I Shall never think any thing strange, generous Shepherd, when I remember
Hylas, and consider, that most things do consist only in Opinion. For nothing
is so directly contrary unto each other, as virtue and vice; and this man,
taking the one for the other, does show us, that it is merely opinion which
puts the price upon all things: And doubtless he is the most unconstant piece
that ever thought himself in Love; and he will go about to prove by arguments
and reasons, that it is a virtue to change, or love many at once; and that this
is no inconstancy. Also, it is questionless, that he speaks as he thinks, and
his arguments and reasons are the issues of his heart. I remember that when he
came from Camargue unto Lions, he got into the Temple amongst the women, at the
grand Feast; and if Palinice had not showed much compassion upon him (for so is
the name of this my Companion) certainly he had paid very dear for his
curiosity: but she finding, that his fault proceeded from folly, and not
malice, disguised him with a vail, and got him out of the Temple, then carried
him to his lodging, which was in a demi-Isle, betwixt the Rosne and the Arar.
This courtesy was enough to oblige Hylas, unto a grateful visit of Palinice:
and her modesty was such, as would have given a check unto any but Hylas, from
moving any matters of Love unto her: Yet, before the third visit was paid, he
acquainted her with his mind, and was as familiar, as if he had been brought
up with her from his cradle. You have, fair one, (said he unto her at the very
first accost) preserved my life, and good reason it should be employed in your
service; and I will do it, though only out of gratitude: And not to detract
from your first favor which you have done me, I beseech you accept this offer
of my service, and believe, that there is no person upon earth that can love
you better then I, nor whose heart is swelled with more affection. My
Companion, who was unaccustomed to any such expressions, did, at the first,
answer him very coldly; but seeing he persisted, she grew angry, and would not
suffer him to use any such language: At the last, when by his continual visits
she found his humor, she did nothing but laugh at him, which did not offend
him at all; for he had this good quality, that as he was free with every one,
so he allowed every one to be free with him. However, his Love did so increase,
that my companion did grow weary of him; not but that Hylas is certainly a man
of much merit, and is owner of many qualities which deserve Love; but she being
a Widow, and not intending to marry, this courtship could not but be very
disadvantageous to her. It seems, that the Heavens had pity upon Palinice,
and at the same time sent her a Companion, and presently after that another, to
help her to support a burden so heavy. Palinice had a Brother, who had been
long a devoted Servant unto Cercenea, my companion, who now sits next me. And
respect being most in the hearts of those that love most, Clorian (for that was
the name of Palinice's brother) had not yet the confidence to acquaint the fair
Circen^a with his affection: She, on the other side, was yet too young to
discover it by his actions: so as Clorian loved, and in vain, because his love
was not known. Hylas in the mean time, continued his frequent visits unto
Palinice; and as he said himself, it being one of Loves chief precepts, to get
the favor of the kindred friends, and servants of the party loved, he courted
the friendship of Clorian with all obsequious offers he could make, which was
no difficulty to obtain, because the young man was all civility and sweetness,
and had an affection to get the love of all: But Hylas being more subtle and
crafty, as being older, and having traveled, he feigned, what Clorian did in
good earnest; so as he was only a superficial friend, whilst the other loved
him as his Brother; and the ensuing story will make this appear: For Clorian's
affection unto Cercenea daily augmenting, and not daring to make it known unto
her, Hylas took notice of it. Cercenea took a journey to see her Father, who
was sick in a Town, within the Country of the Sebusians, toward the
Allobrogians by reason whereof, Cercenea was long absent from our Town and
consequently from Clorian. And because, as I have heard say, there is no
greater comfort to a true Lover then to think often of the party Loved, Clorian
did often retire himself into a house which he had in that Town, that stood
upon the top of a hill, toward the Sebusians: From this place might be viewed
the Rosne on one side, and Arar on the other; and one might also see the
Forest of Mars, called (...): and if the tops of high Trees did not obstruct
the eye, questionless it might see further from thence, then any other place.
When he turned toward the Temple of Venus, I^ might see as far as the Segusian
Mountains; when he looked toward Arar, he might behold the (...); and when
toward the Rosne, he might see as far as the huge hills of (...), beyond the
plains of the Sebusians. And certainly it was a most lovly prospect every way.
It was to this place whither Clorian did commonly retire himself, and looking
toward the Sebusian plains, did ravish himself with thoughts of his fair
Cercenea. It happened, that Hylas being very familiar with him, and not finding
him in the house, he made no question but he was gone unto this Mount; and being
jealous, that his Companion was in Love, (for he knew, that this solitude, and
melancholy musing, could proceed from no other cause) he went up the stairs as
softly as he could, and finding the door half open, he saw him looking out of
that window toward the Sebusians, so ravished in his own thoughts, that he
could not hear it thunder, and therefore could not hear the noise which Hylas
made, in opening the door and entering; but he himself spoke so loud, that
Hylas could hear these words.

A Discourse unto the Wind.
MIld Zephyrus, that wantonly
Amongst all fragrant flowers does file,
Filching from them that sweetest are;
Thou do by theft perfume the Air.
If ever pity did thee move,
Waft over these plains unto my Love;
And blow my thoughts into that breast,
Where they can only find a rest.
But carry with thee on thy wing,
Those amorous Sighs I sadly sing.
Tell her, in this my sad restraint,
She is my fair and only Saint.
Those lovely Twins, her lips, will yield
Odors more sweet then all the field:
But when thou thus perfumed art,
Return and let me have a part.
Have I taken you, Clorian, (said Hylas, taking him about the neck, and kissing
him) I must confess, you are the closest Lover that e're I knew; yet, you
cannot hide your self from me. No more I will not, (said Clorian, after a
little considering with himself) for neither at this time, nor any other, will
I ever hide any thing from you. I am satisfied almost, said Hylas, upon
condition, you will ingenuously confess, what I do already know. What is it,
replied Clorian, which you desire to know of me? I will not ask, said Hylas,
what your malady is, but only from whence it proceeds. Oh Hylas, (said he, and
sighed) you need not ask me who the cause is: But, I would to the gods, you
could as easily give me any comfort, as I can freely satisfy your curiosity.
So sitting down upon a Couch, he told him of his affection, and how the love he
bare unto Cercenea was so great, as he durst never acquaint her with it.

When Hylas heard the name of Cercenea, he thought he had heard of it before,
though he could not well remember when or where, and therefore he asked him,
which of all those he had seen, was she? Since you do not know her name,
answered Clorian, I believe you never saw her; for her beauty is such, that it
is impossible you should see her, and not enquire her name, and make you
remember her: But when I calculate the time of your coming unto this Town, I
believe you never saw her. I came, said Hylas, at the last F^ast which was
celebrated unto Venus. Clorian, after a whiles consideration, answered him,
That he could not see her, unless he came that very day, because the morning
after, she went away unto her Father who was sick in the Province of the
Sebusians, and never returned since. Well, said Hylas, though she be never so
fair, do you think, that she would not be loved? Can you believe, that those
only who are ugly, will permit it? No, no if such should be told, they are
loved, they would think themselves jeered. I do not think, said Clorian, that
if Beauties b^ told they are loved, they will be offended, but their modesty
may. How, said Hylas? let her be as modest as she can, do you think she will be
angry at being loved? Ah Clorian! their modesty is not any sorrow for being
loved, but only because they doubt, whether what is said be true. And indeed,
where is that woman, who when she is assured of a man's affection, is not
extremely well pleased with it, and gives him no testimony of her satisfaction?
No no, Clorian, of all the actions which we do, next unto those that preserve
life, there is none so natural as this of Love: And can you imagine women such
enemies to Nature, that they will hate what is natural? Come, come, let me
give you advice, which unless you be a very Novice in Love, you will follow,
and find, that I am my Arts Master in such things. Let Cercenea know, that you
do love her, and that as soon as possibly you can; for, the sooner she knows it
the sooner will she love you. May be at first she will turn her head aside,
and bid you talk no more of any Love: Perhaps shee'^ seem to be in a great
fury, and will not speak to you: But however, do you continue and be assured,
that if you be but assiduous, you will win her. When they give us these peevish
answers, and refuse the affection which we present unto them, they put me in
mind of those Physicians and Lawyers, that refuse the Fee, yet put out their
hand. I am older then you are, I have run through some parts of the world, and
let me tell you, I have loved many; this gives me encouragement to speak the
more freely unto you, and you must not take any exceptions. Be certain that
never any faint hearted Lover sped well: And in matters of Love, no fault is so
great, as, being too respectfull. He that will speed well, must dare attempt,
ask, beg importune, press, take; nay, he must ravish. Did you never know the
humor of women, Clorian? Hearken unto the great Oracle, which in our time
spoke thus.

She Will fly away, and yet would fain
With all her heart be overta'n.
She will deny, yet seem to daunt
A Lover, when she fain would grant.
She will resist, that you at length
May seem to vanquish her by strength.
For thus her honor does ordain,
She should resist, and yet but faign.
He that has no courage to do thus, let me advise him, to take upon him some
other trade then that of Love, for he will never thrive by it. Clorian,
therefore my counsel is, that you do assume so much confident boldness as not
only to declare your love unto her, but to hope, that she will love you again,
so you will but let her know your mind. I cannot, generous shepherd, remember
all the documents and amorous advises which Hylas gave; but I understand since
from Palmice, who heard her brother relate them, that he did make himself
appear to be his Arts Master in such things. But, the conclusion of all was,
that since Clorian had not so much confidence, as to declare his Love unto his
Mistress; as soon as she returned, which would be within a few days, Hylas
should be his Advocate, and speak for him. Hylas did very willingly accept of
the employment; for, said he, I shall oblige two at once by it; to wit,
Clorian, in doing him the good office, and Cercenea, in bringing her such good
news. It happened that presently after, my Companion returned to the Town; and
though the death of her Father had put her into a mourning habit, and though
her own sadness was suitable unto it; yet all her sorrows had not at all
lessened her beauty, but had added such a kind of sweetness unto her
countenance, as invited all that saw her to love her, by reason of a certain
attractive compulsion, which rendered her much more pleasing. Hylas, in
prosecution of his promise, no sooner heard of her return, but he courted all
opportunities to see her, in which Palinice was not unwilling to help him,
because her Brother desired it. She, who knew nothing of their design, and
believed it to be only out of curiosity, was glad to satisfy her Brother,
though she cared not for the company of Hylas. As fortune was, Cercenea's
Mother would offer a sacrifice unto the gods, for the soul of her Husband, and
did invite Palinice as one of her best friends; thither she went, and with her
Hylas: But see, if he be not as good a friend as a faithful Lover: he no
sooner saw Cercenea again, but he was deep in love with her: I say, saw her
again because looking upon her, he remembered, that he had seen her before in
the Temple of Venus, when Palinice saluted her; and because he then found some
sparks of good will unto her, his first flames did kindle again in his heart,
as easily, as any Sulphur at the fire. Looking upon her therefore very
seriously, he began by degrees to remember, that Cercenea was she whom he saw
in the Temple, and remembering how excellently she could sing, and all that Love
could make him apprehend at the first sight, he quite forgot his promise unto
Clorian, and thought only how to speak for himself. Thus you may see how
dangerous a thing it is, to employ a Second in such a business. He accosted
her, afterward saluted her: And she, out of sweet civility, returned him a
salute again. Then both being in the Temple, and every one going to their
devotion, he said thus unto her: I see, fair Cercenea, that the sight of you is
fatal unto me, and coming hither to be an assistant unto your sacrifices, I
am become a sacrifice my self. She, who knew not the man, or ever heard of
him, did look him in the face; and then, after a little consideration, she
concluded him to be a stranger, both by his language and habit; because, though
they were made according to the garb of our Town, yet he did wear them in that
manner, as was plain he was a stranger: For strangers, though they do disguise
themselves in our fashion; yet, they have some trick or other in their Air, by
which one may see, they are not of the same Country. And I do believe, that
this difference is less found amongst the Franks, then any other Nation. Now
Circenea not knowing Hylas, she thought, that he had taken her for some other;
and therefore, after she had looked upon him, she turned slightly another way,
and gave him no answer.

Hylas not satisfied with this, he pulled her by the Gown, and said: What, fair
one, no answer to a civil question? I thought, said she, that you had not
spoken unto me, or that you had addressed your speech unto some other; for I do
not know what you mean, by your fatal sight and your sacrifice. It is to you
only, fair one, whom I speak, said he, and to none other but your self: that
is, to the fairest, and most Angelick beauty, that e're my eyes did see, whose
first sight of you, had like to have cost me my life, and so doubtless will
the second, if I do not find you as kind and favorable, as Palinice was at
that time. I pray, said she, how kind was Palinice unto you? She saved my
life, answered he, when the night before the Feast of Venus, your beauty kept
me so long in the Temple, that I knew not how to get out. I do not remember any
such thing, said Cercenea, or that I ever saw you. Whether you did or no,
replied Hylas, yet love you I must; and in lieu of assisting at your sacrifice,
as I did intend to do, I have assisted at that sacrifice, which Love has made
of me unto you: However, I should think my self extremely happy, if I could
find any room in your affection. I see, said she, you are a stranger, and do
not know me; and I do believe, that my affection is very indifferent unto you.
Upon this, she turned away, and one of her Companions coming accidentally into
the Temple, she gave her place unto her, as if out of courtesy, and got as near
her Mother as possibly she could; and all the while that the sacrifice lasted,
she would not come near him. But Hylas having broke the Ice, he would go
through, and was not a man that would sit down in the mid way.

He found a way, by the means of Palinice, to come into Cercenea's Chamber, and
in conclusion, grew very familiar, making Clorian believe all this while that
it was for his sake he frequented her company so much. But such was the humor
of Hylas, as he did not think it enough to deceive his friend, and to love both
Palinice and Cercenea; but, one night as we were walking together, he expressed
himself as fair unto me as unto them, and that before he knew my name.

Hylas, who as I told you before, was harkening, he could not choose, though it
was contrary to his design, but show himself, and say: Why, fair Florice, do
you think it was your name that I was in love withal? Hylas repented he had so
rashly showed himself; but these strangers were exceedingly astonished, when
they saw him so surprisedly; and though they looked fully upon him, yet by
reason of his alteration in habit, they knew him not at the first. But Astrea
was very glad, who thought the discourse of this stranger to be very long, and
that it hindered her from that satisfaction which she hoped for, in this voyage;
yet, she seemed to be sorry, and with the rest, all showed themselves. But
Hylas seeming, as if he had purposely interrupted Florice, did run to her, and
embraced her, and afterward saluted the rest; then turning to her again: Well,
fair Historian, said he, must you needs renew my sorrows, and make those
wounds which you gave me to bleed afresh? Oh, said Florice, you need not fear
any wounds, since you have so many remedies, It Is true, answered Hylas, if all
wounds were cured with the same remedies. But, to let this discourse alone, I
beseech you tell me, what design brought you unto this place? The design, said
Florice, was not to meet you here. If it had, said (...), it had been but an
act of civility and my services perhaps might merit as much: But I see, I have
sow^d upon an ungrateful piece of ground, which does not render a profit worth
the pains. Sometimes, said Cercenea, good land may bring forth weeds in lieu of
corn, because the feed may be naught or sowed out of season, and the sower may
be worst of all; and perhaps some of these may be the cause of that sterilitie
wherewith you tax us. I know, Cercenea, said he, that you have beauty enough to
make men love you, but withal, you want no dis^^in and scorn for those that do
adore you. And I do know, said Palinice, that as you have been ever very
fertile in new desires, and fresh affections, so you never wanted words
wherewith to accuse others of your own faults. Then Hylas stepping back two or
three paces; This is too much, said he, to fight against three at once;
Hercules himself would not undertake two. Upon this, Astrea, Diana, Phillis,
and the rest of their company came in and caused the dispute to end.

It was the custom of all Lignon shepherds, when they met any strangers, to
use them with all possible assistance, conceiving themselves obliged unto it by
the Laws of Hospitality: This custom of civility invited Astrea, Diana, and
their company, to treat these strangers accordingly, and afterward to ask them
the occasion of their voyage? Unto which Florice answered in the name of all,
That being sent into this Country by direction of their gods, who had forbidden
them to reveal the cause, they durst not disobey them, and therefore they could
not give them satisfaction. Then enquiring who those shepheardesses were, and
Phillis telling her their names, (...) addressed her self unto Astrea: I must
needs confess (said she) that I am angry with my self, for not knowing you to
be the shepherdess Astrea, whose beauty being too high to be consined unto so
narrow a Country as Forests, the luster of it has shined into the Countries
all about it: But I do beg your excuse and confess, that now I am dazzled and
confused with admiration, at so much luster as is in you and Diana: And I do
begin to hope, that our voyage will be prosperous, since it meets with so happy
a beginning. Astrea all civility, did answer her in as good language as
possible; and then kissing them, Hylas interrupted: Good Florice, said he, what
do you think of our Villages? did you ever see any greater Beauties in your
Cities, with all their Arts? Have not I good reason to quit them all for these
fair shepheardesses, since the simplicity of my humor and spirit does more
sympathize with their natural beauty, then with those artificial tricks which
are used in your Towns? If ever you did order your actions with judgment (said
Florice) I must confess it is in this; but nor for any conformity of humors
that is betwixt these fair shepheardesses and you, for in that, you are far
different: but because Hylas having been all his life very wavering in his
affection unto all others, will become more constant here, if at the least
perfection of beauty be able to do it: and for my part, I do believe he is,
since not finding any better in any other place, he is forced to rest here. It
does concern me, said Phillis, to answer, because Hylas is my servant; yet
believe it, I will not answer for his fidelity, since I must needs think, that
having once loved so great a Beauty as yours, and falling off, that it is not
beauty which makes him in Love. What then, said Hylas, can it be? An humor of
changing, said Florice, and a certain levity of mind, that will not let you
continue four and twenty hours in one opinion. Oh! said Hylas, you are a
party, and therefore your judgment may be suspected. If you mean, answered
she, that I am the party offended, I do freely forgive the injury, and do think
my self more obliged unto you for your changing, then I should have received
satisfaction in your constancy: And if you think me a party, that does pretend
any thing unto you, believe it, Hylas, I will with all my heart quit all my
pretensions, unto any that will have them, who, if they will receive them, they
will more oblige me by it, then they will find benefit by the gift. You have
reason to dispose thus of me, said Hylas, half angry; for you may as freely
dispose of me, as of the stars.

All this while, Paris had addressed himself unto Diana, whom after he had
saluted; This, said he, is a more happy encounter, than I could ever have hoped
for, since I did the least expect you here. It is indeed happy for me, said
Diana, since we shall enjoy your company, unless these fair strangers do
deprive us of it. At this word she blushed, knowing that Paris loved her. As
this blush did please Paris, so it had a contrary effect in Silvander, who
knowing that Paris loved her, could not defend himself against some stings of
jealousy, when he saw the good reception of his Rival; and this experience
taught him to confess, that jealousy might proceed from love. The
shepherdess, who had no inclination to hate Silvander, took notice of it, and
so did Laonice, though the shepherd did dissemble it as well as he could; and
they had known it better, if Astrea had not parted them; for, desiring most
passionately to finish their journey, she broke company: And because Paris had
taken Diana by the arm, Silvander went toward Phillis, who seeing him
coming: It seems (said she unto him) that we are too too many, and that,
though we were absent, they could entertain themselves. I cannot deny it, said
Silvander; I must shrug my shoulders patiently, and pay this kind of tribute
without murmur. When he would have answered farther, Hylas came to them, and
not caring for these strangers, ran unto Phillis, and lest Palinice, Cercenea,
and Florice, as if he had never loved them. Diana, who could not choose but
admire this humor in him, did make a sign unto Phillis by way of wonder.
Phillis, who did esteem him as an excellent man to make sport, after she had
looked upon him: But Hylas, (said she unto him) can I believe you to be in
earnest? Can you doubt it, said he, ^^nce I have left all these whom I did
love, to wait upon you. That is an excellent argument indeed, said she; but, I
pray tell me, did you ever love these strangers whom you have left to come unto
us? You may gather as much, said he, from Florice's own mouth. I had some
reason (said she) to ask this question; for if you did ever love them, how
could you find a heart to leave them so soon, in a place where they are
strangers? Even as I have heretofore left others for them, said Hylas, so now I
do leave them for you; and I must needs confess, that if my affection unto you
were not much above all terms of civility; I should have thought my self in
some sort obliged to wait upon them. Doubtless, said Phillis, you do very much
oblige me; but I do admire, that since you did love them, you should now make
so little account of them. I did love them, it is true, said Hylas, but I will
do so no more, my love to them is now dead; and methinks this should be no
such great piece of wonder, to see a man free, when the cord which tied him is
broken. I do believe, said Silvander, that Hylas did never love these
strangers; for if he had, he would have loved them still, since the cords of
Love cannot be broken. Though they cannot be broken, said Hylas, yet I am sure
they may be untied. No, said Silvander, all Love knots are Gordian knots. If
they be, said Hylas, I have a sword as well as he, who when he could not untie
them, did cut them, and I am sure I have done so several times.

Never believe you did love them, said Silvander; for if you had, you would
have loved them still. Shall I not believe what I do know, said Hylas? But, to
do you a pleasure, I will not believe it. But pray trouble neither me nor your
self any further; keep your self to your own melancholy humor, and vex me
no more with your impertinent opinions.

Phillis, who was discreet, and seeing Hylas in his angry altitudes, to
interrupt him, said thus: However, Hylas, I must needs be angry with you, for
hindering me from knowing some things which these strangers had begun to relate.
Mistress, answered he, I had rather never have loved them, then you should
miss of your satisfaction by any means of mine. I know, answered Phillis, that
the love you bear unto them, and the satisfaction you speak of, will not
trouble you; for, since you do not love them now, what will it concern you,
whether you did or did not love them? Why, my Fairest, said Hylas, do you not
esteem past contentments? If my contentment do not continue, said Phillis, the
remembrance of it does but grieve me the more. The services then that were done
you a week since, said he, are vanished; if it be so, the worse for Hylas.
Silvander answered in the behalf of Phillis: Your Mistress, said he, does not
speak of services, but of contentments received; and before you complain, it is
requisite to know of her, whether your services be in that rank. Hylas
answered: Those who mistrust their own merits, as you do, may make that doubt,
but not I. Silvander, who knows that Love cannot be paid but by Love again,
and she, unto whom I devote mine, has more goodness, then not to acknowledge
it, and more judgment then not to esteem it. Silvander would have answered but
Phillis interposed: I do esteem Hylas, said she, as I ought to do, and do
acknowledge, his merits are very worthy to beloved; nor need he think his
services are forgotten; for, he continuing to love me, they are all esteemed as
present: And if this declaration do please him, I will request one thing of him
which he ought not to deny me, unless he would have me think, that he does not
love me. Command, fairest, said Hylas, what you please, but two things; that I
die, or that I cease loving you; and I obey: for if I die, I cannot love you,
and if I do not love you, I cannot delight in any life. May you, and your love
to me, said Phillis, be immortal, and so they shall before they die, by my
command. But my desire is, to have a relation of that from your own mouth,
which you hindered Florice from imparting to us. Diana hearing this request, and
being much offended with the extremity of the Suns heat, did say, she would be
a very willing Auditor, so they could find out an umbrage from the Sun's heat;
for she believed, the discourse of Hylas would be very pleasant.

Astrea, who longed to go about their business, did think as much, and
therefore in compliance unto Diana's will, she said, that she would make one.
So, said Hylas, it shall not stick upon me; and I should think my self to be
very bad company, if I were not very willing to give you satisfaction, and my
self also, for I do believe, there is as much delight in thinking upon old and
past Loves, as if they were present; for the delights of Love are commonly more
in the imagination, then in the thing it self; and in relation of things past
the soul does cast her eye upon those images which remain in the fancy, and
looks upon them as if they were present. And therefore let us look out for a
convenient shade, from the rays of the Sun. It is impossible, said Silvander,
to find a more convenient place in all the Wood, then by this little brook
which you see; for the coolness of the shade, and murmr of the water, is
very inviting; besides, it is nothing out of our way. All the company concur
with him; and when they came unto it, every one began to wash their hands, and
sit round the Fountain of it, unless Silvander, who got into a great Cherry
Tree, which made part of the shade unto the Fountain, and brought some of the
best Cherries unto Diana, who gave some to Paris and the shepheardesses, and
picking out some of the best, she gave them unto Silvander, saying; Here
Silvander, I must needs give you some, who gave them unto me. I would to god
(said he, and kissed the hand that gave them) you would receive all I give you
with as good a will as this. Then taking his place as near her as he could,
Hylas, when they had eaten all their Cherries, began his discourse thus.

The History of Parthenopea, Florice, and Dorinde.
I Have often laughed in my thoughts, at all those who condemn inconstancy, and
are professed enemies against it, considering, that they themselves are not
able to be as they say, nor more constant, then those, whom they brand with
that vice; for, when they do fall in love do they not fall in love with Beauty,
or something they think that is pleasing unto them? Now when this Beauty does
fade, as time doubtless will make all Beauty do, are not they inconstant, in
still loving those faces that are now grown ugly, and retain nothing of what
they were, but only the very name of a face? If to love that, which is contrary
unto that which was loved, be inconstancy; and if ugliness be contrary unto
beauty: then he that did love a fair face, and continues loving it when it is
ugly, must be concluded inconstant. This consideration makes me think, that the
way to avoid inconstancy, is always to love beauty, and when it fades,
farewell love; find some other that is fair, and still love beauty, and not
its contrary, unless you be unconstant to your first love. I know full well,
that this is point blank against the opinion of the vulgar: But, by way of
answer, let me tell you, that the Heard of people, the vulgar, is but a heard
of rude and ignorant beasts and in this, they give a true testimony of it.

Do not think it strange, fairest Mistress, nor you generous Paris, if in
relating the story of my life you hear of many such changes: For, I am so
careful not to decline from this constancy, that I had rather quit all those
whom hitherto I have loved, then recede from it. You have formerly been
acquainted with the cause, why I came out of Camargues, how I came unto Lions,
why I loved Palinice and Cercenea. And when I interrupted Florice, she would
have told you, how she began to captivate me; but because she forgot some
things which are requisite you should know, I shall speak out that, which she
did so subtlely conceal, and then relate the story of my life, if we have time
enough.

Be pleased to know, then, fairest Mistress, that Clorian was very ill
advised, in employing me to be his spokes-man unto Cercenea; in such a
business as that, it is dangerous to make choice of a friend, that is better
accomplished then himself; a hundred to one, but in lieu of Friend, he becomes
a Lover; and he that sent him, not loved; for, if his Mistress have any wit, she
will choose the better. The truth is, when I went with Palinice unto Cercenea,
in the behalf of Clorian, my intention was to serve him as a friend, and to
use all possible addresses, which might conduce unto his contentment; but,
as soon as I saw this Beauty, I remembered, that I my self was in love with
her, ever since I saw her that night in the Temple; so as now the state of the
question was whether I should stifle Friendship, or stifle Love; and after a
long debate with my self unto which I should yield, I concluded, that the last
commer must give place unto the first. Love told me, that it had taken
possession of my soul almost as soon as I was born, and that my affection unto
Cercenea, was before my love of Palinice, which was the cause of my friendship
with Clorian; and therefore my friendship coming after my love, it is injustice
if I let it keep still in possession. No surely, thought I, we see the Laws
allow primogeniture in Children, and Nature it self seems to approve of it.
This was the reason why I applied my self unto Cercenea, as Florice has told
you. And I beseech you judge, whether I am obliged to endeavor the contentment
of another, before my own. Why should she upbraid me with the name of Traitor
to my friend? For, if of two evils, the lesser be always to be chosen; if
killing ones self be the worst of murders, who, that is in his senses, will
say, but I had better betray friendship then love, and have a greater regard
unto the preservation of my own life and contentment, then the life and
contentment of Clorian? Clorian loved me, and I loved Cercenea; Clorian desired
me to speak for him, and my affection bad me speak for my self: If I did not
satisfy Clorian, I offended against my friendship to him; if I did not
satisfy my affection, I offended against Cercenea and Hylas. I do love
Clorian, and I do love Hylas also. Put self and another in the scales, and
self, I dare say will outweigh: So I and Clorian. The gods did favor my
design, so as Cercenea, after some courtship, did love me may be, as well as I
loved her, and when you know what assurances of it she did give me, I believe
you will say as much as I. But because there was some unto whom she owed duty,
and particularly her Mother, she desired me to let her faign as if she loved
Clorian, because there was already some probability of a Marriage betwixt them,
being both of one Town, and one quality. Moreover, Clorian being very rich, her
Mother would doubtless like well of the Match; whereas if my love unto her had
been discovered, being a stranger, and perhaps had a wife in some other place,
she would have disallowed of it, and perhaps charged her daughter not to see me.

I was very glad of the motion, because I knew not with what language I could
put Clorian off any longer, having worn out all my excuses, till they were
thread-ba^e, so as he seeing me so much with Cercenea, and yet doing nothing
for him, began to be in some doubt of me. Then I acquainted Cercenea with all
passages betwixt Clorian and me, and how he had employed me to speak unto her.
But, fairest Mistress. I told her by way of mocking him, lest if I should have
set forth unto her his affection as it was, she should entertain any sparks of
love unto him; but, I did it so dexterously, that Cercenea had a greater mind
to make use of him as a cloak for her love of me, with less suspicion and told
me. That her Mother had often proposed him unto her for a Husband, and that she
knew he had some good will unto her. Then I went unto Clorian, unto whom I
feigned a long Prologue, as an introduction of what I intended to say; I
related unto him the speeches, answers, and replies, that I made in his
behalf, and did assure him, that I had made a way for his affection to find a
welcome. Oh! what thanks did he give me, and what promises to serve me upon the
like occasion: for which I thanked him, but did not desire to be in his hands
as he was in mine. At the last, he took heart, and according to my advice, he
resolved to speak of it unto Cercenea; but, with more fear and heart-beating,
then if he were to fight with the most valiant man alive: Yet, the courage
which I had infused into him, and assurance that he should be welcome to her,
did make him surmount those fears which had solong silenced him; and finding an
opportunity, he acquainted her with his intentions in the best language he
could invent, the effect of which was, that he bore unto her so much humble
respect, as, without me, he never had durst to declare his affection unto her;
that it was all purity and virtuous desires. Truly (answered she) you have a
very good friend of Hylas, and you may well think him so, and by all means
preserve such a Jewel; for he has done nothing above a month, but continually
talk in commendation of you: Also, you may understand from him, that I am not
so obdurate as you imagine, but does think my self obliged to entertain a man
of your merit, when you come with honest and pure designs of Marriage, as your
friend tells me you do; and therefore I am contented to live with you,
according to the purity of such affection; but I shall be very glad to have
Hylas a witness of all that passes betwixt us, that he may arbitrate all
matters betwixt us. I must be brief, my fair Phillis, otherwise an age would
not serve, to relate all the accidents that befell me. But be pleased to know,
that ever since this day, Clorian was so far engaged, that he could not
retreat; and because their Parents began to take notice of it, I did acquaint
her Mother, that Clorian did intend to marry her Daughter, and that, because I
thought it an advantageous Match unto Cercenea, I had contributed all my
endeavors to bring it about; but, since I had not yet spoken of it unto his
Father and Mother, I desired, that the business might be kept secret.
Cercenea's Mother knowing Clorian to be rich and well born did heartily thank
me for my endeavors, and did desire, that if Clorian had any such mind, he
would speak unto her, and she would keep it as secret as he pleased; but she
desired, to have that satisfaction from himself. I assured her, he should; and
accordingly, within a few days after, we went unto her again, and Clorian told
her more then I had done. Thus all things went very well; for my part, I was
welcome to the Mother, more welcome to Clorian, but most of all to Cercenea.
You see into what a pass I was brought: to seem as if I did not love this fair
one, I was forced to quit my place unto Clorian, and to speak for him. When
there was any company, I stood before them, that Clorian might unseen kiss her
hand; but, it vexed me to the soul, when he kissed her mouth, as often he did
in my presence: And though it did displease me very much, and Cercenea more,
yet we did constrain our selves, that she and I might have some opportunities
sometimes of privacy: For the Mother, believing me to be a mediator only for
Clorian did give me all the liberty I could desire. Nay more, I brought her
Letters from Clorian, and oftentimes did answer them my self, for she did only
write them, and god knows, not without much laughter and jearing of him.

Thus did I live, the most contented man alive, till Fortune upon a sudden
turned the wheel and yet it went not so near my heart, as it would another,
because I had so good a receipt against all such maladies. The Facchanalian
Feasts being at hand to be celebrated. Clorian and I resolved to maintain a
Tournement. Clorian took for his device a Picture of Circe (with Circenea's
face) amongst the Companions of Ulysses, with this Motto, To her had fewer
Charms. But I not daring to declare my self as he did, I did a little
disguise her name, and painted a Siren, and Ulysses tied to the Mast of his
Ship, with this Motto, What B^nds would be sufficient? I thought that I had
done very well, and that she was infinitely obliged unto me for it: But see the
Fate. As chance was, there was a young Beauty in Lions, whose name was
Parthenopea, a near neighbor unto my lodging, with whom, how ever it came to
pass, I had no great familiarity; for it was not my humor to have any fair
neighbors, and not to visit them. When I was in the Lists, those that were
curious, began to interpret our devices; as for that of Clorian, every one
could easily understand it, Circenca's face, and the clinch of her name, did
sufficiently discover it: But, as for mine, none could give it a meaning. At
the last an old Knight that was upon the Scaffold, amongst the Ladies where
Cercenea was, and Parthenopea, and whose age excused him from being in Arms,
he said, that it was easy to discover his meaning; and then addressing
himself unto Parthenopea: It is for you, fair One, said he, that he enters
into the Lists. At this, she blushed and thinking her self wrongfully accused,
did answer: If it be for me, he is very secret in his matters, for he never
spoke to me. Take heed (said Cercenea, who thought her self concerned) that
you do not dissemble, and carry it more close then he does. It is an easy
matter, said she, to carry that secret which I do not know. If you please to
know the reason of my opinion (said the old Knight) I shall tell you, and I am
confident your judgments will agree with mine. I shall be very glad, said she,
to understand this secret from you. You see then (replied the old Knight) that
he bears a Siren upon his Shield, with this Motto, What Bonds would be
sufficient? he could not more plainly name you, then by the painting of a
Siren; for the Ancients say, that the Sirens were three Daughters of Achiloes,
by the Nymph Calliope; and were called Lygra, Leucosia, and Parthenopea; and
your name being Parthenopea, he could not more clearly express his meaning
then by a Siren, and Ulysses tied to the Mast of a Ship, meaning, that nothing
can hinder him from being yours, if by your favors you will be his. Then all
the company cried out; Oh Parthenopea, how closely have you kept it? But you
had now better to confess then deny it. For my part, said she, it is all one
whether it be so or no, for it concerns me but a little. I hope then said
Circenea, you will not be angry if we call him your Knight. I do not care said
she, but have a care you do not call him wrong. The report went presently
amongst the Ladies that I was the Syren's Knight, and Clorian Cyrenea's. For my
part, I knew nothing of it, but took notice, that as I passed under the
Scaffold, Cercenea cried out unto me, Adieu the Knight of Parthenopea, but I
knew not what she meant.

At last, the Tourney being ended, every one retired; and Clorian and I
thinking we had behaved our selves very well, as soon as we had put off our
Arms, we went unto Cercenea; but she being infinitely incensed against me, did
not look upon me with her usual sweetness, but when I spoke to her, she would
give no reply, but, Let me alone, Knight of the Siren, and in a scorning
manner, turned away from me. I was so innocent in what she accused me of, that
I knew not what to think, unless that I had ill acquitted my self in this
Tournement, which I undertook to maintain: But not conceiving, that I had done
any worse then my Companion; and seeing that she cherished him, I could not
imagine what to think.

That night I retired, unsatisfied; for I could not obtain so much favor, as
to speak with her in private, but went away much displeased at my fortune. But
the next morning, a chance happened, which spoiled all my affairs. Being that
morning in the Temple, I saw there Parthenopea, with one of her Aunts; and
seating my self by chance by her, I perceived she did not look upon me with
the eye of an enemy: She was fair, and consequently one of those, who by the
Laws of Constancy, I was obliged to love; and therefore I got a little nearer
unto her, and watching for an opportunity of speaking unto her, she leaned
toward me, and said How Sir, do you like the Tournement? It is my part, said
I, to ask you that question, since it is the office of such Beauties as your
self to judge. I do not ask you, said she, how you did behave your self, for
every one can witness, none could do better; but I would gladly know, whether
you be not weary after all the pains you took? Since, fair one, said I, you
have given such an advantageous judgment for me, it is impossible I should be
weary. We were in a place where long discourse was not handsome, and therefore
she answered me only with a smile, and turned the other way When prayers and
devotions were done, she went out of the Temple; and I conceiving my self
obliged by her language to wait upon her to her lodging, which was near, I took
her by the hand, and by the way I understood how it was the opinion of every
one, that I maintained the Tournement as her Knight. I being glad to umbrage my
affection unto Cercenea, and moreover taken with the favors of Parthenopea I
answered her, that it was true and that not daring to declare it by my words, I
made choice of that way. After much discourse, and when we were come unto her
lodging she took off her Scarf, and laid it upon the table; afterward her
Mask, and standing to the fire, she talked unto me and I perceived, that what I
had done, was not displeasing unto her, because she still renewed the discourse
upon it: And the more I saw my service pleased, the more fell I in love with
her. In conclusion, before I parted, I took her Scarf which lay upon the
Table, and though she made a little resistance, yet I put it about my neck, and
told her, That since I undertook a Tournement for her, without any mark of my
affection, it was reasonable I should have that, as a testimony of my being
hers; her resistance was not great, and therefore I carried it away, and wore
it about my neck all the rest of the day. However, because I would not lose
Cercenea, I would not go into any place where she was in probability of seeing
me: But he whom I doubted the least, which was Clorian, told her, not intending
any hurt unto me, that I was the most contented man in the world, with the
favors of Parthenopea, and thereupon told her of the Scarf. Oh how this went
to her very heart, for she did really love me, and yet she made no show of any
discontent. But the next morning when I went unto her, and Clorian not there:
Oh Knight of the Siren, said she, what have you done with your fine Scarf? I
must tell you that I did love Cercenea much better then I did Parthenopea, and
would not lose her upon so small an occasion; and therefore I swore a thousand
oaths that when I undertook the Tournement, I had not the least thought of
Parthenopea; but upon the word of Siren only, which had a resemblance unto
Cercenea. But, said she, why did you not tell me of it? Because, answered I, I
thought the thing so plain, that you would know it this way. And what do you
(said she) concerning this Scarf? I must confess, said I unto her, that I took
it from Parthenopea yesterday, being desirous to disguise my affection unto you
under that vail. Cercenea stood silent a while, and then began thus: Well
Hylas, I will believe all you tell me provided you will give me satisfaction in
one thing. It shall be impossible (said I) if I do not. Give me the Scarf,
replied she, which you took from Parthenopea, and in exchange, I shall give you
another which is better. I was very loath to do it, and would gladly have come
off with an excuse, but it was impossible.

As soon as she had it, she put it upon her arm, and gave me another, which
indeed was much better; and the same day, knowing that I was not in my lodging,
she went with some of her friends (under color of walking) unto my lodging,
and sent to see if I was not within: A servant of mine, whom she knew, came to
her, and told her, that I was not in my lodging. This good company and my self
(said she) were desirous of his company to walk with us: But prithee do me the
favor to go and tell Parthenopea, that we stay here for her to that end; and
in reward of thy service, take this Scarf, and wear it all this day for my
sake. Then she put about his neck that Scarf which I had from Parthenopea. This
varlet thought himself mighty brave, and much honored in this favor, and
gave her most humble thanks; and to show his ready obedience, ran as fast as he
could to deliver his message unto Parthenopea, who seeing her Scarf about the
fellows neck, she had an opinion, that I caused him to wear it in scorn of
her, and hearing his err^nd, did know very well, that it came from Cercenea,
and that I had given it unto her; which did so extremely offend her, that I
could never since renew with her, and much less with Cercenea, who absolutely
declined me, although she plainly saw, that I did love her better then I did
Parthenopea. But practicing this Maxim, that one must hate them whom they have
offended, so she knowing her treason to be great, she would never conside in me
again. I was constrained to return unto Palinice, but stayed not long; for it
being then the springtime of the year, these Ladies would many in a company,
enjoy the sweetness of the air, and go into the Country in a Barge, up the
calm and smooth River of Arar, passing away the time, one while in music of
Instruments, another while in that of Voices and sometimes landing, would dance
upon the dazie Meadows. As ill luck was, I had no acquaintance amongst all
this good company, but only Palinice and Cercenea; however, I thrust in amongst
them, and undertook to entertain them all: I saw they all whispered, and asked
who I was and Palinice had a great deal of trouble in telling my name unto all
that asked her: But presently after, I was as well known as any in the company,
for, holding discourse with the first that did offer any, they found my humor
so pleasing, that all of them desired my friendship. As long as the Barge went
upward, although the River ran so silent, as one could not tell which way it
ran; yet, sometimes it would make such a noise against the stream, as they
could use none but Instruments: but when it went downward, the waves made only
a little dashing against the Barge, and then those who had good Voices, did
sing what came into their fancies. Amongst this assembly of Beauties, there was
many Knights, and children of Druides, to keep them company, and pass away the
evening with more delight. This was the first time I ever saw Theombres: This
man had almost passed the Autumn of his age, in such a good opinion of
himself, as he thought all Ladies like to die for the love of him: For my
part, I never could observe any taking quality in him; yet certainly, he had
some features, which was not displeasing unto some: Amongst the rest, Florice
was one, who might come into the catalogue of those who are called Fair: Indeed
she was fair, all her features pleasing, but above all her eyes were so sweet
and alluring as I must confess, I never saw such; her stature was tall, and
her mind so majestic, as one might easily see, she was above vulgar
extraction; and indeed she was of that Family, who vaunts to be descended from
the great Ariovistes. And though this fair Lady was such, as there was not one
in all the Country, but did, and ought, to yield unto her, both in merit and
beauty: Yet, Theombres was more in her affection, then any in the Town. And
because it was long since this Love began, and hung in a kind of languishing
continuance, Theombres thought it best to awake it, by some sparks of
jealousy; and therefore seemed as if he were in love with a young Beauty,
called Dorinde, who indeed was Mistress of some beauty, but yet yielded in all
unto Florice: Now Dorinde being gone out of the Town unto one of her Uncles,
Theombres, to continue his dissimulation, did always, when he sung, take
Dorinde for the subject, and, as I remember, one Verse of it was, that when she
departed, she vowed to keep him continually in her memory, which he took to be
so great a happiness unto himself, that he would not change fortunes with any
Angel in heaven. The fair Florice did think her self much concerned in this,
and it being spoke in her presence, she was the more offended; and therefore in
defense of Dorinde, who was some ways allied unto her, she answered him in
this manner.

A Song.
DORINDE did but only play,
And fool you, when she so did say;
Knowing without a wrong, she may
False coin, to such as false are, pay.
Perhaps the vainesse of your mind
Does make you brag, that she is kind;
To show, that favor you can find,
From one so fair and well inclined.
If such a promise she did vow,
'Twas only to be rid of you:
So being but a parting blow,
She Is not obliged to think on it now.
This retort upon Theombres by Florice did so please me, that ever since, I
resolved to love her, and add her unto Palinice and Cercenea. And presently
after, rowing by a very pleasant Meadow, it was the general vote to land in
it, and enjoy the beauty of the place: Some began to sing, others to dance, and
others to gather flowers, or to walk. Florice was one of those, whose Genius
was to make Nosegayes and Garlands; she had separated her self from company,
and set down upon the grass, perhaps in some thoughts of what Theombres had
said. I accosted her, not with an intention to fall on, but to try her, and as
I found her tractable, so to go on, or make a retreat; also my conceit was,
that Cercenea being made thereby a little jealous, might be moved to
repentance: but it happened quite otherwise, as you shall understand. However, I
fell upon my knees by her, and was very officious in helping her to gather
flowers: She, very civilly, took them at my hands, but wondered, that having
never seen me before, that I should take so much pains. I perceived it well
enough, but still waited, till her words gave me an occasion to let her know,
that I loved her. My reason, why I treated her at such a distance of respect,
was, the grandeur and state that she kept, which in truth was such, that of all
I ever loved before, I never stood in such reverentiall fear, as of her. It
happened as I hoped for after she had received many of the flowers which I
gathered, she told me, I had taken too much pains, and that I would think her
to be uncivil, if she suffered me to continue. To which I answered, That I
thought every one obliged to do her all service, since she had so excellently
well defended her friend in her absence. Do you mean Dorinde, said she unto me?
The very same said I, in whose person you have obliged all others. Truly, said
she, I could not endure the vanity of Theombres; for you see what he is, and
yet he thinks, we are all ready to die for the love of him. Then certainly,
said I, Ladies must needs be either very loving, or of very little judgment;
for I think him to be rather a remedy against Love, then of any capacity to
cause it. I am clearly of your opinion, said she; for, if I had an inclination
to love, this man of all men living should be the last I would choose. If you
should love him, said I, it would be a grand offense against the gods, who
having adorned you with so much beauty, you would that way profane it. I cannot
tell (said she) what beauty there is in me: but I am most sure, that I could
never love him. Cannot you tell what beauty there is in you, said I? then you
cannot tell what all the world does see; but, perhaps it is only your modesty,
which makes you seem ignorant of it. No, no, said she, I do really believe,
that there is nothing in my face which can merit that name you give it: But, be
it what it will, pray let us talk no more of it, for more would be out of
season, and little delighting. I shall obey you, said I unto her, but it shall
be with this protestation then, that I will never speak again what I think, and
what you have forbidden to be in my mouth, shall as long as I live rest in my
heart. We had discoursed longer, had not the company called us away, for they
were already gone into the Barge. Then she rose up without making any answer,
and putting her flowers in a corner of her Gown, I took her hand, and conducted
her to her company, where not daring to revive the discourse which we left,
lest I should be too bold (for so much forwardness in the first declaration of
Love, is a sign of but little affection) I contented my self at this time
with what I had already said. At last, the general genius of the company was
all for singing, and when it came to my turn, I sung these ensuing Verses, to
assure Florice, that all which I had said, was true.

A Song. Amorous Oaths.
FAirest, you murder my desires,
Which yet, to none but you aspires.
I swear by your fair eyes, that are
More splendid then the Sun by far.
I swear by my own heart and soul,
Which you imperiously control.
I swear by your own sweetness, which
Does all my faculties bewitch.
I swear by your disdain and scorn,
Intolerable to be born.
I swear by all that amorous fire,
Which makes men love you and admire.
By all my hopes, and all my fear,
And all my hot desires I swear.
I swear by your fair self, that is
The Center of my happiness.
I swear by all that life affords,
And yet you credit not my words.
Thus, fair Phillis, was a good foundation laid; for, since the very first time
I saw Florice, it was impossible for me to make a retreat; yet it angered me,
that I should lose Palinice, as well because I was obliged unto her, as because
she was really a woman of much merit. Moreover, the love of Cercenea much
grieved me; for this young Beauty being offended she slighted all the reasons
I could bring in to convince her. However, though she did not love me, yet it
vexed her to see, that Florice should have a more absolute power over me, then
ever she could have, thinking this to be an argument, of her being inferior in
beauty: And this was the reason why she did me all the ill offices she could
both to Palinice and Florice. But so it happened, that her malice did me no harm,
but did more for me, then all my services perhaps of a long time could have
done; for Florice presently found, that Cercenea, did speak it out of a
passionate partiality, and therefore she gave no credit unto her: And on the
contrary, considering and observing my actions more nearly, she began to find
them agreeable, and by little and little to please her; so as Love, like a sly
and subtle spy, did insensibly insinuate himself into her soul. However, I
being very desirous to keep my self in Palinice's favor, I was a little vexed.

But learn this from me, Silvander, (said he, and turned toward that
Shepherd) that there is none whom women esteem more, then those who are in
love with them. Nor none whom they more despise, said Silvander, then those
that leave them, and love another. But upon this consideration, said Hylas, I
endeavored to keep fair with all, if it was possible, but all in vain; for
Florice was too full of vanity, and had too over good an opinion of her own
merits, to entertain a heart in which any other had a share. And this proud
soul resolving to be sole Mistress and to love none but me, she did one day do
me so much favor, as to assurence of her love. But, said I unto her, what
shall we do with Theombres, (thinking to upbraid her with him)? She presently
answered me in my own element. Let us give him unto Palinice. I understood her
meaning well enough and therefore I swore unto her never to love any but
Florice and that if she would banish Theombres out of her sight, I would
promise her, never to look upon Palinice again. Nor because you desire it, said
she but because he does extremely displease me, I will swear and protest unto
you, that I will never love him, and that if it were handsome, I would banish
him out of my sight; for when you consider that action well, you will find it
to be a greater wound unto me, then it can be satisfaction unto you. Since this
time, she gave her self wholly unto me, and I, contrary to my own nature, did
give my self wholly unto her, and declined all others. From morning until
night I never stirred out of her lodging: unless she went; and if any came
upon visits, they must be persons of great eminency, if they did interrupt our
discourse. At every word, I was in her mouth, and she in mine, and we could not
speak, unless the one called the other as a witness. Judge yet, whether
Palinice and Cercenea had not enough to talk off. This was the reason, why all
the Town made it their common talk; and reports always increasing by going,
they went so much in disadvantage of Florices honor, that at last they came to
her ears, by a friend who acquainted her. She repented her self of the
imprudent carriage of the business, though too late: She acquainted me and
told me, that we must be more circumspect in our expressions of good will; and
the better to hide it for the future she willed me not to come unto her, but at
night, and so give a stop unto reports if it were possible. To give her
satisfaction, I refrained coming for a while; but because she was as much
displeased with the deprivation of my company, as I of hers, it was resolved
betwixt us, to find out some way or other, to avoid the censure of the world,
and yet be together. After consideration she advised me to seem as if I loved
some, who used to be familiarly with her, and under that shadow, I might come
unto her: And upon serious thoughts, none deemed more fit for this purpose then
Dorinde, as well, because she was her cosen, and frequently familiar, as
because she was fair, though not very subtle: And though she was not so fair as
Florice, nor so rich, nor so well descended; yet, she did excel the most, both
in beauty and merit. The day that I declared my self Dorinde's servant, was
that, upon which the people celebrated a Feast, in memory of the restoration
and building of their Town by Nero, after that most terrible fire, which in one
night consumed it to the ground. At this time of public joy, every one did
strive to appear as fine as possibly they could, as well to assist at the
sacrifices offered unto Jupiter, the Restaurator, and to the Titular gods, as
to be seen in the Theaters and public Shows. Dorinde, desirous to be seen and
observed, did set out her beauty with all the illustrations that Art could
devise. Before the day ended, I did so accost Dorinde with my expressions of
that affection I had unto her, that she did believe them. At that time and day,
I became acquainted with a young Cavalier called Periander, a man indeed full
of civility, discretion, and sweetness: This man seeing me so obsequious to
Dorinde, and finding my humor agreeable unto his own, resolved to make me his
friend: And I, on the other side, being desirous of acquaintance in that place,
where I intended to stay, since Love did so oblige me to it; I thought him to
be a man of merit, and therefore was glad to have him my friend. This encounter
of friendship, which proceeded from one and the same sympatheticall cause, was
sooner contracted betwixt him and me, then betwixt me and Dorinde, although
Florice, the better to disguise her own love, did contribute all that possibly
she could unto it: But poor Florice did not foresee, how she was sharpning a
sword which gave her a deep wound she did not know, how it was always my
humor, never to see any Beauty, but I must needs love her a little; so as ere
I was aware, I was in Love with Dorinde as well as with Florice: yet, I did
love Florice better, she being more fair, and of a higher rank. Two months were
spent in this manner, and the friendship betwixt Periander and me grew to that
height, that we were commonly called the two Friends; and because we both
desired a continuation of it, we took reciprocal oaths, of a most faithful
and perfect friendship, calling the gods to witness to the oath which we had
taken, and to be punishers of him, who should violate the Laws of friendship.
After this protestation, nothing was in the soul of one, but it was discovered
unto the other. It happened one morning (for commonly we lay both together) after
much discourse upon the Beauties of the Town, he asked me, whether there was
any of them which I loved: And answering him; Yes: He told me, that before he
would ask me who my Mistress was, he would tell me who was his I desire, said
I unto him, to be the first in that freedom, because you were the first that
asked the question. Then I related unto him all the addresses which I had made
unto Dorinde, since the last two months, but would not by any means mention
Florice, as well, because I loved her more and desired that that Love should be
kept secret, as because I knew that one of his consens did court her in
Marriage. As soon as I had named Dorinde: How, (said he) do you love Dorinde?
Dorinde, the Daughter of Arcingentorix. The very same, said I; and I do assure
you, that I have courted her above this six months. Oh heavens! cried he, how
cruelly does love treat me? And after he had paused a while; I do swear, said
he, and protest, that it is she whom I have long loved. Could a greater
misfortune befall me! I had rather die then retreat, and if I continue, I shall
offend against the Laws of Amity. I was much astonished to hear him say thus;
for, though I loved him, yet it went against my heart to leave Dorinde unto
whom Love had kindled new desires in me: And therefore, after I had held my
eyes up to heaven, as one that was much troubled, I said thus unto him:
Brother, since our Loves did begin in us before our Friendship, it argues a
sympathy in our humors, which forces us to love the same; but however, let
the Laws of Friendship be inviolable; since we have thus far agreed, let our
prudence endeavor to continue so for the future; and in order to that, let us
see whom this Lady most affects: To think that our friendship should make us
quit her the one unto the other, this would be rather tyranny then friendship;
and to think, that we can continue Rivalls and Friends, is Folly. What then
should we do? Let us refer all to Reason, and see which of us she loves most.
Tell me, I do conjure you by the Oath which we have taken, whether it be true,
that she does love you, and what testimonies of it she has given you? I do
swear, Brother, (answered he) that I will not tell you a lie, either in this,
or any thing you shall ask, I will first die a hundred deaths. Know then, that
it is impossible I should give you any assurance that she loves me, since her
discretion and modesty keeps all close in her own soul: Then (said I unto him)
since we are both in one condition, let us swear by our friendship one unto
another, and call all the divinities to punish most rigorously the perjured,
that he who can obtain most affection from her and give a testimony of it unto
the other, he shall only enjoy her: By this means we shall not offend against
the Laws of Friendship it being most reasonable, that he whom she loves most,
should enjoy her, and the other quit her. I conceive your Proposition to be
very just, (said Periander) and I swear by all the gods not to swerve from it.

I beseech you, generous Paris, consider the Natures of most men. Before
Periander declared his affection unto me I did love Dorinde; but much less
then since: And as a fire is augmented by the agitation of the wind; so my
affection was much more violent, being opposed by the affection of Periander.
This was the reason, why I devoted my self unto her more then before. But
having spent some days in courting her without effect, and fearing that
Periander being of that Town, and having many kindred of good rank, should make
a farther progress into her favor then my self. I resolved to use the
subtlety of the Fox, where the strength of a Lion would not prevail: I had
recourse then unto Policy, thinking that in Love, subtleties were lawful and
just. I caused a little Mirror to be made, no bigger then the plain of my hand,
but as rich as possibly Art could make it, both in the curiosity of the Gold
work, and in the Enamell, which added much to the value and beauty; afterward
I put my own Picture, which was drawn to the life, between the Glass, and the
table of Gold which held it; so as when the Mirror was opened, nothing could be
seen but the Glass and work about it. Afterward I went to an old woman, who
got her living, by carrying Jewels and other pieces of curiosity, unto private
houses to sell; and told her, that I desired to turn this Mirror into Money,
and therefore she would do me a great pleasure, if she could sell it for me.
She promised, she would do her best. But I told her, that I had present use of
money, and would let it go at any reasonable rate. She answered me, that things
done in haste were never well done; but still she would do her endeavor. So
she went away with my Mirror, yet, she was no sooner gone out of my lodging,
but I sent for her back, and told her, that my occasions were so pressing, as
if she could but get half the worth, or less, she should let it go; but
advised her, before she went any whither else, to carry it into the house of
Arcingentorix: I know, said I unto her that he has a Daughter whom he loves
very well, perhaps he will be glad of such a present for her. Indeed, answered
the woman, I did intend to offer it unto him before any other, because it was
long since I was at that house Go then, said I unto her, and before you carry
it any whither else, let me know what the Father or the Daughter will give for
it. I will not trouble you with all the goings and commings of this woman: but
so it was, that my plot took effect, and Dorinde bought it, as well for its
curiosity of workmanship, as for the cheapnesse; not giving the third part of
the worth for it. Things being thus ordered about five or six days after, I
saw it hanging by her side, and she making very much of it. Then I thought it
requisite to accomplish my plot as soon as I could; for it was to be feared,
that because the glass was so extremely thin and fragil, it might break, and
then my picture would be seen; to prevent which danger, I went unto Periander,
and asked him, Whether he had any thing advanced himself into Dorinde's
favor? To which he very ingenuously answered, That he was not one jot more in
her favor, than the first day he saw her, that he knew not whether he should
accuse her Nature, or his deficiency in Merit, or his hard Fortune; yet, all
his contentment was, that he saw she treated him as well as any other. No, no,
Brother, said I unto him, do not accuse your own Merits, not the Nature of
Dorinde; for your Merits are much above your Fortune; nor is she insensible of
Love's Darts; but that affection which possesses her, is the cause of all this
coldness, both toward you and all others: And to show you your error, though
I know it will vex you at the first, yet I will tell you the truth* Believe it,
Brother, (said I and embraced him) that I am in such possession of her, as she
cannot see but with my eyes. The truth is, I did never in all my life meet with
so close and so discreet a Lover as she is; for she is so afraid her passion
should be known, as she will not in public so much as look upon me, unless
forced unto it by the Laws of civility; but, when we are in private, if you
did but see how passionately she does carrasse me, you would admire the strange
command she has over her self, in not making demonstrations of it any where
else. And to the end you should not think this to be a forged tale, I will give
you such certain knowledge, as shall undoubtedly assure you of all I say. But,
I do conjure you, by all the sacred Laws of Friendship, (since what I shall
tell you, is only to undeceive you) that you do never discover me, for it will
nothing at all profit you, but may ruin me in her opinion. Then vowing he
would not, I continued; Did you never take notice of a Mirror (said I unto him)
which of late days she has worn by her side? And he answering, Yes. Then know
(said I unto him) she wears it for my sake, and the love of me. Now, to put
you out of all doubt, the first time you see her, take out the glass, and then
take out a little paper which is between the glass and it, and you shall find
my Picture. There is no question, but she will be very sorry that you saw it;
but however, my friendship obliges me to discover this secret unto you, rather
then let you run on in your error. Periander hearing this, stood as if
immovable, and stared, as if he had seen the face of Medusa: But after he had
considered upon what I said, he concluded, that if it was so, then he would
quit her unto me, and absolutely fall off. And to know the truth, said he,
though I do not suspect your words, yet, I would go out of her service, by
letting her know the cause, so as she should not accuse me of levitie. So he
went immediately unto her lodging, where he found Dorinde by her self, who
stayed at home to entertain two Ladies which intended a visit unto her. She,
who did really love Periander better then all those that courted her, did yet
make very little show of it; and as soon as she saw him, she went to meet him,
according to her accustomed sweetness and civility. But he, who came with a
bad opinion of her, and conceiving all her kindnesses to be but dissimulations,
he began to look upon her and all her actions with disdain. Almost as soon as
he, these expected Ladies came also, but went presently away again. Periander
could not choose but wonder at her freeness to him and all others: But having
no mind to carry any longer in a place, where he thought him self so
unworthily treated and betrayed, he would see, whether all that was said was
true; and therefore took the Mirror in his hand, seeming as if he much admired
it; and as he offered to take out the Glass, it broke, at which he started, as
if it had been done by chance, and seeing the glass broken: Mistress, said he,
I beg your pardon, I am obliged to make amends, and put in another Glass. She
answered him, that it was a small matter, and not worth the pains; upon this
word, she held out her hand to take it again; but he, thinking that she would
not let him have it, lest he should see the Picture in it, he was the more
backward in restoring it: and in this dispute, he took out the Glass, then the
paper, and then he found what I had said was true. Although he did believe me
before, yet when he saw my Picture, he was so surprised, that he could not
speak of a long time; and the amazement of Dorinde was no less. Periander, who
stood mute, looking sometimes upon the Picture, and sometimes upon Dorinde, and
considering her amazement also, had an opinion, that she only seemed so, to be
thought ignorant of it; therefore he was extremely transported with anger: Let
me tell you, said he unto her, that both in well loving, in secresy, and in
dissimulation, you are the most admirable, that ever I knew. Periander, said
she, I do protest by all that is sacred, that I am ignorant of it. Take heed,
said he, how you invoke things that are sacred; but, since you are not the
first whose humor has deceived me, I will leave the place to another, that I
may have so much contentment, as not to be the last whom you will deceive. Upon
this, he went away in an extreme fury. Dorinde did all she could to undeceive
him, but that did more augment his opinion of her dissimulation. Thus he left
her, and to observe the Laws of friendship, he resolved upon Travel, not
knowing any better way to overcome Love then absence, which yet would not do,
as I shall tell you afterward.

Now look upon me as arrived at the port of my design, having the place free
unto my self. But Oh! generous Paris, when I went to see Dorinde, Oh how she
was displeased at me? She had sent for her who sold her the Mirror, and forced
her to confess of whom she had it; and finding it to be my self, I cannot
express unto you the greatness of her anger: Perfidious Impostor (said she
unto me) why would you so mortally offend one, that never gave you any.
occasion for it? How durst you, after so great an injury, be so impudent as to
come in my sight? I had before han I prepared my self for a chiding, yet could
not endure it without a blush; but knowing, that the only way to stop an
impetuous torrent of fury, was, to let her just anger cool a little, before I
gave any answer; therefore I stayed mute until she had vented all she had to
say, and then I answered her thus: I must needs confess, that all your
reproaches are just; but alas, I cannot complain against you for it, only
against Love, who having inflamed my soul toward you, did freez yours toward
me. Had Love been just, it would in some sort have cooled my too ardent
affection, and then I should not have been forced to offend you, and needed not
have used any tricks, to drive away my Rival from you. But alas I see that I
am a very Novist in Love, since I look for any reason in any thing it does. But
for all that, fair Dorinde, you do me wrong in complaining against my actions,
since being but effects of Love, yet you should expect them to be squared
according to any rules of Reason. I must confess, that I have sinned against
the rules of Reason, but not against Love; and I beseech you take me not as
rational, but as amorous, and most extremely wounded with the darts of Love.

I expressed the extremity of my affection with so much dejected humility, and
passionate language, as it had a good melting influence upon her soul, so as
within a few days after, she began to smile upon me, and pardon my offense;
and see how an ill chance is sometimes profitable, for that which was the cause
of her anger, was it which augmented her good will unto me: and considering the
artifice which I had used, she had an opinion that I did most certainly love
her. And this consideration caused Thcombres to miss his Mistress; for she
devoted her self wholly unto me, so as it may seem, that I did love her only
to make her hate him: And yet for all this, I loved Florice much more then I
did Dorinde: Truth is, that when Dorinde's favors did flow more then usual
upon me, I did begin to love her more; for nothing does kindle affection and
augment it so much, as favors.

Living then thus ambodexterously with Florice and Dorinde, Florice began to
enter into some suspicion of me, and the common brute of this affection was
blown all over: Therefore one day she spoke unto me as if she were quite
altered; and I, who did really love her, did vow and swear, that all my
courtship of Dorinde, was but an effect of her own command to cover thereby my
affection unto her: That if she would, I would never look upon Dorinde again,
and told her, that if she would but look her self in a glass, and look upon
Dorinde, that sight would give her better assurance of my service and
affection, then all my words could. To be brief, with good language I brought
her into a good opinion of me; yet I was forced to promise, that I would give
her all the Letters which Dorinde writ unto me. Take heed, said she unto me,
lest you should promise and not perform, for that would for ever lose me, if I
come to know it. I will never fail in any thing I promise (said I unto her) and
much less unto Florice, then unto the gods. Thus were we upon better terms
then ever. And because none was so dear unto me as Florice, yet had I a corner
in my heart for Dorinde, and was much delighted in her company; she conferred
many favors upon me, and I courted her so close with several Letters, that
she answered me in Letters again, which I presently carried unto Florice, who
read them, and kept them carefully.

Hylas seeing Silvander sit near Diana, and whispering, then laughed together,
he broke off his discourse, to answer what he had a conceit they said. I
believe you laugh, Silvander, said he unto him, at my loving Florice, and yet
held correspondency with Dorinde. If I do meet, in my way unto the happiness
of Florice, with any delights in the conversation of Dorinde, do I contradict
the Laws of reason, if I do receive them? Should I refuse that good which the
gods do send me, and which your unnatural austerity disallowes? Now because
Silvander would be no interruption, he would not return an answer: And Hylas
seeing him silent, after he had shook his head, he fell into the discourse from
which he had digressed.

See now, said he, the issue of these Loves; the frequent conversation which I
had with Dorinde, began to increase my love unto her the more. And in as much
as the conferring of one favor draws on another, that is greater, so she did
every day give me cleerer evidences of her love, which was a cause, that our
Letters began to alter style, and became more affectionate and passionate then
usual. This was a reason, why I gave them unto Florice but seldom, and then
only those which had fewest expressions of affection, and craftily kept the
rest to my self.

Thus I lived for a while in a sea of delights, being welcome unto both; but it
was too high to hold, and this happiness did not last long: For it happened one
day, that as I pulled some things out of my pocket, in the presence of Florice
and other company, she espied two or three little Letters, lapped up after the
very same manner as Dorinde's were, which I had given unto her: She began
presently to suspect the truth, and many days passing, and I not giving them
unto her, she concluded her self to be deluded, and resolved to steal them
from me; and because I took no notice, she easily got them out of my pocket,
whilst I was talking unto others, who did what they could to abuse me, and give
her a better opportunity to play the thief, thinking she did it only to make me
seek them. She took them out so dexterously, that I perceived not; she went
away immediately, and was no sooner come unto her lodging, but locking her
self up in her closet, she threw them all upon the Table, and found five; some
very freshly written, and others of a longer date. The first she took, which
was last writ, contained these words.

Dorinde's Letter unto Hylas.
I Have here sent you the picture which you desired of me, not to make you lose
the person whom you have wone, as heretofore you did with the like-present; but
to assure you, that you have as much power over her that sent it, as you have
of the Picture when it is in your hands. If it were permitted me, I should be
as often with you as it is; and though it be in that more happy then I am, yet
it is less, in not knowing the happiness it enjoyes, which I should esteem
infinitely above my life.


Then throwing this Letter upon the Table with an angry look, and pushing away
the rest further from her, she went back a pace or two. Then folding her arms,
and lifting up her eyes: Oh heavens! said she, can this possibly be true? Have
then betrayed me, Hylas? Could thou so long fool me, and I never see thy
treason? Then standing silent a long while, at last, she struck both her hands
upon the Table, and said: Well Traitor, thou shall not pass unpunished, I will
discover thee unto her whom thou have betrayed as well as me, and perhaps we
shall both grow a little wiser by thy follies. She had no sooner fixed upon
this resolution, but she lapt up all her Letters, and went to Dorinde, and
desired her to go into her Closet, and then shutting the door: Sweet cosen
(said she unto her) I am come to manifest my affection unto you; but upon
condition, that when I have discovered a secret unto you, that you do prudently
conceal it. I know that Hylas has long courted you, and that you have long
thought he loved you; but I come now out of my true affection to you to
undeceive you, and to let you see, that he has deceived you. Upon this Dorinde
blushed, and seemed a little shie. No, no, said Florice, do not think, Cosen,
to hide that, which I do know better then your self: I say, better; for you
only know your own intentions, and not his, but I do know both. If you do, said
Dorinde, I must confess you to be very knowing; but what, I beseech you, do
you know of mine? I know, said she, that you do love him, and sent him your
picture, and receives all his addresses.

Dorinde being touched to the quick, she had not so much impudence as to deny
it, but looked down, and blushed more, holding her hands before her face for
shame. Do not vex, Dorinde, said she, that these things should be thus known,
but rather rejoice they are fallen into my hands, and not another who less
loves you; if you love your own honor, withdraw your affection for the (...)
from this man, who courts you only to get such favors from you as he brags of.
There has been heretofore some familiarity betwixt him and me, and that is the
reason (which you have reason to be glad of) that he has addressed himself
unto me. I do not think you ever spoke one syllable unto him, which he has not
told me; and because it would be too long to repeat them, see here most of the
Letters you have written unto him, which you may do well to burn, lest he
should make use of them hereafter to your disadvantage. Dorinde both seeing and
knowing them, she did ingenuously confess, that she did believe I loved her,
and therefore thought her self obliged unto what she did; but, for the future,
she would hate me a thousand times more then ever she loved me: She thought her
self infinitely obliged unto Florice, for this discovery, and commended her
for the best friend in the world. Then both of them began to inveigh against me
with all possible bitterness, especially Dorinde who thought her self the
most offended. Florice having revenged her self upon me according to her
desires, returned unto her lodging, fully resolved never to love me again, no,
nor ever to see me again if it were possible: But, when the heat of her anger
was a little cooled, and when she began to recall into her memory the discourse
which Dorinde and she had, she remembered, that what affection soever I had
unto Dorinde, yet I had never acquainted her with the affection I had unto
Florice, nor of any favor I ever received from her; concluding from hence,
that I loved her more then I did Dorinde, so as she began to repent of what she
had don; for she did believe, that if I (...) discoursed any thing concerning
her, she should certainly have heard of it upon this occasion. The more this
came into her mind, the more she repented of her too much haste, or, said she,
what though he did visit her? I my self was the cause: If he did court her, I
did command him so to do: If he did love her, it was, because she was amiable:
If he did receive her favors, it was the better to cloak that affection which
he bore unto me* And the truth is, being young, very few of his age would have
refused such a fortune. If he did dissemble with me and not show me how much
he was favored, it was, because he thought I should be angry at it; and all
men of reputation, will preserve the honor of those who do oblige them, but
most certainly he loved me more then her, since he never spoke of our
affection. These thoughts made her condemn what she had done, and extremely
repent of the fault which she had committed, and earnestly desire a
reconciliation.

On the contrary, Dorinde justly incensed against me, and swelling with anger,
after a flood of tears, flowing upon her cheeks and breast, she went into her
Closet, and vented all the bitterness and animosity that her sorrows could
inspire into her tongue: And as fortune was, just as she was wiping the tears
from her eyes, I came to her house, and when she heard me walking, she ran and
pulled to the door, which she had left open when Florice went out, and which,
her mind being upon other things, she had forgot to shut; yet, she could not
do it so suddenly, but I saw how red her eyes were with crying; and when I
wondered, both at her tears, and that she should deny me entrance, she opened
her Closet, and standing in the door: Perfidious Traitor (said she, and called
me by my name) are you come with any designs of injury unto me?

And because I answered nothing, being so surprised that I could not speak:
Perhaps, ungrateful wretch, said she, you will deny your villainy? Ah most
wicked person! (said she, and showed me her Letters, here are all the
testimonies of my too easy belief; but know that there is not one of thy
treasons which is not known unto me; and be certain, that thou have made me
forever thy most mortal enemy. Then she pushed me out of the door and shut it
so suddenly, that I could not hinder her. Thus, fairest Mistress, seeing she
would not open the door, I went away the most ashamed man in the world, but so
incensed against Florice, that revenged I would be at what rate soever; for it
was she, I knew, that took my Letters, and I saw it was she that gave them unto
Dorinde, purposely to displease me. I did imagine, that it was envy or
jealousy, which made her commit this crime against our amity; and conceiving,
that nothing would more vex her, then to seem, as if I had quitted her for
Dorinde, I resolved to break off entirely with her, and devote my self wholly
unto the other. The greatest difficulty was, to appease Dorinde; but I armed my
self with a full resolution, to endure all manner of disdain and anger, rather
than not be revenged upon Florice.

Within a few days after, I went in this design, unto Dorinde in her Closet;
for the displeasure which she had received, made her more retired then usual;
and offering to shut the door upon me, I fell down upon my knees so suddenly,
as she could not avoid me; then, after I had begged a thousand times for a
pardon, I told her all the truth; to wit, how Florice having long loved me, and
to keep our affections more secret, she commanded me to faigne a courtship of
her; which accordingly I did, both at the first, and when I gave her all those
Letters; but afterward, coming to love her in good earnest, I then gave
Florice no more. Oh! yar, said she unto me did you not carry her the last which
I writ also? It Is true, (said he) that she has them, but she stole them from
me; and if you will not believe me, ask of those who helped her to play the
thief. Then I named two, who had seen her steal them, and told me of it; and
therefore, when Florice sound her self punished by her own invention, she
acquainted you with all that could break off your affection from me. But is not
Love just, in making her suffer that harm which she prepared for you? Why
should she make your beauty the cloak for all her designs? May the gods never
be favorable unto me, if I do not hate such things most abominably, and if I
do not love you above all the world, and into whose favor I do desire most to
ingratiate my self. Let not her jealousy and slander of me, have a greater
influence upon you, then my affection has, and let not her anger, at my
disdaining her for you, prejudice me in your good opinion. I used many such
expressions, which at the first did not operate according to my desires and
expectance; but so disposed her, that when I made the theft of Florice manifest
unto her, she would pardon me: And presently after, we renewed love upon
st^icter obligations, then ever before, which took me off from Florice as much,
as if I had never seen her; and I did it without any constraint: for it is most
true, she was fairer then Dorinde, and of a higher rank and quality; yet, my
anger against her had so changed my eyes, as this Beauty did not at all please
them, but made me slight her.

Florice for a while did endure all this, seeming not to care a jot what became
of me, as if all my actions were very indifferent unto her but at length she
repented, and extremely grieved that she had so lost me; and being assured,
that I did once love her also thinking, that a real affection could not so
easily extinguish, she conceived, that if she did seem, as if she loved some
other, doubtless it would have so much influence upon me, as would make me
return again unto her: And in order to this design, she could not think of any
more fit to fool then Theombres, because she thought his disposition was
amorously inclined, and because he had formerly loved her. Then she began to
carrasse Theombres with all imaginable expressions, and show, as if all he said
or did, did please her especially when I was within compass of taking any
notice, and then she would talk to him, and whisper, as if she had made choice
of him, for the only Cabinet of all her secrets. I presently observed this
redintegration, and told Dorinde, who could not choose but laugh, when she heard
how Theombres was embarked. Florice seeing I did not return unto her according
to her expectance, did the more multiply her favors upon him, insomuch as many
did dislike her behavior, and acquainted her Parents with it; for, she was so
free and open in the dispensation of her favors, as in lieu of hiding them, as
is usual, she exposed them to the view of every one, nay, studied how to make
them seen, otherwise I had not come to the knowledge of it for I never saw her
but in public, and when I was with her in any public place, I shunned her.
Now her Father, as I have told you, being advertised of this Love, did
exceedingly reprehend her, and much more her Mother, who for honor and
chastity was an eminent example to all the Country. At the first, she would
have glossed the matter with an excuse; but afterward, seeing excuses would
not do it, she did confess it, and said, that it was true, Theombres did court
her, and that she could not choose but love him. But her Mother, who could not
upon any terms approve of her behavior, did tell her in a very angry manner,
That Theombres did not give so many testimonies of his love to her, as she of
her love to him. To which Florice, in much disorder answered, That Theombres
did court her in the way of honor; and since his End was only at Marriage, she
could do no less then allow of him. If it be so, said her Father, let him
acquaint us with his intentions, otherwise we shall think, you only invented
this, thereby to excuse your self. She, who had a very reverentiall respect
and fear of her Father and Mother, and who besides, had ever lived in great
reputation, did think it expedient, that Theombres should make some overtures
of Marriage unto her Parents, yet not intending to go any further, then a mere
motion; for she hoped, that it might be easily broken off: Therefore she spoke
unto Theombres concerning it, who was joyed at it beyond all expressions; and
not to lose a minute of time, he entreated two of his Uncles to make the motion
unto Florice's Father and Mother; which accordingly they did, with so many fair
offers, as they were received as well as they could desire; for he was very
rich, and an advantageous Match unto Florice, which being known and considered
by her Parents, they would not prolong time, but did conclude the Marriage that
same day, and the more willingly, because they believed it agreeable unto the
liking of their Daughter. Thus is Florice's Marriage with Theombres made up,
all things agreed upon, Writings sealed, and nothing wanting but a Priest to
Marry them. But Oh! what a wonder was all this unto Florice, when she heard of
it? Her Father thinking she would be very glad of it, would himself be the
messenger of the news: But, when he told her how all things went, though she
would have feigned, yet she could not, but broke out into a deluge of tears, at
which her Father was much amazed: How, Daughter, said he unto her, this is very
strange; does Florice cry at what she her self desired? I told you, Father
(said Florice all in tears) that Theombres courted me in way of Marriage, but I
never told you, that I did desire it. Were not you the cause, said the Father,
which moved Theombres to make the motion? It was upon your command, replied
she, and not upon my own desire; and I did believe, you would have given me
some time to consider upon it. Come, come, (said he in an angry manner) you
knew well enough how such businesses use to be carried. Resolve with your
self, that since they have gone thus far, they shall go on. What! would you be
further courted, and give all the world an occasion to talk of you? Would you
have further time, to make me more ashamed? No, no, Florice, content your
self, I have blushed enough for you already, when your friends acquainted me
with your behavior, and I will prevent it for the future if I can. Upon this,
he left her alone, and went to his Wife, who hearing what discourse had passed,
came to her with all the sharp language which she could invent, and for a
conclusion told her, that nothing but death could hinder that Marriage from
taking effect, and therefore she must resolve upon it. Thus, poor Florice was
in a worse condition than ever; for, she had not only lost me whom she loved,
but was likely to be enjoyed by another, whom she loved not, but hated worse
then a death. Imagine in what a wilderness of thoughts she was and what
various combats was in her soul: In conclusion, she resolved, that death should
be the remedy against all her restless afflictions; not that she had so much
courage as to kill her self, (for the thought of such a cruelty made her to
tremble) but because she thought her life was not able to endure so many sad
and tormenting miseries. But see the strange consequents of Love; she did not
so much grieve for the loss of me, and at her being another whom she loved
not, as to think, that I should put a bad construction upon that affection
which she expressed unto me: For, though she was angry at me, because of
Dorinde; yet, she did love me, and excused me for loving her no more, accusing
her self with the offense which she had committed against me. Being thus
perplexed, and since she could not avoid her Marriage with Theombres, she
resolved to give her self so much satisfaction at the least, as to let me
know, that her mind was not changed, and that her affection should for ever be
the same as I had found it: Her Letter was thus written.

Florice's Letter unto Hylas.
WHen you look upon this hand, perhaps you will remember, that you have seen it
heretofore, when you loved her that writ it, and that now so much offended you.
Consider how great my affection is unto you, since after so great an injury, I
take pen in hand, to let you know the condition she is in, whom once you so
much loved, and who loves you still infinitely above all the world, maugre all
the injuries you have done me. Know, that by the rigorous Laws of Marriage, I
am now going to be another, and that there is no other remedy, unless you
will this very hour prevent it: Assuring my self, that my Parents woudl be
better pleased with your Alliance, then that of Theombres, unto whom, alas, I
am destined, unless you do love me as well as I love you.


When this Letter was brought unto me, I was sorry at those frequent reports of
this Marriage; and though I was resolved to be wholly Dorinde's, yet I could
not choose but resent the loss of Florice; for I esteemed her lost, in the
alliance of Theombres. And see the subtlety of Love: He knew well enough, that
to assault me openly was in vain, because I was still in mine anger, and
therefore he would go another way with me. First, he propounded unto me my
hatred of Theombres, how undeserving he was of this advantage, and how happy he
would be in Florice. Then he represented unto me, the beauty and merits of
Florice, what pity it was that such a man should enjoy her; and brought into
my memory all those favors which I had received from her: To be brief, he did
so imprint these considerations in my soul, that ere I was aware, I was more in
love with her, then with Dorinde; so as when her Letter came unto my hands, and
considering with a sound judgment, the beauty, the quality, and the merits of
the Writer, I did acknowledge that I had done her wrong, in quitting her for
another much inferior; and repenting of it, I intended to return to her again.
Truth is, when I considered the remedy which she propounded, to break off her
Marriage with Theombres, I knew not what to resolve upon; for I hated that
fatal Tie of Marriage more then I can express; not with Florice in
particular, but with any woman in general; conceiving that there was no
greater tyranny nor slavery amongst the sons of men, then that of Marriage.
Thus was I in a Labyrinth of ravelled resolutions; for on the one side, Dorinde
was not displeasing unto me; on the other side, I could not endure, that
Theombres should enjoy Florice, especially in the way of Marriage: But, after a
long contest with my self, I resolved to renew that love which was betwixt us,
and to do all that possibly I could to prevent Theombres. And in order to this
resolution, I seemed, as if I had not received the Letter which she had writ
unto me, which I might easily do, because he who brought it, left it for me at
my lodging, I not being then within: So taking pen, ink, and paper, I writ
thus unto Florice.

Hylas his Letter unto Florice.
ARe you mad to marry Theombres? Have you so soon forgot Hylas and his
affection, that you should prefer this man before him? Can you content him, and
make me grieve for you? Oh ye gods! will ye permit it? or if ye do permit it,
will you no! punish the ungrateful Florice?


The reason why I seemed, as if I had not received her Letter, was, because she
should not think it was her invitation, but my own affection, which made me
return unto her; for, had I come upon her summons, she would have thought my
love less, which I would not have her think. When she received my Letter, she
was extremely joyed, to find that I loved her, and was sorry, when she saw I
had not received hers, therefore she writ unto me again, to let me know, that
she had advertised me of a course which I should take, to free her from that
misery which was prepared for her. And because she feared her Letter was lost,
she repeated it again in this. But I, without returning any answer unto it,
seemed as if I was gone out of the Town, as not being able to endure the sight
of her Marriage with Theombres; and to the end she might believe it, I gave
order, that almost at the very same time, another Letter from me should be
carried unto her. It was thus indicted.

Hylas his Letter unto Florice.
SInce it is impossible, but Florice must needs follow the course of her fatal
destiny, I must needs also depart the Town, not being able to endure a sight so
deplorable unto my self: I had rather take the unhappy success by my ears,
then by my eyes, which I do reserve to swim in tears at such sad news. The
gods give you as much content, as you have left me little, and may it continue
as long, as my smarting misery will last, which will be to my grave, where I
will lament your inconstancy, and my own sad fate.


Now, fair Phillis, I writ this Letter unto her, to the end she should think, I
had not received hers; for otherwise, I had been obliged unto an answer,
unless I had utterly declined her, and rather consented unto a death then to
marry her; not, but that I did infinitely esteem her, but these bonds of
Marriage were most horrid unto me, and I had so good an opinion of my self, as
I thought it certain she would not be denied me, if I asked her of her Parents:
And least she should be troubled about her Letter which she had written unto
me, I caused it to be carried back unto her by one of my servants, who was
instructed to let her know, that I was gone out of the Town two or three days
before; and since he knew not whither I was gone, nor when I would return, he
brought it back unto her, lest it should be lost. She did not know that it had
been opened, for it was sealed with the same seal, both she and I having long
since each of us a Seal as like one another as possibly could be made. She
took the Letter with a sad sigh, and afterward enquired, why I went away, and
what urgent occasion had constrained me to be gone so soon? He answered her
according to my instructions, That he knew nothing; only, he never saw me so
sad in all his life as I was at my departure. Ah me! (said she then, with a
most profound sigh) I am afraid he will return too late for my contentment.
Then, to hide the tears which trickled from her eyes, she turned the other way.
When this man returned, he told me all that she said and did; and I must needs
confess, I pittyed her, but I could not for my life resolve to marry her:
Therefore I kept my self close until the Marriage were past, and sent the man
every hour to hearken news: At the last, I heard that all was concluded. I
should be too tedious, fairest Mistress, if I should relate all the artifices
which she used; but let me only tell you, that the night before the Marriage,
she writ these words unto me.

Florice's Letter unto Hylas
Could I send you my life in this paper, as well as the truth of my intention,
I should not complain at heavens injustice in destinating me to fail, both in
my love and in my duty. Tomorrow is the last day of my life, if I may call that
a death which takes away all my contentment. If Hylas do love me, miserable as
I am, and will accompany my sorrows with his, let him resort to my grave.


Judge, whether this Letter did not touch me to the quick, since I did really
love her: but, seeing no remedy but to marry her, I must confess, my affection
was not of force enough, to bring my will unto it.

The next morning she was constrained to sign the Contract, and to agree unto
all that her Father and Mother would have her; but, with such incredible grief
and trembling, that her legs were not able to bear her, nor her hand to guide
the pen, wherewith she subscribed her name. Oh ye gods! said she unto one of
her Companions what a most cruel Law is this, that ordaines the innocent to
sign their own death? But when she went to the Temple, and through the street
where my lodging was lifting up her eyes to the windows, she said thus unto
her self: Why, Oh happy lodgings, are not the gods as favorable unto me as
you? And, as fortune was, I being at the window, which I held half open, to
see her pass by, she espied me: But, Oh ye gods, how this vision went to her
heart? she fell into a swoond, and lay in the arms of those that went with
her: And lest I should do the like, I was constrained to lie down upon my bed,
and stirred not from it most part of that day At the last, she was married with
so many tears, as every one pittyed her. And because I feared, lest she having
seen me, she should think; I did but only give out that I was gone away, I
procured an intimate friend that same night to let her understand, that I was
departed, only because I would not see this unhappy Marriage, and that my
intention was, never to return again; but, since my affection would not give me
leave to be so far distant, I was constrained to return, but arrived in the
most unfortunate minute that could be; and that it was absolutely impossible I
should live, unless she gave me some assurance, that her affection was not
changed. She, as if she never heard him, took a Ring off from her finger, and
put it into his hand: This Diamond, said she may assure him, that it has less
constancy, then the affection which I promised unto him.

Now hear, I beseech you, what happened: That very same night, and, I believe,
about the very same hour, when Theombres had her in his arms, I was in my
bed, and held my hand upon my breast, having the Ring upon my finger. I know
not how, but it cut me, and made so deep a wound, that my shirt and sheets were
all bloody, and ever since, has left a mark upon my side, near my heart. Oh
heavens! (cried I out upon a sudden, thinking upon the wrong which I had done
Florice, and Theombres had done me) how sensible am I of the offense and injury
that is done unto my affection. Perhaps I have insisted too long upon these
particulars; but I beseech you excuse Hylas, since he was never so touched to
the heart by any other, except by you, my fairest Phillis. Or except any in
this Company, said she. But, pray tell us how you left Dorinde? Unto which
Hylas replied thus: When I was in the depth of my perplexities (for indeed I
did love Florice, as well because she was fair, as because I thought Dorinde
loved another) the heavens helped me out with as good an occasion as I could
desire. Periander, who, as I told you, was constrained to quit Dorinde unto me,
and, not being able to see me enjoy her, was gone out of the Town, was at
length forced to return, as not being able to endure so long out of her sight;
and though he did foresee, his sorrows would be greater in seeing, then in
hearing, of our affection; yet could he not choose but return, thinking it would
be some consolation unto his wound, to see the hand that gave it. And because
he came at the first to see me, as soon as he came, I resolved to give, as they
say, two blows with one stone, to rid my self of Dorinde, and to oblige
Periander. Two or three days passed on, and he never talked one word unto me
concerning Dorinde; and one time, being separated from the Company, I said thus
unto him: Periander, it is impossible for my affection unto you, to suffer my
self to be a cause of that melancholy which I have observed in your face, any
longer; I love you too well, than to see you suffer for my sake: You do not
doubt of my affection unto Dorinde, but you shall less doubt of the affection
I have unto you; And to give you evident testimony that it is not a little, I
release this Dorinde unto you, whom my good fortune took from you; and the
affection I bear unto you, shall surmount the love I bear unto her: Receive
her, therefore, Periander, from me, and be assured, that I shall less grieve
to part with her, then to see you thus sad for my sake, or be deprived of your
presence. If ever any condemned person was joyed when a Pardon came, Periander
was as much, when he heard this; and yet his discretion and affection unto me,
made him at the first refuse it; but when he saw I persisted in this mind, he
received it with so many thanks, as I was constrained to tell him, that she was
justly his due, knowing very well, that he did surmount me in love, as my good
fortune and cunning surpassed his

Then I retired by little and little from Dorinde, and Periander on the
contrary advanced. But, in the mean time, I attempted upon Florice, I found out
the means to speak unto her, and assured her of my affection. To be brief, I
contrived it so, as there was never better correspondency betwixt us; and that
which most helped me, was, the hollow-hearted affection which she bore unto
Theombres: It Is true, she had always some suspicion of Dorinde, and therefore
after she thought that she had made me hers, she told me peremptorily, that she
would have me so clearly and openly break off with Dorinde, as she should never
be in any doubt of it afterward; otherwise, she should live in a continual
incertainty of my affection, and that she had rather part fair with me, then
live in such continual apprehensions. I desired, that my breach with Dorinde
might be done by some civil way, and least offensive unto her. But she would
needs have it done by some rude and public affront, and she would not be
persuaded otherwise At the last, I resolved upon it.

Upon the sixth of July, all the Gallantry of the Town went with the Druides to
gather the sacred Misletoe, in the Forest of Mars, called Erieu; and then
Florice charged me to satisfy her request. All the Ladies were trimmed in
their gayest dresses, and every one in the Athenian habit. The sacrifice being
ended, and public rejoycings beginning, I took Periander apart, to the end he
should not be offended at what I did; I told him how I saw Dorinde had some
hopes yet in me, and therefore she did not receive his service; so well as she
ought; but I would undeceive her, and dash all her hopes. Then seeing her with
Florice, and in the midst of the best company, I went to her, and after some
common discourse, I said unto her so loud, as all about her might hear Now I
see Dorinde, that what is told me of you, is true. What Is that, (said she, and
smiled, little expecting such an answer as I gave)? That you have (replied I)
the best opinion of your self, of any person in the world. Then she blushed,
and asked me the reason of my judgment. Because, said I, you measuring others
by your self; as you do love all you look upon, so you think every one is in
love with you; and I know you are in that error concerning me thinking that I
am ready to die for the love of you: but, I would have you know, that your
merits are too mean to make me such a fool; if you think otherwise, undeceive
your self, and be assured, that Hylas is ashamed he ever loved you; or if he
was such a fool, that he is wiser now. Imagine, noble Paris, how blank Dorinde
was: For my part, I would not exchange a syllable more with her, but went away,
and left her most pitifully out of countenance. Ever since, Florice was the
most satisfied that is imaginable, and wholly devoted her self unto me And as
Theombres stood for a Husband, so I enjoyed her as a Friend. But Dorinde,
extremely incensed against me, resolved to do me all the mischief that
possibly she could, and discovering the intimate familiarity betwixt Florice
and me, she designed to thwart it: And because I did not see her, though I was
sorry for it, for I did love her, though lessethen I did Florice, she thought
Periander would be a fit instrument to work her ends by; therefore she began to
show him more countenance then accustomed, and, by degrees, seemed to love him
better; at which Periander was so joyed, that he almost never stirred from her:
Having lived a while thus with him, she acquainted him with the deceit I had
used, in putting my Picture in the Mirror, and that he should not doubt it, she
sent for the woman who brought it to sell. To be brief, she told him so much in
my disadvantage, as she cooled his affection unto me; and all this out of a
design, to get by his means, some of Florice's Letters from me; and therefore
continuing her discourse: He is (said she unto him) wholly devoted unto
Florice, but it is only, until some other pass before his eyes; for he is the
veryest knave, and arrantest weathercock that ever was. But (said she unto him,
and held his hand in hers) will you do me one very great pleasure? And he
answering, that he would do any thing to serve her. She made him swear, he
would be as good as his word. Then went she on: You know, that Florice and I
are friends and allies, I cannot believe that she does love him: I beseech you
tell me all you know. Undeceive your self in that, said he unto her, assure your
self she does love him, and there is hardly a day, but he has a Letter from
her. Oh my god, said she, can you not help me to the sight of one of her
Letters? Very easily, answered he, for he is very careless of them. In this,
Periander said right; for the truth is, I know not what I did with all those
she writ unto me, nor was I angry with my self for my carelessnesse. Well,
said Dorinde, now I shall see, whether or no you be a man of your word, and
whether you love me; for if you do, and this be so, you will presently bring me
one of them. Periander, without any regard unto our friendship, whether it was
by virtue of Dorinde's command or out of revenge upon me, for putting that
trick upon him, but he came that very night to lie with me, as he often used,
and stole away one which I received in his presence, and the next morning, as
soon as he could get into Dorinde's Chamber, he brought it unto her: It
contained these words.

Florice's Letter unto Hylas.
THe man who is in the world only for our torment, goes tomorrow out of the
Town: If you come, all the night shall be ours, and the rest of the time I
spend in absence of him I love, I cannot call mine.


You know, generous Paris, that upon such Letters, they never any use to write
Superscriptions, lest the Writer should be discovered by the Direction; and
therefore Dorinde, after a thousand thanks to Periander, went into her Closet,
and superscribed it, Unto Theombres, afterward sealed it up very handsomely
with a Seal, and giving it unto a creature of her own, instructed him what he
should do, and commanded him to carry it unto Theombres in all haste, because
she understood, that he was to go out of Town the same day: The fellow did as
he was directed, and so nimbly, that whilst Theombres was reading the Letter,
he slipped away, and came to Dorinde, and told her what he had done. I refer it
unto your imagination, fairest Mistress, whether the Husband was not amazed,
when he saw his Wife's Letter, and much more, when he read it: It wrought this
influence upon him, that whereas before he should have gone out of the Town
single, now he must go double, and carry his wife with him; but not before he
had showed the Letter unto her, and had shreudly reprehended her for it. She
excused her self as well as she could, telling him, it was long since this
Letter was writ, and that it was Dorinde who had now written the superscription
of it. To which Theombres answered, that whenever she writ it she was to
blame, and could not be excused. She replied, that Dorinde and she being
intimate friends, did often use to write such unto each other, and invite
themselves thereby to come and visit one another; and that Dorinde being angry
with her, and knowing that he was to go out of Town, had, in revenge upon her,
sent him this Letter, which truly, said she, you may well believe to be so,
since the superscription is written with Dorinde's own hand; and that if she
would, she could show several others of the like nature, as I might of hers
had I been as careful in keeping them as she is. Theombres was something
satisfied with this excuse, yet not so, but he constrained her to go with him
out of Town, and would not let her have more leisure, then to write one word
unto Hylas, and left it in the hands of her Maid, in whom she had good
assurance of her fidelity. For my part, I thought she had stayed at home, and
that Theombres had gone by himself therefore I went at night to the usual
place of meeting. But this Maid opening the door, she gave me Florice's Letter,
and shut the door again immediately against me. and would not speak one
syllable unto me: This made me fear some dysasterous accident had happened, and
therefore returned to my lodging, where as soon as ever I got a light, I read
this Letter with extreme impatiency, and found in it these words.

Florice's Letter unto Hylas.
SHe who writes now unto you, is the most mortal enemy you have, intimating
unto you, that neither Dorinde nor your self, have villainy enough to make me
die, but that the heavens will let me live, to be revenged upon you both. In
the mean time, for get my name, as you have done all my favors:


Oh heavens! how this Letter went to my heart, I was in such a strange
confusion of thoughts that I could not imagine why Florice should write thus, I
spent all that night in walking up and down my Chamber, and as soon as it was
day, I sent a servant to find out a way, how I might speak with her who gave
me the Letter; but it could not be, all that day: When night came, I understood
all from her, how Florice had an opinion, that I had given this Letter unto
Dorinde, which made her believe, that I did only dissemble, when I seemed to
cast off Dorinde, and did it only to delude her. I put my hand presently into
my pocket, and not finding my Letter, I did suppose, that Periander had stolen
it from me: After a thousand protestations of my innocence unto this Maid, I
went away with resolutions of revenge: But when I met my friend, and with a
frowning brow taxed him with his theft, he answered me, with a smile; If I have
displeased you, said he, I am sorry; but you may well forget it, if you do but
consider, that now we are upon eeven terms, for your stealing of Dorinde from
me by your artifice of the Mirror. But friend, said I unto him, I have restored
your Mistress unto you, and you have caused me to lose mine. I know not
answered he, how to give you satisfaction in that, unless by restoring her
unto you, in acquainting her with my theft. Truth is, I did love Periander, and
perhaps as much as I did any of these Ladies; therefore I received his excuse,
conceiving it to be the only means to reingratiate my self into Florice's
favor: And therefore turning all into rallarie, we waited for Florice's
return. But, Theombres being but half satisfied with his Wife's excuses, he
resolved to stay a while in the Country, the better to discover who made any
addresses unto her, and to find out her humor; and he stayed so long, that I
was in the interim past my patience; therefore I went to see Criside, and
seeing her, loved her; and the truth is, she did deserve it, for I never in all
my life, saw a more lovely and attractive stranger.

Astrea had taken much delight in the discourse of Hylas, had it been at any
other season but being extremely desirous to be at the place where Silvande:
found Celadon's Letter, she was impatient at any thing which gave a stop unto
it: And this was the reason, why upon the first occasion which presented it
self, she made a sign unto Phillis, that it was time to be gone, and that she
was weary of so long a stay. When she saw that Phillis did not understand her
meaning, and likewise saw Hylas offering to continue his discourse of Criside,
she prevented him with these words: I did not think, that the beauty of Phillis
could have had so much power over so free a spirit, as to hold him in one
discourse above an hour; but, since her rigor does not consider his
constraint, let us show our selves more kind and discreet, in interrupting
him; for, the heat of the day being over, walking will be more delightful then
talking. Upon this, she rose up, and the rest of the Company followed her.

Hylas taking Phillis under the arm: I am very glad, fairest Mistress (said
he) that she, who is the most insensible, does resent some of that pain which
you put upon me, and does see the love I have unto you. He meant this by
Astrea, whom he thought to be a person that never had loved any: And see how
commonly our judgments are deceived by appearances and shows; for, Phillis
desiring to leave him in that opinion. Those, said she, who do love well, do
never use to give testimony of their affection by the report of persons, who do
not know how to love, but by their own obsequious services. And as for that
patience which you have been put to, in speaking so long, I believe you are as
sufficiently paid for it, by my hearing you so long. This, said Hylas, is the
intolerable arrogance and ingratitude of all the Shepheardesses in this
Country. And because Phillis would follow the rest of her Companions, he lead
her by the arm, and continued thus: Because you will not be obliged unto me,
you will not only deny me the merit of my patience but you think I am beholding
unto you for hearing me: By what Law, I beseech you, is this? The same, said
she, that a Lord does impose upon his Slave. Nay, rather, said he, a Tyrant
upon his People. Why, replied Phillis, do you take me for a Tyrant? Surely
there is this difference betwixt us that I do not use any force or violence
against you. Can you say so, said Hylas, and not blush? Do you think it is not
by force, that Hylas has continued so long under your power? I pray, said she,
where are my Fetters, my Manacles, my Compulsions, and my Prisons? Ah! most
ignorant, and too much dissembling shepherdess, said Hylas, your Chains are
so strangely indissolvable, that I would not be delivered from them, for all
the freedom and liberty in the world. Judge, if your Manacles be not very
strong, since Hylas cannot break them; Hylas, I say, whom a thousand Beauties
could never hold, nor keep him from breaking loose from them all. In the mean
time, Paris having taken Diana by her hand, Silvander, out of his discretion
kept a distance; for he would force his affection, and in his respect unto his
Shepherdess, give place unto Paris, as all the shepheardesses were very ready
to pay all due respects unto him, who for their sakes; had quitted the grandeur
and eminency of his quality. As fortune was Mandonte was alone, and because I
hersander was taken up with Laonice, Silvander took her hand, and resolved to
wait upon her during all the voyage; and though he made this address unto her
at the first, because he knew not where to find a better; yet afterward, he
was well pleased with his choice, for this shepherdess was both fair and
discreet, and had some features in her face and actions, which did much
resemble Diana; not that she was so fair as she, nor so like being together;
but if assunder, they had much one of the other, in their resemblance.

Silvander, since he could not be with Diana, was very glad his lot fell upon
one that had any thing like her; but much more, when by discourse with her, he
found a nearer resemblance in her Tone; and therefore, ever since this day, he
was much pleased with her company; yet a little after, he paid very dear for
his delight. Tireis waited upon Astrea, Paris upon Diana, and Hylas upon
Phillis, so as Thersander seeing his place was taken up by Silvander, he was
forced to fall upon Laonice. She, who kept her eyes continually upon Phillis
and Silvander, did observe how that shepherd was much pleased with Mandonte,
and that she might know more, she desired Thersander to go nearer them, which
his jealous apprehensions prompted him very easily to do; yet, they could not
hear any thing, but common discourse. They had not walked above a quarter of an
hour in a long Meadow, but Silvander showed them the Wood, unto which he would
conduct them. Presently after, they entered into a thick Cops; and because the
Path was very narrow they were constrained to go in file. At last, Silvander,
who, as their conductor, walked first, he much wondered, to see some boughs of
trees heaped one upon another, in the fashion of an Arbor, which obstructed
his pass. All the Company going through this Arbor, came up to him, to know
why he stayed, and seeing no path: How now Silvander, (said Phillis) do you
that undertook to be our Guide, conduct us thus? I must confess, said he, that
I have lost the way which I went the last morning; but, I believe this to be a
nearer and better. The way, said Hylas, is very good, if you had conducted us
to Hunt, for I see nothing but Wood. Silvander was vexed that he lost his way,
but he was more amazed then before, when hesaw another more spacious Arbor in
the form of a Temple: at the entry, there was some Verses written, which
Silvander stayed to read. All the Company being weary they called upon him
several times. He, in a great amazement, turned toward Diana: Mistress, said
he, do not repent your self of the pains you have taken, in coming hither;
for, though you are a little digressed of the way, yet, you shall see here a
wonder of the Wood: Then taking her hand, he conducted her to the entry: the
rest of the Shepherds and Shepheardesses followed in sile, and longed to see
this rarity of which Silvander spoke. Before the entrance was a Court of green
grass, about thirty paces square, environed with thick wood on three sides, so
as none could see them. A crystal Fountain, which took its original opposite
to the Porch, or rather, Arbor, of this Temple, did, Meander like, run by the
one side, which rendered the place most delectable. This Grove was ever a place,
that had been dedicated as sacred unto the great Heseus, Tentates, and Taramis:
And there was no shepherd that ever durst presume to drive his Flock near this
Thicket; and the reason why it was never frequented, was, lest they should
disturb the solitude and sacred silence of the Nymphs, Pans, and Egipans. The
grass was never sullied, the wood never felt the axe, nor was broused by any
cattle, and the Fountain was never defiled by any foot: so as this little
Grove, dressed into the fashion of an Arbor, or rather a Temple, did plainly
demonstrate, that it was dedicated unto some deity: And therefore all these
Shepherds approaching the entrance with reverence, before they passed any
further, they did read the Verses which were written upon a Table of wood over
the Porch: They were these.

Unless with sacred Love you be enflamed,
Unto this sacred place, be all ashamed
To enter: Here Is the Grove, where, every day,
A Heart, that is all Love and Zeal, does pay
Religious duty; here he does implore,
And here divine Astrea does adore.
The Shepherds and Shepheardesses stood amazed at this Inscription, and looked
upon one another, as if they were desirous to know, whether any of the Company
did either know, or had seen this before. Diana addressed her self unto
Silvander; Is this the place, Shepherd, (said she) unto which you did intend
to bring us? No, answered he, I never saw this place in my life before.

It is evident, said Paris, that these boughs have been lately lopped and put
into this order, for the leaves of them are yet green. However, said he, we
must go in* But, lest we should offend the deity, unto whom the place is
consecrated let us enter in with all possible reverence; and first, let us make
our selves as clean as we can.

Every one consented, except Hylas, who answered, That for his part, he had
nothing to do there: For said he, since all those are forbidden to enter, that
are not enflamed with an holy Love, I know not whether or no I ought to enter:
I know that I am enflamed with Love, but, whether it be holy or no, faith I am
not sure. How, Servant, (said Phillis, and smiled) a defect in your Love! What
do you in our company? For my part, answered he, I have abundance of affection
after my own fashion; but, what know I, whether it be such affection as these
Verses means? And I have heard say, that it is not good jeasting with the gods.
See, Hylas, said Silvander, what a shame your impure affection does bring upon
you in this good Company. You say very true indeed, said Hylas, but did you
take this act as you ought to do, you would rather commend me for it for, in
being obedient unto the commands of the divinities which are adored in this
place, I do make it appear, by my great reverence of them, that I do reverence
them as I ought to do; whereas you, who despise their commands, do profane the
sacred place by your presumptuous boldness: for, your own soul, if it would
not dissemble, can tell you, that your affections are not so sacred as is
required. I shall answer you presently, said Silvander. Then he and all the
company washed their hands, put off their shoes, and with bare feet entered into
the Arbor. Then Silvander turning toward Hylas: Hearken, Hylas, said he, and
be a witness of my words. Afterward reading the Verses again, and lifting his
eyes up to heaven, and kneeling: Oh great deity (said he) who is adored in this
place, I here enter into the sacred Grove, being most assured, that I do not
contradict thy will, knowing my love to be so holy, and so pure, that thou will
be pleased to accept the vows and supplications of a soul so amorously
sanctified as mine; and it this profession which I here make, be not true,
punish, O great deity, this my perjury and presumption.

After this, with hands lifted up, and head bare, he entered into the Arbor,
and all the rest after him, except Hylas. The place was spacious, some sixteen
or seventeen paces round, and in the midst, a great branch-soreading Oak; at
the root of this Tree was erected a grassy Table, in the form of an Altar upon
which stood a Picture, and in it two Cupids drawn, who did strive with one
another for a branch of Myrtle and Palm wreathed together. As soon as this
devout company was entered, every one fell upon their knees and after they had
in private adored the deity of the place Paris approaching the Altar, and
taking upon him the office of a Druide, having gathered some Oak leaves:
Accept (said he) O great deity, that is adored in this place, the humble
devotion of all this zealous Company. I do with all humility and devotion,
offer unto thee in their names, a few leaves of this blessed Tree, under whose
shade it pleases thee to be adored. Then every one arose, and went unto the
Altar, to look upon the Picture which was upon it; in which they saw two
Cupids, as I told you, who holding in both their hands a branch of Myrtle and
Palm wreathed together, the one did strive to take it from the other. The
Limner was exquisite in his Art; for these little lovely Boys were plump and
fat, yet, their Muscles and Nerves might be seen which by reason of their
striving seemed to be raised up; both their right thighs were advanced, and
their feet almost touched each other; both their arms were stretched out, and
their bodies leaned backwar I, as if they knew, that the further off a weight
is, the heavier it is; and the weight of their little bodies, lent more
strength unto their striving arms. Their faces were both fair, but blushing,
by reason of the blood which came into them by striving, which the great veins
upon their temples and foreheads did sufficiently testify. And the Artist had
been so careful, and wrought it with such industry, that though he did
represent an action, which made it appear, that both of them would vanquish;
yet, one might perceive by their countenances, that there was no enmity betwixt
them, having, for all their Combat, mixed a kind of sweetness and smiling in
their eyes, and about both their mouths. Their Torches which were on each side
of them, which they had let fall, by chance, fell one against another, so as
they united together, and made but one, by this means added luster to each
other, and gave the greater light with this Motto, Our Wills are but one. Their
Bows were so linked and twisted one with the other, that they could not draw
them but both together; their Quivers, which were hung upon their shoulders,
were full of Arrows; but by the color of their feathers one might know, that
those which the one had, belonged unto the other, because in the gilded Quiver,
were silver feathered Arrows, and in the silvered Quiver, gilded Arrows. The
Company had looked long, and not understood this piece, i the shepherd
Silvande, at the request of Paris, had not interpreted the signification These
two Cupids (said he) do signify the Lover and the Loved; this Palm and
Mirtle-wreath does express the victory of Love, for the Palm is an emblem of
Victory, and the Mir^e of Love. The Lover and the Loved do strive, which shall
be victorious; that is, which shall be most loving. Those Torches, whose flames
are joined together, and by this union, more splendent, does show, that
reciprocal Love does augment affection. The Bows intertwisted and linked so
together, that one cannot draw them without the other, do teach us, that all
things are so in commun betwixt friends, as the puissance of the one is that of
the other, so as neither can do any thing, unless his Companion contribute
his, which the changing of the Arrows does more illustrate. One may also see
by this conjunction of Bows, and Flames, and change of Arrows, and union of
two Wills into one, that the Lover and the Loved are but one: So as I perceive,
this Picture represents unto us that the endeavors of two Loves to get the
victory one over the other, their contest is not, who should be best Loved, but
who should best Love, giving us to understand, that the perfection of Love
consists, in striving how to Love, and not how to be Loved. Now if this be so,
fairest Mistress, said he and turned toward Diana, you may see, how much you
are in my debt. I must ingenuously confess, (said she) that after this rate I
had rather be in your debt, than have you in mine. Hylas, who stood at the
entrance, and durst go no further, though he had a great desire unto it, and
the more, when peeping in, he saw the grassy Altar, and Picture upon it: And
because he could not well see, he employed his ear with all attention, to
hearken unto Silvander's discourse, and heard what he said unto Diana. I
perceive, fairest Mistress, said Silvander, that neither you nor I are
represented in this piece, since they in it are both Lovers and Loved; you are
loved, but do not love; and I do love but am not loved, and all this more by
ill fortune, then by reason.

There is no difference betwixt us, said Diana, but in words; for I call that
reason, which you do call ill fortune, and yet it is the same thing. If all the
difference (said he) were only in words I would not care; but the worst is,
that which you call reason and I ill fortune, fills me full of all miseries,
and its contrary would make me the most happy shepherd in the whole Universe
Afterward he turned toward the Picture and as Diana would have answered: I
beseech you, my Fairest (said he) do not talk any more of your small affection
to me, but let me see what is yet more rare in this Picture. Then taking her by
the hand, he read these words, thus written in the bottom.

The twelve Statutes, containing the Laws of Love, which, upon pain of his
high displeasure he commands all Lovers to observe.
The first Statute.
HE that is a perfect Lover, and a just,
And as he ought; love infinitely must.
Extremes in Love allowed are, as best,
Mediums will never make a Lover blessed,
But odious are: All Mediocrity,
Sign is of Treason, not fidelity.
The second Statute.
Let him the puissant god of Love adore,
And let him love some One, and not one more:
Above one Object, never let his eye
Once look upon, or wantonly epsy.
It is decrced by Loves Imperial Law,
That he his Bliss from this one Fountain draw.
The third Statute.
Unto this fair One and her service, he
Must dedicate himself and liberty;
He must his heart and all delights resign
To her, and only her, himself consine.
The rate he sets upon himself, must be,
According as she loves him, so must he:
The fourth Statute.
If he advancement to himself does seek,
Let his ambitious aim be at the cheek,
Which gave his love a life; let him confess,
She is the center of his happiness,
Which he does only aim at, and aspire
To set the luster of her glory higher.
The fifth Statute.
Let his affection to his Mistress, be
So dear, so chaste, so full of purity,
As he fruition of her shall despise,
Before a stain upon her honor rise.
If hers and his come in comparison,
Let him prefer hers far before his own.
The Sixth Statute.
If any offer to asperse the fame,
Or cast a blemish on his Mistress name,
Let him unsheath his anger, give the lie
To him that offers such a calumny.
If any dure to put affronts upon her,
Let him then die, or vindicate her honor.
The seventh Statute.
Then let his love arrive at such a height;
As he esteems her 'bove all mortal weight.
The Sun, the Stars, and glories of the skies,
He value must inferior to her eyes.
Perfection in the abstract he must deem her,
And think him guilty, that does less esteem her.
The eighth Statute.
He must inflamed be with fits of Love,
So violently hot, as they must move
His pulse to beat a mad-mans temper: He
Must sigh, must languish, and half dead must be,
And ever in such violencies swell,
As, ask him what he ailes, he cannot tell.
The ninth Statute.
He must forsake his habitation,
His soul must ever live by love alone.
He must no being have, but on the score
Of her, whom he does worship and adore.
So into her transformed he must be,
As that without her eyes he cannot see.
The tenth Statute.
Those days that in her presence are not past,
He must esteem as absolutely lost:
Court all occasions, Let him spare no pain,
To bring him back into his heaven again:
And whilst his body does a distance find,
Let him be present with her in his mind.
The eleventh Statute.
For her, he must depart even from his reason,
Bid welcome unto Manacles and Prison:
In sharpest torments, think himself at ease,
So he thereby his fairest Saint shall please.
And all without expectance of rewards:
To love her is the honor he regards.
The twelfth Statute.
He must not think it possible his Love,
Should sooner then the firmest Rock remove.
If any, such advice to him shall use,
Let him as Heterodox the same refuse.
Who so shall ever such an error move,
He is a very Schismatic in Love.
Hylas hearing what Silvander read: I do not think, Silvander, said he, that
one word of all this is written in that Picture which you have in your hand,
but you, having long since composed them after the rate of your melancholy
genius, do now, to give them the more authority, and the more easily to delude
the Company, do put them upon the score of that Picture. That might have been,
said Silvander, if there was none here but my self that could read; or if
these Laws were contrary unto Reason, or the ancient Statutes of Love. If it
were not as I say, said Hylas, you would bring me the Picture hither, that I
might see it. If you do think, said Silvander, that this sacred place would
have been profaned by your body, I have greater reason to think, that these
holy Laws would be polluted, if, by your reading, your soul should have any
communication with them. This moved all the Company to laugh; and this
unconstant Lover would have replied, yet could he not be heard: For, Silvander
having set the Picture upon the Alar, and done reverence unto it, every one
followed Paris, who opening a little door made of Osyers, he passed out of this
Arbor into another more large: over the door was written on a table of wood,
these Verses.

If through Loves Temple you dare boldly venture,
The sacred Temple of Astrea enter,
Where Love, by his commanding Law, decrees,
I should adore her ever on my knees.
As unto her I dedicate my days;
So likewise nights, my sorrows to her pays.
Astrea was she, who was most concerned at this; whether it was, because of the
name, in which she thought her self most interessed; or whether because she
heard speak of the dedication of days and sorrows; so it was, she did
apprehend, that by it was meant the fortune of the poor and unfortunate
Celadon. She looked, and long pondered upon this inscription, and in the mean
time, the rest of the company going a little farther, and finding a Vault like
to the first, but much bigger, they all fell down upon their knees, and having
paid their particular devotions in silence unto the deity, to whom that place
was consecrated, Paris, as he did before, so now, offered for all the Company,
an Oaken bough upon the Altar. It was of grass, like unto the other, but made
triangular; and in the midst stood a goodly Oak, whose top surveyed all the
Trees of this sacred Grove. It seemed by this Tree, that Nature was wanton in
her production of it, having from one stock sent forth three several branches,
three several ways, yet most admirably united at the top, without the help of
any Artifice; on one branch was written upon the bark Hesius, upon another,
Belinus, and on the other Tharamis; upon the stock which sent forth these three
branches, Tautates, and at the top where they reunited, Tautates again.

These things, which were according to the customs of their Religion, did not
much astonish them, for they did use to worship god under Oaks; but that which
they saw on the left hand, amazed them very much; it was another Altar, of
grass also, with two great Pots of earth out of which did grow two stocks of
Myrtle, betwixt which was a Picture, over which the two Mirtles twisted their
branches, into a resemblance of a Crown. This was apparently visible not to be
Natural, but wreathed in that manner by Art. The Picture represented a
Shepherdess; at the top of it was written, This is the goddess ASTREA; and
at the bottom, this:

More worthy of our Adoration, than we of her. As soon as Diana looked upon it,
she turned toward Phillis: Did you never see any (said she) whom this Piece
resembles? Resembles, said she? it is the very substance of Astrea: I never saw
Picture so exquisitely done, nor more like, in all my life: Is not that the
very same sheephook, which Astrea has in her hand? Observe the Letters C and A
which are upon it, and intertwisted together with knots. You are in the right,
said Diana; and see, there is Melampus lying at her feet: that Dog is very
knowable by his Marks, half his head white, the other black; and upon the
black ear, a white spot: Observe also the white list about his neck in fashion
of a collar, and the silver half Moon upon his sable coat; also the black and
white list along his legs. Silvander came to her, and Phillis, and said unto
them: Amongst all the Flock there, I have found which is that that Astrea loved
best; There it is, all white, except the ears, which are black. Astrea hearing
all this discourse, stood astonished and mute, and, with admiration, beheld all
she saw; yet going nearer the Altar, and finding several pieces of paper
lapped up upon it, she took one of them and opening it with a trembling hand,
she found these Verses.

Wanting the Substance, Shadows comforts be.
IF any passenger do ask, who, in this Grove,
Gave me this Picture? Know, that it was Love
It Is all my joy, my sole felicity:
Wanting the Substance, Shadows comfort be.
My drooping soul, swelled to the brim with grief,
And like to break, did beg of it relief.
Although thou art not half, said I, yet see,
Wanting the Substance, Shadows comfort me.
To render homage unto thee, I dwell.
Within the confines of this shady Cell.
Be so indulgent, as to say to me,
Wanting the Substance, Shadows comfort thee.
Though by a fatal, dire, and dismal doom,
Unto thy Substance I must never come:
Yet, this fair figure may a witness be,
VVanting the Substance, Shadows comfort me.
Oh! Fairest figure e're was left in pawn,
Or ever was by any Pencill drawn.
No Lover ever loved, as I Thee;
VVanting the Substance, Shadows comfort me.
I do adore thee then, without Idolatry,
Not as an Image, but a deity.
For by experience I do plainly see,
VVanting the Substance, Shadows comfort me.
Astrea retiring her self, she read and pondered these verses; and the more
she looked upon the Hand, the more she thought it did resemble Celadons; so as
after a long combat in her self, she could not possibly restrain her tears,
and to hide them, she turned her self toward the Altar. But Phillis, who was
as full of wonder as any in the Company, having taken up another paper, she
went unto her supposing, that the reason why Astrea did thus separate her self
from the Company, was, because she knew this Picture, and these Papers were
Celadons. And Diana also following her, Phillis beckned unto her to go back,
lest Silvander and Paris should follow her also; which sign she quickly
understood, and therefore turning toward Astrea's Picture, she opened some of
those papers which lay upon the Altar: The first she laid her hand upon, was
this.

Upon the Eyes of a Picture.
PAinter, I ask thee, what they are,
That spark les in those Eyes so fair?
What are they souls or flames that fly,
And hover so about that Eye?
They are flames, which death to fowls do give,
Or rather souls, that makes Love live.
It Is strange, that from the self same eyes
A Life and Death should both arise.
The works of gods all wonders are,
And so these Sun^ seems sure as rare.
To think them human is a sin,
Since reverence from the gods they win
To love them they command thy heart,
Since thou to look allowed art.
It Is true, but yet my heart does bear
In it, such reverentiall fear,
As bids devotion pay, not Love,
To one that equals gods above.
But star, the gods, who blessings shoure,
Will not require above our power.
But try, I say, and thou will prove,
Thou can not look, but thou must love.
Whilst Diana, to amuse the company, did read these Lines aloud, and these
being ended, took others, of which the Altar was full, Phillis addressed her
self unto Astrea: Oh heavens! dear Sister, (said she unto her) how I am amazed
at all I find in this place? For my part, answered Astrea, I am so much out of
my self, as I know not whether I be asleep or awake Look upon this Writing,
and then tell me, whether you ever saw the like unto it? This, answered
Phillis, is Celadon's writing, or else I am not Phillis. There is no doubt of
it, answered Astrea; and I do very well remember, that he writ this last line,
VVanting the Substance, Shadows comfort me, upon a little Picture which he had
of me, and which he wore about his neck, in a little bag of persumed Leather. I
pray see, said Phillis, what is in this paper, which I took up from under your
Picture.

Stay, stand, and gaze, did e're eye see
A Saint so pure, so fair as she?
Can any be so dully dumb,
As not Idolater become?
And rather all the gods give over,
Then not so fair a Saint adore.
But soft: ere I devotion pay,
Let me consider what I say.
These flaming Beauties are not eyes,
Only a Picture which I prize:
It is not real, only shade,
By an in genious Artist made.
Are they not eyes? Can any Art,
Like them, so captivate a Heart?
Sure Pictures, be they never so like,
So mortally can never strike.
But be they what they will, I Am sure,
No Mortal can the blows endure.
Since by their power, I wounded am,
I Will fly them, to avoid the same.
But why, fond Lover, will thou fly,
From such a fatal piercing eye?
Thy heart's already wounded by it,
What e're it be, it is vain to fly it.
Oh Sister, said Astrea, it is most certainly Celadon that writ these Verses,
it is without any manner of doubt: for, about three years since, he did write
them upon my Picture, which my Father had of me to give unto my Uncle Focion.
Upon this, tears flowed from her eyes. But Phillis, fearing the rest of the
Company would see her: Sister, said she, this is rather a cause of rejoicing
then sorrow; for, if Celadon did write it as I do believe he did, certainly he
is not dead, although you think he was drowned; and if it be so, what greater
cause of joy could you have. Ah Sister (said she, turning the other way, and
pushing her from her) for gods sake do not torment me with any such language,
Celadon is too certainly dead, by my folly; and I am most miserable in the
loss. I see the gods are not yet contented with those tears, that I have
already shed for him, since they have brought me hither, to give me a fresh
subject for more: But, since they will have it so, I will turn my self wholly
into tears; and though I cannot wholly wash away my offense by them, yet, I
will never cease, until I have lost either my eyes, or my life, or both. I do
not tell you, said Phillis, that Celadon is alive; but I must tell you, that if
he did write these Verses, I must of necessity conclude, that he is not dead.
Sister, said she, our Druides tell us, that we have souls which never die,
although our bodies do; and so in that sense he may live. I have heard say,
answered Phillis, that it is our duty to give a burial unto the dead, and to
put a piece of money in their mouths, to pay the Ferry-man, for wafting them
over the Stygian Lake; and that such as are deprived of burial, are a hundred
years wandering about the places where they lost their bodies; and how can you
tell, but that the soul of Celadon having lost his body, and being denied that
charitable office, may be wandering about the fatal River of Lignon, and still
retain the same affection and thoughts which he had before? Ah Sister, said
Astrea, these are but mere phantasms; Celadon is certainly dead, and these are
the testimonies of his affection, and my folly. What I do say, answered
Phillis, is grounded upon more then phantaims and Chimeraes, and I hint then
upto you, out of my desire to contribute unto your tranquillity. I do know it,
Sister replied Astrea; but consider, that if I should think Celadon alive, and
afterward find him to be dead, nothing could preserve my life; this would be,
to see him die twice: and the gods, and my own heart do know, how near his
first death did bring me to my grave. Yet, you may receive this satisfaction by
it, answered Phillis, as to know, that death could not extinguish the affection
which he bore unto you. That, said Astrea, conduces unto his glory and my
punishment. Nay rather, said Phillis, this construction may be made of it, that
he being dead, does clearly and without a cloud see, the pure and entire
affection which you bear unto him, and that the jealousy, which caused your
anger against him, did proceed only from the superabundance of your love; for I
have heard say that our souls separated from the bodies, do still see and
behold them. This, answered Astrea, would be the greatest satisfaction that I
can receive; for I do not doubt, but as my imprudence did give him great cause
of grief, so this sight of my affection would give him contentment: For, if I
did not love him above all the world, and if I do not continue still in the same
affection may the gods never love me. These two Shepheardesses were talking
thus, whilst Diana entertained the rest of the Company, sometimes in reading
the papers which she found upon the Altar and sometimes a king Paris, Tircis,
and Silvander, what was their thoughts of these things. There is not any here
but knows, said Paris, but this Picture was made for Astrea and conceives,
that he who put it in this place, does not only love, but adore her. For my
part, said Silvander, if Celadon were not dead, I should believe these
Characters to be his. How said Tircis, Celadon who was drowned some three or
four months since in the River Lignon? The same, answered Silvander. Did he,
said Tircis, love Astrea? I have heard say, that there was a most inveterate
enmity betwixt their Families.

The beauty of this shepherdess, answered Silvander, was greater then their
hatred; and since he is dead, I hope there is no danger in saying so. Nor do I
believe there would, said Diana, if he were alive; for, he being so discreet
and Astrea so wise, their affection could not offend any. Astrea hearing what
they said of her, though her eyes were not yet dry, she could not choose but
answer them: These tears, said she, which I cannot hide, do testify, that
Celadon did love me; but these Manuscripts do testify, that Astrea has rather
offended against Love then Duty: But, to give him satisfaction after his death,
I will ingenuously confess, more then decency would permit me when he was
alive, and say, I did love him. Upon these words, all the company came to her,
and Diana showing her the papers which she had in her hand: Is this said she,
Celadon's writing? Doubtless it is, answered Astrea. Then, said Diana it is a
sign he is not dead. Unto which Phillis answered, That is it of which we have
been speaking; but she tells me, that Celadon's soul, which wonders about the
River Lignon, did write them. Why, said Tircis, was he not buried? That Is the
reason, said Astrea, why he wanders thus; for they never made him a Tomb.
This, said Paris, was most carelessly done, to let so brave a soul as Celadon's
suffer so long pain for want of a little care. You may see, said Tircis, how
little those that are alive do care for the dead; so as I esteem them to be
wise, who bury themselves alive. Indeed, said Diana, it is very strange, that
this shepherd; so much loved and lamented, not only by all his Kindred, but by
all the Neighborhood, should not have that charitable office done him, which
many have, who are less loved. Perhaps said Thorsander, the gods did so ordain
it, to the end, he should not so soon have that place he had so much loved, and
being recompensed with his love, he had rather stay some while near her he had
adored. However, I conceive, said Tircis, that even as our bodies cannot be in
the Air, Water, or Fire, without much pain, because being ponderous and heavy,
they must perpetually be unquiet, as long as they are in such pure Elements, as
have no solidity in them to rest upon; so the soul, separated from the body,
not being in its proper Element, as long as it is amongst us, is in continual
pain, until it enter into the Elizian fields, where it will find another
Earth, another Air, another Water, and another Fire, more perfect, proper, and
suitable unto its nature, then unto our dull, and gross bodies. And therefore
when my dearest, and so much loved Cleon, dyed, I was in a resolution not to
bury her, that I might have retained her dearest soul the longer about me; but,
our Druides convinced me of that error, and told me, as I have told you. For my
part, said Sivander, since for went of burial, men shall stay some time longer
in the place where they dyed, I heartily desire all my friends, that if I do
die in this Country not to bury me, that I may the longer look upon my fairest
Mistress; for, there are no joys in the Elizian fields comparable unto that
blessed vision, nor any pains that a soul can suffer, by being out of its
proper Element, but are recompensed by it.

That would do very well, said Tircis, if after we be separated from our
bodies, we did retain our affections: but, our Sages tell us, that our passions
are only ^ibutes of humanity, and the gods did bestow them upon us, to the end,
the race of men should not fail; but after death, souls being immortal, and
not in a capacity of engendring, our Passions and our Loves are lost in it,
even as our desires of eating, or drinking, or sleeping. But, said Silvander,
if Celadon did write these Papers, it is not likely he has lost his affection
and love unto this Shepherdess. Who knows, said Tircis, but that the gods,
who are infinitely just, were pleased to give him that particular satisfaction,
in recompense of that pure and sacred affection which he had unto that
shepherdess? If so, said Silvander, why should not I hope to find the gods
as just and favorable unto me, as him, since my affection shall not yield unto
him or any other, either in purity or zeal? But, said Astrea if the gods do
show him this as a favor, would it not be impiety, to deprive him of that
contentment, by endeavoring to give him a burial, and so set him out of this
world? No, said Tircis, for the gods do favor him in it, only as a comfort in
the pains which he is continually in, being constrained to be absent from
heaven, so contrary to its nature.

The Shepherds were thus discoursing, when Phillis, espied a place, which
seemed, as if some had been upon their knees, for such marks were imprinted
upon the earth; and because it was just opposite to the Altar, and she also
spying a piece of Parchment close by it, she went to see what it was, and
opening it, she found these words.

A Prayer unto the goddess Astrea.
OH great and puissant goddess, although your perfections cannot be equaled,
and though all our sacrifices come infinitely short of your merits; yet, I
beseech thee, let them be acceptable in thy sight, since if you should receive
none, but such as are worthy of you, the gods themselves must be the Victim.
This which I here most humbly offer unto your divinity, is a Heart, and a Will,
which were never dedicated unto any, but only your self. If this offering be
acceptable, look with the eyes of pity upon that soul, who ever found them
full of love, and by an act worthy of your self, ^rid it out of that pain, in
which it has long languished. I do most heartly beg this favor by the name of
Celadon, if ever the name of your most faithful and affectionate servant, can
merit from your divinity so much glorious satisfaction.

Phillis making a sign with her hand, and calling Astrea: Come hither, Sister
(said she) see what Celadon asks, and you will find what Tircis said, to be
true. Then, all coming near, she read aloud this prayer, whilst Astrea did
accompany every word with a tear, though she did strive all that possibly she
could to restrain them. When Phillis had ended: Truly, said Astrea, I shall
satisfy his most just demand; and if his Parents will not build him a
Sepulcher, which they are obliged unto by Consanguinity, he shall receive one
from me as his friend. Upon this word, going from that place, all the Company
went back to Hylas, who was not idle all the while; for, seeing them all very
serious and intentive in the other Arbor, he came into that where was the
twelve Statutes of the Laws of Love; and taking the Picture in his hand, he
read them, then altered them according to his own humor; and having a quick
and ready Wit, he changed them thus.

The twelve Statutes of Love, falsified by the Inconstant Hylas.
The first.
HE that is a perfect Lover, and a just,
And true, never love infinitely must.
Extremes in Love are never counted best,
Mediums will ever make a Lover blessed,
And happy be: All Mediocrity,
Sign is of prudence and fidelity.
The second.
Let him no puissant god of Love adore,
But let him love some One, and many more:
Above one Object, always let his eye
Still look upon, and wantonly epsy.
It is decreed by Loves licentious Law,
That he his Bliss from many Fountains draw.
The third.
To many fair Ones, and their service, he
Must dedicate himself and liberty;
He must not heart and all delights resign
To one, and only her, himself confine.
The rate he sets, upon himself, must be,
As many love him, so himself must he.
The fourth.
If he advancement to himself does seek,
Then let it be, in loving every cheek,
Which can give love a life; let him confess,
In loving many is his happiness,
Which he does only aim at, and aspire,
To make the luster of his glory higher.
The fifth.
Let his affection to his Mistress, be
So dear, so sweet, so full of amity,
As the fruition of her he shall prise,
Above all stains of honor that can rise.
If hers and his come in comparison,
None must be dearer to him than his own.
The sixth.
If any offer to asperse the fame,
Or cast a blemish on his Mistress name,
Let him conceal his anger^ give no lie
To him that offers such a calumny.
If any dare to put affronts upon her,
Let him not die, to vindicate her honor.
The seventh.
Then let his love arrive at such a height;
As that his judgment may be pure and straight
All Suns, and Stars, and glories of the skies,
He value must superior to her eyes.
Perfection in the abstract do not deem her,
Nor think him guilty, that does less esteem her.
The eighth.
He must inflamed be with fits of Love,
So temperately hot, as they may move
His pulse to beat a gentle temper: He
Must never sigh, and pule, and half dead be,
Nor ever with such violencies swell,
As, ask him what he ailes, he cannot tell.
The ninth.
He must not quit his habitation,
Nor think his soul can live by love alone.
He must some being have, besides the score,
Of her, whom he does worship and adore.
Not into hor transformed so to be,
As that without her eyes he cannot see.
The tenth.
Those days that in her service are not past,
He must not think as absolutely lost:
Some good occasion may reward the pain,
Though it never bring him to that heaven again:
And when his body does a distance find,
Let him contented be within his mind.
The eleventh.
For her, he must not derogate from reason,
Or welcome bid to Manacles and Prison:
Can he intorments, think himself at ease,
Though he thereby the fairest Saint should please.?
Since all without expectance of rewards,
The honor vain to love her, he regards.
The twelfth.
He must not think it impossible his Love,
Should sooner then the firmest Rock remove.
If any, such advice to him shall use,
Let him as Orthodox the same peruse.
Who so shall ever such advice over move,
He Is far from any Schismatic in Love.
Hylas made all the haste that possibly he could, in altering these twelve
Statutes, and that the alteration might be less discemed, he first erased out
what he thought fit with the point of his knife, then did polish it with the
haft of his knife, then did write upon it what he had changed; and when all was
done, he set it in its place again, and went out, unperceived by any; so as
when they came out, he was found sitting at the entry, as if he were fast
asleep: and because sad Astrea, going out the first, did take no notice of him,
he lay still, and would not stir; but when Phillis, who came after, spied him
in this lazy posture: How now, Hylas, (said she unto him) how have you spent
your time, whilst we have been viewing the greatest rarities, that are in all
the Country? Faith, I have some thoughts (answered Hylas, rising up lazily, and
rubbing his eyes) which trouble me, more then ever I did imagine they could.
What are they, said Phillis? I will tell you, said he, if you will promise to
do one thing form, which I shall ask. I will not engage my word, said she,
before I know what it is. You may do it, said Silvander by adding conditions,
that he shall ask nothing which is unfitting for a wife and virtuous
shepherdess to grant. Upon that condition, said Phillis, I will. Know then,
fairest Mistress, (said Hylas) that I do believe, this place to be really a
sacred Grove, which is dedicated unto some great divinity; for, ever since I
heard Silvander read the Laws of Love, I have had such inward remorse, as I
cannot be at quiet within my self; conceiving, that I have hitherto lived in a
most gross error, and contrary unto those Statutes, which the god, who is
adored in this place, has commanded unto all those who will love; insomuch as
I am ready to abjure my error, and submit my self unto the Laws which he
has ordained: There was only one thing which hindered nie from doing it, whilst
you were within the sacred Grove, and I will declare it unto you: You know,
fairest Mistress, that ever since there was any sympathy betwixt my heart and
you, and since Hylas first called himself your servant, I never found in all
this Country a more contradicting spirit, nor an humor more antipathyous unto
mine, then that of Silvander; upon all occasions he has thwarted me, and used
all artifice to subvert whatsoever I intend; as in that unjust Sentence which
he gave against Laonice, only because I spoke for her; otherwise he could not
be so gross as to prefer one that was dead, before so fair and accomplished a
shepherdess. Calling these things into my memory and consideration, I had a
conceit, that he read the Ordinances of this god after another manner then they
are written, and only to cross me: Therefore I do conjure you, not only by
your promise, but the honor you owe unto Love, and the deity of this place,
that you will take so much pains as to fetch me hither those Laws, that I may
read them my self, be satisfied in my doubt of Silvander, and follow those
Laws all the rest of my life. Is this request uncivil, Silvander, and unfit
to be made unto a wise and virtuous shepherdess? No, said Silvander; but I
rather think it in vain. No, said Hylas; but let us make another promise to one
another. Promise me before all this Company, that you will follow those
Statutes which are there written, as long as you live, and I will do the like.
I shall, said he, most willingly; for I have long since promised the same unto
the gods. You do promise then, said Hylas. I do, said Silvander, and that
without any reciprocal promise; for, I love you better, then to make you
perjured. For my part, answered Hylas, I do swear unto you, calling to witness
the gods of this place, and let them punish, which of us two shall first fail.
I do assure you, said Phillis, that seeing so great a change in Hylas, I shall
most willingly let him see the twelve Statutes. Then going into the Arbor, and
making an humble reverence, she took them, and brought them unto this
unconstant Lover, who, with bare head and knee upon the ground, did say, I do
receive these sacred Laws, as coming from a god, and brought by a goddess,
protesting and vowing unto the great gods or this sacred Grove, and calling all
this Company as witnesses, that I will all my life observe them as religiously,
as if the god Hesius, Tautates, and Tharamis had ordained them. Then rising up,
still bare headed, he kissed them, and being environed with all the Company, he
began to read them with a loud voice. But when Silvander heard him read, that
one ought not to love infinitely: Fie, shepherd, said he, read truly, and you
will find it otherwise. I think I do, said he, and showed them unto Phillis,
who read them as he did. This cannot be, (aid Silvander); then coming nearer,
he desired to see them. I see, said Hylas, that he who uses to deceive others,
does think, others will deceive him: I doubt you will read them otherwise then
they are writ. I shall read them truly, said Silvander; but pray let me see
them. Methinks (said Hylas) it may suffice, that Phillis saw them, and you may
very well trust her. I swear (said Phillis) that Hylas read as was written, and
no otherwise: I cannot believe it said Silvander, unless I see. Then read them
your self, said Hylas, so you will read them truly. Then Silvander took them,
and swearing he would read them without any alteration, he began to read: But,
when be found Hylas was in the right, he knew not what to think; and wondered
more, when looking further, he found the sense of every Verse altered. Now
Mistress, said Hylas, what do you think? had I not good reason to suspect
Silvander, since, you see, he read quite contrary to what was written? Come,
Shepherd, said he to Silvander, what do you say to all this? Will you be a man
of your word, or will you be false? Silvander answered not a word but was more
amazed at this, than any adventure he ever met with; but still looking upon the
Statutes, Diana came unto him, and looking also upon them, was also amazed:
Silvander, said she, tell me upon your faith, and confess the truth, when you
readd them at the first, were they written as they are now? I protest, fairest
Mistress, said he, when I readd them, they were not as they are now. Then
Diana taking them into her hand, did look upon the writing a little nearer;
which Hylas perceiving and fearing his juggling should be discovered. Come,
come, Silvander, said he what needs all this talk? I am ready to keep my word,
and will you be perjured? You take me very short, said Silvander; and believe
it; I have some great suspicion of knavery; for I am sure, that the Statutes
which I saw, were as then I read them, and now I see they are quite contrary:
so as I am much in doubt, that there is some fallacy. This is but a very bad
excuse, said Hylas; how do you think a new Table could be made upon such a
sudden? As they were thus talking, Diana, who looked upon them very narrowly,
she found, that though the Ink was alike, yet there was some difference on
some Characters, and then rubbing them with her finger, the new written went
off, and the rasure appeared; then holding the Parchment betwixt the Sun and
her eye, all the rasures and old writing easily appeared, which having found
out: Now, said Diana, I can end both your disputes, for in one and the same
place, you may find what you both seek for; you, Silvander, may find it
written as you did read, and you Hylas, as you did correct it. Then coming to
them, she did demonstrate it unto them both; for betwixt the Sun and the eye
one might plainly see, where the Parchment had been scratched, and might,
though dimly, see, what had been old written, and what newly. Every one of the
Company did confirm what she said, and all flocking about Hylas: Come,
shepherd, said they, tell us truly how you did this. Hylas seeing himself
discovered by the strict observance of Diana, was almost forced to confess the
truth; yet, not before he had sworn many an oath that it was the injustice of
those Laws, which moved him unto it; for, said he, they are so very
unreasonable, as I could not possibly forbear correcting them as they ought to
be. None could forbear laughing, to hear him talk so, but more, when they
considered, into what a damp Silvander was struck at the first. And because it
grew very late, and they had stayed very long in that place, Phillis would have
carried back the Statutes to the place from whence she had them: But all were
of opinion, that it was fit they should first be corrected as they were at
first; and that Hylas, to extenuate some part of his offense, in entering into
that place which he was forbidden, and for daring to falsify the Statutes of
Love, he was censured to erase all that himself had written, which accordingly
he did: More, said he in obedience unto my Mistress, then to appease the anger
of Love or Silvander. Take heed, said Silvander, that this be not too much
presumption and infidelity Had Hylas heard these last words doubtless he would
have replied; but he being gone into the Arbor, no answer was given. In the
mean time, all the company went their ways, and took a little path which
Silvander had chosen. And because Astrea was out of hopes to hear any more
news of Celadon; that could please her, she had a mind to return back, and in
order to that, she left Tircis, and came to him Methinks shepherd, said she
unto him it is too late to go any further, and night will surprise us, before
we can return to our Cabins. That Is true, said the shepherd; yet that,
methinks, should not hinder you from going on, since we are so near the end of
our journey; and though you should return, the day would not serve you above
half the way. But, said Astrea, where should we lie? The place unto which I
shall conduct you, said Silvander, is not far from the Temple of the good
goddess and I am sure the venerable Chrisante will bid you all very welcome. I
would know, answered Astrea, whether this be agreeable unto my Companions. And
then staying till the way was a little broader, she made Silvander's
proposition unto them. There was not one, who did not very well approve of it,
since it was impossible to return unto their Towns by day light.

In this resolution then, they went on and Silvander not quitting Astrea, did
show her the Wood where he found the Letter, which caused this voyage. This
said Astrea, is a place very retired to receive any Letters in. You will more
think it so, said he, when you are there; for, it is the most salvage and rude
place, and the least frequented, of any about all the River Lignon. So as none
could hit the way said Astrea, except you and Love. For my part, said he, I
know what it is, and as for Love. I will be silent; for, I have heard say, that
sometimes when he would throw flames into a heart, he has burnt himself; and
who can tell whether he did not so, by the beauty of my Mistress? and if any
thing cure him, it is doubtless the Fillet which he has before his eyes. Ah
Silvander! (said the Shepherdess) that Fillet does not hinder, but he can see
when he pleases, and his Arrows hit so right upon the mark they are aimed at,
as it is not likely one that is blind did shoot them. I have seen, wise
shepherdess (said Silvander) a blind man, who could hit the way unto every
house, and turn at every turning in the Town, having gotten it by a long
custom. And why may we not well say, that Love, who is the prime and eldest of
all the gods, has by a long accustomacy, learned to hit the hearts of men,
though he be blind; and to show you, that it is more by custom then skill,
observe, that he loves us only in the eyes, and yet hits our hearts: If he were
not blind, do you think he would wound with Love so many unequal persons,
Superious with Inferiors, and Shepherds with Queens. But I speak this as a
person interested, for I, that does not know what I am, it has caused me to
love Diana, whose merits are above the degree of any shepherds, and it has
made Paris, who is Son unto the Prince of Druides, to love a shepherdess. As
for your merits answered Astrea, you do equal the perfections of Diana, and
Diana, by her virtue, does transcend the grandeur of Paris; so as the
inequality is not so great, as to make you accuse Love of blindness. Silvander
stood mute at this reply; not, but that he could easily have answered, but
because he was sorry, he had by his words given knowledge of his affection, and
repented of them, fearing it would offend Diana, if she should know of it. But
by good fortune, his words were well addressed; for Astrea, knowing what pure
and sincere affection he bore unto Diana, she would most willingly have left
him all assistance. And the nature of all such as know how to love well, is,
never to prejudice the Love of another, unless it be prejudicial unto their
own:

By this time, they were come unto the Wood, and therefore Silvander said unto
her: This, wise shepherdess, is the Wood which you have so much longed to
see, but being already Sunset, we have not time to view it. If we do find in
it, said she, as many rarities, as we did in that from whence we came, I shall
think our journey and time very well employed. With such discourse as this,
they entered into the Wood, and it grew so dark, as they could not see one
another, nor follow, but by the voice; then going further into the Wood, he so
lost his way, as he was forced to confess, that he knew not where he was: The
cause of this was a Plant over which he walked, which they of the Country do
vulgarly call Wander-weed, because it has a quality, to make those that tread
upon it to wander out of their way, and, as the common bruit was, there was
much of it in that Wood. Whether this be true or false, I cannot tell; but so
it was, that Silvander and all the Company could not find their way again all
that night, though he turned and winded almost through all the Wood, and at the
last, they were all so wildred, as they were constrained to follow one another,
by taking hold of each others clothes; for the night was so dark, as if it were
so purposely, to hinder them from getting out of the Wood. Hylas, who by chance
was got betwixt Astrea and Phillis: I begin, Mistress, said he, to hope well
in the service which I have done you. Why, said Phillis? Because, said he you
are very much afraid to lose me and whereas I was wont to follow you, now you
follow me.

It Is true, said she; but you must thank Silvander for it, whom you say is your
greatest enemy. I cannot tell said Hylas, whether I should more thank him for
the favor I receive from you, or chide him, for the pains I have taken. You
may judge of that afterward, said Phillis, when you have put the pleasures and
the pains which you have received, both into a balance. I wish, Mistress, said
Hylas, that you would hold the balance, and judge which was the heavier. Every
one did laugh at the good will of Hylas; and Silvander, who heard it, answered
him only thus: I confess, Hylas, that I am a blind man, who leads many others.
But the worst is, said Hylas, they are blind only because they trusted too much
unto your eyes. If you had been out of the Company, said Silvander, we had not
been so blind. Why, said Hylas, did I put out your eyes? No, said Silvander,
but you did take away our means of seeing, holding us so long in discourses of
your inconstancy, and by falsifying the sacred Laws, which did put us upon the
night. Silvander, said Hylas, you put me in mind of those, who when they had
found good Wine, did blame it, because they were drunk: Good friends (may the
Wine say) why did ye drink so much? And good friend, Silvander, why did you
hearken to me so long? Did I nail your ears to any post? No, said Silvander,
there were stronger chains in that company and place, then yours. But be it as
it will, we are now so wandered out of the way, either by reason of the night,
of by going over the plant Wonder-weed, as there is no hopes of getting into
the way again, until it be day, or at the least, until the Moon do shine.
What Is then to be done, said Paris? No better course, said Silvander, then to
rest ourselves under one of these Trees, until the Moon do show her self.
Every one approved of the motion: And the shepherds spreading all their Coats
upon the ground, under the dryest Tree, the shepheardesses did sit upon them,
and so rested altogether till the Moon appeared.

Although the night was already far spent, when these shepheardesses did sit
themselves down upon the Coats of the Shepherds; yet, being unaccustomed to
such a Canopy as the Cope of heaven, and unused to sit upon the grass in the
night, they talked a long while, before any sleep did seize upon their eyes:
And because the horror of the night did possess them with fears, they laid
themselves close upon an heap. Diana being next Mandonthe, did ask her, what
fortune brought her into that Country? Wise Diana, answered she, the story of
it is both too long and too tedious; let this, I beseech you, serve for all,
that the same Love that is so Regent in your Villages, has as great a
Sovereignty over Ladies and Knights; and it is it which brought me hither into
this state, although my quality has raised me above it. If it be only your
fears of being tedious to us, said Phillis, I dare undertake for all the
Company, that this objection ought not to hinder you, from giving us a relation
of it; for we have all longed to have the satisfaction from you: And I conceive
no time more convenient than now, since we are without the hearing of any
shepherd. The reason, said Diana, why I in particular do desire it, is,
because those who see us assunder, do say, that we resemble one another very
much so as methinks, I am as much concerned in your fortune as my own, and
obliged to enquire after it. It would be great glory unto me, said Madonthe, to
resemble such a Beauty as yours; but I wish, for your tranquillities sake, that
your fortunes may never resemble mine. I am much obliged unto you, said Diana,
for your good will; but every one has their own loads, and knows best where
the shoe does pinch them, and others are not concerned further then by way of
compassion: Therefore I beseech you give satisfaction unto our request Then I
beseech you give me leave, said Mandonthe, to speak in a low voice, that the
shepherds, who are near us, may not hear; for, I should be extremely ashamed,
they should be witnesses of my errors, especially Thersander, for some reasons
which you shall understand by the sequel of my discourse. Then she began in
this manner.

The History of Damon and Mandonthe.
IT is best for me, wise and discreet Company, to relate the story of my life
unto you by night, that darkness may shadow my shame in relating my follies,
for so must I praise those occasions, which made me quit the quality unto which
I was born, and assume this in which you see me: For, though I am now in this
habit, with a sheep-hook in my hand, yet, I am no shepherdess, but descended
from Parents more noble. My Father, following the fortunes of Thierres, had
gotten such reputation of a Soldier, that in his absence, he commanded all his
Armies; not because he was a Visigot as he was, but because he had great
authority among the Aquitains. This King did so love and honor him, that he
was obliged to dedicate himself wholly unto him; in whose service, besides the
Estate which he inherited from his Ancestors, he so enlarged his possessions,
as there was none in all Aquitain that could vie with him in riches. Having
lived thus many years, his greatest grief was, that he had no other Child but
me. And though his death was sudden, yet it was with so much honor, as I hold
it to be the best piece of his fortune: For, after he had raised the Siege of
Orleans, and pursued Attiles as far as the Cathalaunique Country, Thierres,
Merovea, and Etius, gave him Battle. As fortune was, my Father fought that day
upon the right hand of his King, who had the left Wing, and Merovea the Right;
and almost the whole strength of Attiles was upon Thierres side. After a long
fight, the King of the Visigots was killed, and my Father also, who, after he
had received a hundred wounds, was found upon the body of his King, to defend
whom, he received those blows which were made at him; which Torrismond, his
Successor and Son, did take so well, as he buried his Father and mine both in
one Tomb; and after the Battle was won engraved most honorable Inscriptions,
to his eternal memory. When my Father dyed, I was about seven or eight years
of age, and began then to resent the rigours of Fortune: For Leontidas, who
succeeded my Father in his Charge, and whom Torrismond loved above all the
Cavaliers in Aquitain, did use such artifice, as I was committed unto his
Guardianship, and almost ravished from my own Mother, under a pretense, which
they called, Reason of State saying, that having such great possessions, and so
many places of strength he would see, that I married my self unto such a one,
as was very well affected unto the service of Torrismond. Thus was I deprived
both of Father and Mother, the one, by death; the other, by reason of State:
Yet, Fortune was so favorable unto me, in the honesty and sweetness of
Leontidas, that I could not desire better offices then those I received from
him, nor wanted he any thing, but the name of a Father. But his Wife was of
another nature, for she used me so cruelly, as I may say, I could not hate
death more then she.

Now Leontidas his design was, to educate me, until I was at Marriage estate,
and afterward to bestow me upon his Nephew, whom he intended to adopt his
Heir, having no Children of his own. But constraint being the greatest means to
hinder a generous spirit from complacency, it happened so, as his Nephew had
never any affection unto me, nor I to him, both of us conceiving our Fortunes
so noble, as we needed not any additions to make them greater. These
considerations, and some others more secret, did hinder our affections unto one
another: But, when I came unto age of more discretion, I found greater
impediments then these: For, the Courtship of many young Gallants, who
addressed themselves with abundance of honor and respect, made me think, the
faint and hollow love of Leontidas his Nephew did dishonor me. On the other
side, he being vexed, that I should so slight him, he retreated, so as I never
saw him, but as a stranger, of which I was not a little glad. And though the
respect which every one did bear unto Leontidas, by reason of the extraordinary
favors which Torrismond showed him did stave off many from openly declaring
themselves; yet, there was a Cavalier, a near Kinsman unto Leontidas, who,
notwithstanding all those considerations did undertake to serve me, though he
had but small hopes to obtain. At the first, he had no design to embarque
himself in good earnest, but only to keep himself out of idleness, and to
make it appear, he had both merit and courage enough, to love and court the
love, of her, that was esteemed the highest Match in all the Court. When this
young Gallant began to serve me, he was a man without any respect, violent, and
quick, and so courageous, that the praise of Temerity was more his due, than
that of Valiant. But, since Love took him into discipline, he changed all his
imperfections into so many. Virtues, and made him so amiable as since, he is
grown the very pattern of civility and gallantry, unto all the Cavaliers of
Torrismond. His name was Damon, near kinsman unto Leontidas, of whom the King
had at the first no good opinion; but since he began to change, the King also
changed his mind. But Leontidas being one, that was extremely observant of
every ones actions, he took such notice of his design, that he could not
endure him, because he thwarted his aims, of giving me unto his Nephew: And to
give a stop unto this new courtship, he did so peremptorily forbid me from
seeing him, and him, from speaking unto me, as both of us were extremely
offended at him. We, loving better because forbidden had ever since a greater
desire to see each other than before, so as you may believe, that this
prohibition was it only, which did oblige me to it. When Damon began first to
court me, his humor was so displeasing unto me, as I could not endure him;
but, after Leontidas with menaces and harsh language did expressly forbid me
seeing him, and seemed to distrust me: he vexed me so extremely, as I resolved
with my self never to love any other: And therefore I did with all possible
diligence correct his vices, which his nature did most incline him unto;
sometimes blaming them in others and sometimes telling him, that my humor was
not to love those that were addicted to them. Thus forming him into a new
model, when I saw the conditions of this young Cavalier were changed, I loved
him much more, then if he had begun to serve me with the same qualities and
perfections; for, every one is much better pleased with the works of their own
hands, then any others: yet, I did carry my self so discreetly toward him as
none could perceive that I did love him, and stood so upon my guard, as he had
not so much boldness, as to declare his mind unto me by his words: But at
last, thinking that all his service was lost, if I did not know his intentions
he resolved to take more heart, and put it to the venture: and because he
thought it more expedient to do it by Letter then Tongue, after a long
disputation in his mind, he writ this.

Damon's Letter unto Mandonthe.
MADAM, It is extreme temerity, to love an owner of so eminent perfections;
but, I conceive it my duty to serve and adore them. And if you will extinguish
the affection of those who love you, you must also extinguish those perfections
which cause you to be loved; which if you will not, do not think it strange you
should be disobeyed; for, force does always excuse an offense, that is
committed against their will; and necessity does not acknowledge those Laws,
which the gods themselves do impose.


He was not a little perplexed, how he should bring it to pass, that I should
see this Letter, for he knew, that I would not receive it unless by some
Artifice. And see what inventions Love has. He came unto me seeming to
entertain me with some Court-newes, and told me two or three passages which
happened very lately: at the last, he told me, that he had discovered a new
League of Love, but feared to tell me the Parties; because the Lady was one of
my friends, and the Cavalier one of his. Why, said I unto him, do you think me
to be so indiscreet, as I cannot conceal what is not fit to be known? Oh no,
said he; but my fear is, lest you should be an ill willer unto my friend.

And why so, answered I? a pure and honest Love cannot offend any one. I
plainly saw; (sweet shepheardesses) that he was perplexed, and knew not what to
do; but I could not imagine, that it was any business concerning his own
particular, since if he had any such mind, he might have spok unto me long
since, having had opportunities to do it: And therefore I was very urgent with
him, and more perhaps then I ought to be. And at the last he told me, that as
for their names, he durst not tell them for several considerations, but he
would let me see a Letter which he had found that morning. Upon this, he put
his hand in his pocket, and showed me the Letter which he had writ unto me,
which, without any scruple, I took and read, but knew not his hand, because I
had never seen it before. But as I had before a little desire to know their
names, so after the reading of it, my desire was extreme, and was more urgent
then before: At which he smiled, and put me off with some bad excuses. Why
Damon, said I, will you not give me so much satisfaction, as to tell me what I
ask? I am afraid (said he) that I shall offend you, if I should obey; for she;
unto whom this Letter is addressed is very much a friend of yours. Nay,
certainly, said I, you will much more offend me by your disobedience. Then I am
(said he) betwixt two great extremes; but, since the fault which I shall commit
is by your command, it will be the less, and therefore I will obey. Then
taking the Letter, he read it aloud; but when he came to the end, he stopped, and
named no body. See, fairest Shepherdess, the strange effects of Love;
sometimes it hurries the poorest and basest spirits into incredible impudence,
and other times it makes the highest courage to tremble at such things, as the
meanest person would not dorre at.

Damon serves for an example of this; since he, whom no dangers could make
start, had not so much courage, as to tell his name unto a woman, and a woman,
whom he knew, wished him no harm. But, as his courage failed him, so my
understanding more; for I might well have known by his fear, that it nearly
concerned him; and I well believe, that it was Love which did infatuate me,
intending by us, to make his puissance the better known unto others; otherwise,
certainly I had seen it since I did love him, and since, they say, the eyes of
Love looks though stone-walls. However it was, I must confess, I did not
apprehend it; and seeing him stand silent: What, Damon, said I, must I know no
more? Truly I did think, that I had a greater power over you then I see I have.
From thence it is, answered he, that my silence proceeds; for, your too much
power over me; makes me mute, and yet what I have said might have sufficed you;
for what can I declare more, after I have read the Letter, and you heard my
voice? How, Damon, (said I to him, extremely amazed) was it your self that writ
it? It was I, said he and he would down his head and looked upon the ground. Then I
beseech you tell me, said I, unto whom it is directed? Since it is your
pleasure to know it (said he directly) it is unto the fair Mandonthe. Upon this
word, he was silent, purposely, as I believe, to see how I would receive his
declaration. I must confess, I was much surprised, for I expected any other
answer then that; and though I did love him, and that with a resolved will; yet
honor which ought to have the first place in our souls, did make me think,
his words did offend me: And though I knew, that I my self was the cause of
his boldness, yet would I not excuse him upon that, conceiving, that
notwithstanding he ought to have held his peace. The truth is, the love I had
unto him was a good Advocate for him, and though it could not quite qualify my
resentments of honor, yet it did infinitely sweeten them. At the last I
answered him thus: Damon, I did little expect this treason from you, in whom I
durst have trusted, as in my self; but, by this act, you have taught me never
to trust in any young and rash person; yet, I will not lay the whole blame upon
you, because I my self am partly guilty, in living with you heretofore as I
have don: but, your over boldness shall cause me to be more advised for the
future; I shall hereafter take heed, both of you, and all that resemble you.
Madam, said he unto me, if you call it treason to love you, I must confess, I
have betrayed you, and shall do as long as I live, knowing, that neither you,
nor any in the world, can imagine the grandeur of my affection: And if you do
think, that my youth made me so bold, I shall maintain it against all men, that
never was age more prudent then this youth, nor ever any prudence more wise
then this temerity, which you blame me for. If I have failed, and that you are
guilty of it, your manner of living with me is not the cause, but because being
so admirably fair, and full of all perfection, it is impossible any should look
upon you, and not commit the same fault. Alas, did you not tell me, that a pure
and perfect Love could not offend any? And why should you now judge otherwise
against me? But, if my words do offend you, here is Damon that spoke them,
offers his breast unto you, and the heart that adores you; chastise him as you
shall please, and if he refuse any thing you shall doom him unto (unless
forbidding him to serve you) hold him for the worst of Traitors, and the most
unworthy of your favors of any man alive. Had you been contented (said I unto
him) to have given me some testimonies of your affection, by your humble
respect, and not by such impudent language, I had then found some reasons to
love you, as now I do to hate you. Do you think, Damon, I can put up these
injuries without revenge? Do you not remember who my Father was? Have you been
ignorant of my life, and what care I have had, not only to be as I ought to be,
but also to preserve my fame from all manner of scandal? Consider these
things, and if you do continue, you will make me persecute you by all the ways
I can invent Madam (answered he presently) never set before me any pains you
can imagine; he that can endure the anger of your fair eyes, need not to fear
all the torments in the Universe. Do not think I am ignorant who you are, nor
from whom you are descended; your virtues are too deeply engraved on my soul,
and I am too much obliged unto those, who gave you a being in the world, ever
to lose the memory of them. But if I have only offended you in words, and not
out of any design, but to do you service, forget, Madam, I beseech you, and
forgive my tongue; command me to be dumb, so you will let me adore you in my
heart, and I will never speak again. But, if you think your reputation, of
which you are so justly tender, would be blemished, by my telling the world
that I love you, you would take the only way to force me unto it, if you should
do according to your menaces; for, it would be impossible, but my affection
would break out, and so that which I now tell you in private, would be
published all over the Court; and, would not that much more offend you? Before
you pronounce your doom against me, I beseech you, Madam, consider well upon
what I have said, and that if my fault have displeased you, why should you do
worse, in publishing it unto all the world?

It would be a hard task for me (wise shepheardesses) to repeat all the reasons
which Damon alleged, and though I cannot express them well, yet I assure you
he did. I must confess, I do approve of their counsel as very good, who say,
that a Lover ought not to declare his affection unto any Lady, before he have
obliged her unto some kind of good will unto him, for then the offense which
she receives by the declaration, will be mitigated; and she will hearken unto
his words with a more favorable ear. I did approve of it, I say, at this time
by experience; for, I could not possibly part from him, though I did resent the
injury which he did me. And on the contrary, before our discourse ended, I did
consent he should love and serve me, so it was with honor and discretion. And
because Leontidas had his eye perpetually upon us, I commanded him not to see
me so often; and, to deceive him, to dissemble as well as possible he could. I
do remember, that at that time, Leontidas, though a great and a wise Captain,
yet was possessed with the love of some woman, who seeming to love him, did get
what money they could from him, yet in secret favored others. Damon composed
some Verses, which he sent unto me: And because we feared, lest if our Letters
should be lost, our names would make known, what we desired should be secret: I
called him Brother, and he me Sister. I think that I remember the Verses yet,
which were these.

Although he belch out envy at my bliss,
And vomit venom at my happiness.
Although by looking in our eyes, he see,
What he does think within our souls to be.
Although that I am not my self, he knew,
Having no life, dear Sister, but from you.
Although he plot, to make us jealous be,
And stain our actions with black calumny.
Although he should divorce me from my joy,
And all my dearest happiness destroy.
Yet, spite of fate, and him, and all that is ill,
Do what they can, yet I shall love you still.
Maugre his malice, spite of all the lies,
That bitter tongues against us can devise.
Tortures and torments, all is one to me,
Even in my grave, still yours I vow to be.
I wish this irksome Argus would employ
His hundred eyes (and not us thus annoy)
In watching of his Mistress, whom, they say,
Another loves, and yet he does her pay.
But to return from whence I digressed. Ever since, Damon did so regulate and
conform himself unto my will as I could not deny, but that I did love him; and
indeed, he was such a one, as it was hard to do otherwise, especially
considering, how his affection unto me, had made him change his vices into
virtues. And because, to delude the eyes of Leontidas, we did not speak
together, unless as we accidentally met, and never in the presence of any;
many had an opinion, that the generous spirit of Damon would not long endure
the disdain which I used toward him, and that he was quite fallen off from me.
Leontidas himself was also deceived, though his Wife, who was of a very
suspicious nature, did still assure him of the contrary; and because he did
most passionately desire to bestow me upon his Nephew, to satisfy his mind,
he set over me a Woman, whose office was, to be a spy over all my actions,
without making any show of it; her name was Leriana, and well in years, yet of
a very pleasing nature, but withal, as subtle and crafty as ever lived. I was
not so quick-sighted as Damon, for presently he discovered the design of
Leontidas. But I, finding her to be very good company, and one that did strive
all she could to please me, I could not believe she had any bad intention. He,
continually telling me, that she would deceive me, and bidding me to take heed
of her, we resolved to go more subtlely to work: And because it was not in our
dispose to turn her away, we thought it most expedient to seem, as if her
company was very pleasing and welcome unto us: By this artifice we thought we
should oblige her, not to do all the ill offices she could, but to make
Leontidas think, that we had no designs, but what we were willing he should
know.

Oh how well advised had we been, if we had put this determination into
execution, after a more solid consideration. Leriana seeing what carrasses I
used, did show her self so desirous to please me, that at the last, I began
insensibly to love her: And she on the other side, taking notice of the
applications which Damon made unto her, did believe, that he loved her; and
this belief, together with the beauty of this young Cavalier did quickly
invite Leriana to love him, so as there was none of us, but poor Damon, who was
not deceived; yet he paid the dearest for our errors, though he knew all this
from the first, yet could he not help it. I shall as long as I live remember
the words he used, when he said unto me: Sister, you do love Leriana, but take
heed she deserve it; I am afraid you will find it, when it is too late her
design is naught, both against you and me; for, the Wife of Leontidas sets her
over you, only as a spy: And believe it, the carrasses which you have
commanded me to use unto her, has made her believe, that I love her, and
therefore she wishes me no harm. So much the better, Brother, (said I unto
him) for I know you cannot be in love with her, nor shall I be jealous.
However, the good will she bears unto you, will perhaps keep him within
compass, and hinder her from doing you any hurt. Pray heavens, Sister, said
he, it falout so; but I am in fear, this affection will end quite contrary;
for, it is impossible I should continue my carrasses long unto her then, when
she finds her self deceived and slighted. Oh heavens, what mischief will she
not be apt to do unto me? No, no, said I unto him, she can never think to win
upon you by: force. I pray god, replied he, that I prove a bad diviner, and
that she do not do all she can to do us mischief. I did see, that this woman
was very kind unto him, but I could not imagine, she could be in love with
him, only thought, that her application to him, was out of her desire to be
complaisant. Now though Leontidas did treat me with all possible sweetness,
yet, the harsh usage of his Wife, made me almost weary of my life. I told
Damon, that he ought to consider the miserable life which I led; that I had no
contentment, but in him, nor consolation, but in Leriana; that I did not think,
Leontidas and his Wife had any intentions of setting Leriana as a spy; or if
they did, I thought they might be deceived, and that this woman thought her
self so obliged by my carrasses, as I am almost sure she loves me. Damon
seeing me in this opinion, could do nothing but shrug his shoulders, and durst
never since speak of it unto me, for fear of displeasing me. And see what force
this good opinion which we have of a person, has over us: I did plainly see
her applications unto Damon, but could not imagine it was with any bad
intentions conceiving it to be only out of complacency. Oh how the vizard of
dissimulation does disguise vices, and makes us mistake them for virtues? And
upon this ground, I was very angry with Damon very often, conceiving he did not
treat Leriana as he ought, since I had told him that I loved her, and that this
was the least thing he could do for me, to make much of those whom I cherished.
This Damon knew well enough, and durst not complain, lest he should make the
matter worse, only nourished in his heart an extreme hatred against her which
he had much ado to hide. On the contrary, Leriana did so grow every day in
affection to him, that seeing he took no notice of it, she could not choose but
write a Letter unto him, so full of passionate expressions, that Damon could
not dissemble, but did put herso out of hopes, as she did not only stifle her
love to him, but entertained a most deadly hatred in its room: Could she have
proved what she knew of our affection, doubtless she would have done it, in
accusing him unto Leontidas; but our happiness was, that what familiarity
soever was betwixt us, I never spoke the least thing of it before her; but,
since that I found her so subtle and crafty, as I did believe, if she could not
have made any proofs, yet she would notwithstanding inform; but that which
restrained her, as I thought, was her Letter which she writ unto Damon, by
which Leontidas might have seen her to be but a bad woman; yet, this
consideration was nothing, because she might say that she did seem to love
Damon, only to insmuate her self into the more credit: And doubtless Leontidas
and his Wife had believed her, having entertained so good an opinion of her, as
they thought her to be one of the gravest and wisest Matrous in all Gaul. But
as I was mistaken in my affection to her, so also Damon was much to blame; for,
had he showed me the Letter which Leriana writ unto him, doubtless he had
showed me my error, and we had not fallen into those misfortunes, in which
since we have lived; and the reason, as I think, why he did not, was, because
of his sharp answer which he returned, fearing, if I saw it, I should be angry
with him. But however, he kept it so secret as I knew nothing of it.

Now Leriana plotting revenge upon this Cavalier, she conceived no way would
bring it about, but such occasions as I should give her, thinking, that keeping
in familiarity with me, it was impossible but some occasions would present
themselves, which would fit her purpose; and in order to that, she courted me,
and followed me as close as my own shadow. She having a most notable piercing
wit, which would dive into the very thoughts of persons, she found, that
Thersander did love me; I say, this same Thersander whom you see here with me.
It is requisite (sage Shepheardesses) that I acquaint you with his condition,
as for his person, you see what it is; Be pleased to know therefore, that his
Father following mine in all his martial expeditions, they were both killed
the same day Thierres dyed: And this Thersander being brought up of a child in
my Fathers house; he conceived such affection to me, as the difference of our
qualities could not restrain him from looking upon me otherwise then he ought;
and perhaps I might ignorantly be the cause of it, for the great inequality
betwixt us, made me receive his services, not as a Lover, but as a domestic.
But Love, who is blind, did make him entertain such thoughts, as were far from
any grounds of reason: yet Leriana, who was far more subtle then I, having cast
her eyes upon him, and found out his intentions, she thought him a fit subject
for a beginning of her revenge: She knew very well, that amongst all the bitters
of Love, there is none so sharp as that of jealousy, nor so easily infused
into a soul that loves well; she began therefore to insinuate her self into
familiarity with him, expressing much goodwill unto him, offering him all the
assistance that lay in her power; and briefly, did by degrees get him access
unto me, and opportunities to speak with me: But finding, that his modesty
would not permit him to declare his affection unto me, she resolved to infuse
more courage into him: And in order to that, one day when they were together,
after some far-off discourse, to be a prologue unto the main business, she
told him, that she and I had often wondered, he should never make choice of any
Mistress, and that I should say, I could not imagine the cause; that it could
not be for want of will, for his age would not permit that; and therefore it
must needs be want of courage, though if he did set himself out, he might get
the favor of the fairest Lady in all the Court; and therefore that I could see
nothing but that, or that he thought none worthy of him. Thersander, who
believed her, and who was touched to the very soul: Alas, alas, said he, both
my Lady and you, have but ill observed my actions, since you have not found out
my follies. Alas, I do love, and do love in such a place, that it is better for
me to sit still in silence, then declare it, in any hopes of obtaining. Sly
Leriana knowing his meaning very well, yet seeming not to understand him, did
still turn and wind her discourse so, as she got out of him the name of
Mandonthe, but with so many excuses, as she saw it very requisite to continue
her design, in infusing more courage into him; and therefore she told him,
That she saw no such inequality betwixt me and him, but that he might very well
go on; that though Fortune did not favor him with any great Estate, nor could
derive his Pedigree from any great Ancestors; yet, his virtues did supply
those defects, and made him equal to me in merit. All this she told him, to
make him the more confident of himself, and much more which she invented; as,
That she knew by my words, that I did very much esteem him, nay, love him, and
was weary of Damon for his sake, and would often say unto her, that Damon was
changed into Thersander. Thus did she infuse as good a conceit of himself as
possibly she could. Having, thus laid a foundation for her treason, she would
now found how I stood affected; and sometimes naming Damon, as if by chance,
she would still be harping upon Thersander, and something in his commendations.
All this I did not understand, for I had never cast any eye upon him: And
finding me to speak of him as of a person indifferent, she had an opinion, that
I would receive Letters, if they were handsomely given unto me. The time of the
year was at hand, when it was customary to present New Years gifts: She
conceived, that a pair of perfumed Gloves would be a handsome cover for a
Letter, and therefore procured one from Thersander, and put it into the finger
of a Glove, and when she saw her time, that the best and most company was with
me, she presented her New Years gift unto me. By fortune, Damon was present;
and because she feared, lest meeting with it, I should not make it known unto
every one, she told me, that there was a seam unripped, and she would mend it:
Upon this, she took that wherein the Letter was, leaving the other in the hands
of those that desired to smell at it. But I finding the Paper in the finger, I
asked what it was? To which she answered, that it was the seam which rippeed
when I tried them. I, who did not understand this piece of subtlety, replied,
that it could not be so. She, with incredible impudence, answered, that she her
self had ripped it, and that I could not have it until it was mended. I
perceived, that there was something which was to be dissembled amongst so much
company; but I was too young and simple to apprehend it, or to dissemble: Yet
Damon, who had his eyes always upon us, and who knew by experience how
ingenious Love makes men, he presently conceived, that there was some Letter in
the Gloves, which must be concealed from him, but he could not devise from whom
it should be; as for Thersander, he was out of all suspicion, yet, now he began
to have some thoughts of him. For my part, though I had a desire to do nothing
but what was fitting; yet I had a great desire to know, what it was which was
in this Glove, and therefore retired as soon as I could. When I was alone, I
took out the Letter, and opening it, I found these words.

Thersander's Letter unto Mandonthe.
AS being constrained, and not as esteeming my self worthy, I do assume so much
boldness, MADAM, as to call my self, Your most humble Servant. If you will be
served by none but such as are worthy of you, such then only must have the
honor to see you. Though we have not merits, yet we have desires, which are
more intolerable to us, because they are less accompanied with any hopes. But,
if Love, continuing his ordinary miracles, shall make an extreme affection
pleasing unto you, I shall then, Madam, esteem my self infinitely happy, and
you be most faithfully served: For I do know, that though all the hearts in the
world should join their forces together, to love and adore you, yet, they
could not all equal the grandeur of my Passion.


The flatteries of this Letter did please me, but coming from Thersander, I
was ashamed of them, wondering that such a one as he should dare to look upon me
in this way: I was also offended with Leriana, thinking it strange she should
be the bringer of any such Letters; and I was long in consultation with my
self, whether I should complain of her, or take no notice of it: I resolved at
the last to tell her, that I had thrown it into the fire, and never read it;
and because I would fly all occasions, as well to stop all reports, as because
I would have no occasion to put away Leriana, whose humor was very agreeable
unto me; and though I knew she was in a fault, yet my youth, and the affection
I had unto her, constrained me to forget it, and to seek for excuses in her
behalf. A few days after, she came unto me; and because I did not wear the
Gloves which she gave me, having an opinion they came from Thersander, as well
as the Letter, she asked me, what I had done with them? I have given them away,
said I unto her, because they were not fit for my hand. And the Paper within
them, said she, what have you done with it? I threw it into the fire, answered
I; was it of any importance? Did you not read it, said she? And I answering,
No: She said, that she was very glad of it, because she was deceived by one
whom she trusted but she thanked god, that the fire had purged away the fault.

What was it, (said I unto her)? You shall never know from me, said she; and I
assure you, that since I did know what it was, which was within this hour, I
was extremely afraid you should have read it, and came now purposely to hinder
you. This crafty woman did think, that I had read it; but finding me not so
well disposed as she desired, she thought it necessary to imprint a good
opinion of her self in me, and to dissemble as well as I. And because she knew
I loved Demon, she accused me with it, and condemned it; thinking that she
could not build her designs upon a better foundation, then the ruins of that
affection which I bare unto this Knight; and therefore she turned her wits
wholly to ruin it: And because she knew very well, that I had no ill opinion
of my self she fancied, that Damon's affection unto me, was the cause of mine
unto him; her design was therefore, to put me into some doubts of him,
conceiving there was no better way then jealousy, and that a generous spirit
does more resent disdain, then any other offense: And though jealousy may
proceed from several causes, yet the principal is, when a Lover sees the
party Loved, loves another, taking this new affection for an argument of
disdain, and conceiving, that as she whom he loved did merit all his love, so
also he ought to have all hers; in which she failing, he does attribute it unto
disdain.

But when she went about to execute her design, she found it to be a piece of
no small difficulty, since this Cavalier did not look upon any woman but my
self; besides, it was requisite, that Leriana should have some power over her,
of whom she should make me jealous, to the end, she might the better mould her
unto her ends; moreover, that such a one be secret, and fair, and of such a
quality, as might seem probable she deserved to be loved; it was very hard for
her to find all these qualifications in one person: But she, whose acute wit
never found any thing impossible, after many a days quest, in vain; at last,
resolved upon a Niece, whom she brought up, and to supply all defects by her
subtlety. This was a young wench, whose name was Ormanthe young, both in age
and spirit, who indeed was owner of a fair face, but so shallow in all attracts
of Love, as very few deemed her fair; yet notwithstanding, Leriana had an
opinion, that she could so instruct her, that where nature was defective, her
art would supply. In order to this, she took Ormanthe to task, chid her for the
little care she had of her self, told her, she might be ashamed to see all her
Companions courted and loved, who were much less fair then she was, and that
she could not oblige the meanest Cavalier to love her; she told her, all this
proceeded from her carelessnesse and want of wit, and that for her part if she
did not resolve upon better courses, she would send her home to her Mother;
for, if she stayed any longer in the Court, she would arrive at no other title,
but an old Maid. Ormanthe, fearing that her Mother would give her but coorse
treatment, if Leriana should send her home, she fell down upon her knees, with
tears in her eyes, and beseeched her to pardon all her faults, and promised,
that for the time to come, she would wholly conform her self unto her will.
Leriana seeing so good a beginning, continued: Ormanthe, said she, all these
tears and protestations will be in vain, if I do not see you change your
behavior and way of living; all your Companions are courted, and you are the
only one that is not. Do you think it is not a great grief unto me, to see all
the young Beauties in the Court waited upon, and when they walk, every one has
her Gallant to lead her, nay, some two or three, and you the only one that none
looks upon? This, believe it, is a great disgrace unto you. Those who look you
in the face, and find it fairer then most of your Companions, must needs say,
that if you be not courted, it must be, because you are poor, or that there is
some fault, either in your Race, or in your Person: And truly, all this
proceeds from your carelessnesse, and from your rude and rustic nature, which
makes every one to shun you. And indeed, I know that Damon has a good mind to
love you; I know it, because he has got some of his friends to tell me as much,
and yet he can never find a way how to approach you, you are so inaccessible,
and because your retired humor will never give him an opportunity; he is the
greatest Gallant in all the Court, and this would be a great honor unto you.
Should this good fortune present it self unto any one of your Companions, Oh!
how welcome it would be? What industry and artifice would they use to bring it
to pass? Ormanthe, let me tell you this once for all, if I do keep you here in
Court any longer, I shall expect, and desire you shall give, all occasions unto
Damon to love you, and do not fear, to let others see the favors you do him;
for his design being to marry you, he will not think them disadvantageous to
him. This was the lecture which Leriana read unto this young Wench: And truly,
it was seed not sowed in barren ground, but produced plentiful effects.
Ormanthe being naturally of a free and affable humor, without any
dissimulation, and being put forward by Leriana's instructions, she did ever
since that day apply her self with so many carrasses unto Damon, that he and
all that saw it did wonder: The noise of it went so far, as I came to hear of
it, and that by the artifice of Leriana, who by the means of Thersander, caused
it to be spoken of in a place, where I might come to know of it; and to the end
I should think there was no juggling in the business, Thersander never spoke of
it, but caused some of his friends. However, I could not believe, Damon could
love this foolish Wench better then me; since me thought, her beauty did not
equal mine, as my Glass assured me: Moreover, when I considered my extraction
and Ormanthe's, I could not imagine, he should be so inconsiderate in his
choice, as to slight me for such a one; which this crafty Leriana knowing very
well, she was put upon a greater piece of artifice. There was an old woman,
Aunt unto Leriana, who had lived all her life in much honor and reputation:
Leriana did contrive the matter so, as this good old woman was acquainted with
the carrasses, which Ormanthes used unto Damon, which were such, as when she
heard of them, she could not rest until she sent for Leriana; and she sent for
her, to meet her in my Chamber, purposely that I might see when she spoke unto
her. Their discourse was long, and the anger that I observed in them, made me
desirous to know (when this good old woman was gone) what the matter was. She
seemed very unwilling to tell me, and stood a long time without an answer: At
the last, because I was very urgent with her, she said thus unto me. See,
Mistress (for so she called me) how subtle Damon is; but yet, not so subtle as
my self: he thought, that by his feigning love to you I should not see the
affection which he bears unto Ormanthe: This subtlety had been good, had it
been unto any other but my Niece; but, this does so nearly concern me, that I
must needs look nearly unto it; and he has carried the matter so far beyond
all prudence, as he must needs be blind that does not see it. I think, that I
have been told of it by above a hundred persons, and this good old woman came
hither purposely to tell me of it; it is grown the common talk, and so
dishonorable to my Niece, as I were to blame if I did suffer it, since she is
under my charge. I have chid Ormanthe many times for it, but I think he has
bewitched her: For my part, I know not which way she takes him; for, though she
be my Niece, yet, I must needs say, there is not any one more unlikely to make
one in love with her, then she. Oh! how these words went to my heart? I retired
into my Closet, whither this crafty woman followed me, being too well
experienced in such accidents, to be ignorant of the operation these words had
in me. And because I did put my whole confidence in her when we were alone, it
was impossible for me to restrain my tears, or conceal from her my affection,
which I had so long hid. Oh! what extreme contentment Leriana received by this
declaration: And though her whole design was only to divert me from the love
of Damon; yet, she knew it was not yet time to strike, but must first weaken it
a little more, before she did downright attempt it: And in order to that, she
would needs make me believe, that she was very much a friend unto that
Cavalier, purposely, because I should not mistrust her; and therefore she spoke
thus unto me: I must confess, Mistress, that you have eased my heart; yet I
am sorry, I should buy my ease at the expense of your sorrows. Had I thought
that Damon had loved you, I should never have feared his loving my Niece; he is
a man of better judgment, then to change you for any other, it is only but some
flash of youth, which makes him go a little astray from you, he will return
again, I warrant you; and therefore let not this withdraw your affection from
him: However, I make no doubt, but this act does much afflict you, and
displeases you as much, as if it were some grand injury; and the reason is,
because Love is a child, and is offended at a trifle. But, Mistress, let it
not trouble you any more; if you will but use a remedy which I shall prescribe,
you shall both be presently cured, I will warrant you. Do you not know, that an
over great light does dazzle? and that too great a noise does deaf? So perhaps
the beams of your affection, shining too freely upon him, has lessened his
love; for my part, I am apt to believe it so: I know, young spirits are
ordinarily subject unto such things, and being too well assured of what they
enjoy, they grow careless, and kick at abundance, which does beget in them new
desires. But against this disease, as against many others, contraries must be
applied. I am confident, that if you did but seem a little to withdraw from
him, he will presently return to his duty, and cry you mercy for his fault. You
may believe, Mistress, that I do love you, because I use this language unto
you; and I do give you the same counsel, as, if it were my case, I would take
my self. In conclusion, this cunning Piece of subtlety so dissembled the
matter, as, with many thanks, I promised to follow her counsel. It happened,
that Damon finding me something faint toward him, and laying the blame upon
the carrasses which Ormanthe used toward him, did by degrees withdraw from
her, and shunned her as much, as if he had been the Woman, and she the Man.
Leriana took notice of it as well as I; and not to let slip any good occasion,
one day, when we were by our selves in my Closet, she asked me, whether her
counsel was not good? and whether I would not believe her another time? And I
answering, Yes: She continued; Then, Mistress (said she) we-must do as good
Physicians use to do, who having prepared the humors by some slight
medicines, do afterward draw them quite away by remedies more strong. I will
acquaint you with an art, which I have seen much used amongst Lovers. There is
nothing which a Lover does more sharply resent, then paugs of jealousy, nor
which awakens him more, nor will sooner make him return to his duty: If Damon
were a little touched with it, you should see how soon he would return, how he
would cast himself at your feet, and acknowledge his offense. I could not
choose but laugh when I heard these words, thinking, that I was not able to
obtain so much power over my self; yet considering, what good effects her
first counsel produced, I resolved to believe her in this: But, (said I unto
her) of whom shall we make use of for this business? She durst not propound
Thersander unto me, because of the former passages, but she had a desire it
should proceed from me, and therefore she answered me thus: This question,
Mistress, is very pertinently asked, and it must be advisedly thought upon;
for, he must be such a one, as will not hurt your reputation, and therefore I
do conclude, he must be one, of whom you may absolutely dispose, and one, so
far inferior to you, as you may withdraw when you please, and he not dare to
be offended, or that every one should believe you did but fool him. Then
looking upon the ground, and scratching her head, as if she were much puzzled to
find out one, upon a sudden she looked upon me, and said; Why should we look
so long for one that is so near? who better then Thersander, you may do what
you please with him, and he dare not be offended; besides, he is discreet, and
has no small affection unto you already; so as I cannot imagine one more fit
for such a purpose then he. When she named Thersander, I remembered the sormer
passages, and did think, that she made choice of him sooner then any other,
because she loved him; but also I knew, that his quality and discretion was
such, as were very suitable for the business which I intended him for: And
though my high spirit did forbid me to cast my eyes upon one of so mean a rank;
yet, my affection unto Damon, and my desire to recall him, did make me
condescend unto Leriana's counsel: And therefore I began to look with a more
favorable aspect upon Thersander, and to talk with him; but it was with much
shame, when I perceived any saw me. Damon, whose affection was extreme, did
presently perceive this alceration. And Leriana told Thersander, that his
discreet and humble carriage unto me, had wrought such good effects, as that I
loved him almost as well as he loved me. The least shadow of a favor from me,
seemed to be great and substantial; and though I did behave my self to him in
a way of indifferency, yet, the least syllable I spoke, was a favorable
sentence; and this made him to brisk up himself, and look bigger then
ordinary, and all by the false hopes which this subtle woman had infused into
him: So as Damon soon observed all this; and calling to mind the Letter which
he saw me receive in a pair of Gloves, and from thence drawing many
disadvantageous couclusions, both against himself and me, he did believe, that
through the solicitations of Leriana, I had entertained the affection of
Thersander, and rejected him. After he had patiently endured thus a while, in
hopes of some change, but finding none, he being not able to endure it any
longer, resolved to upbraid me with it; and because Leriana was continually
with me, he could not possibly find any opportunity of speech with me, unless
in the Chamber of Leontidas: And therefore, as I was rising from the Table, and
far off this woman, he seeing that he could have no better occasion, did close
with it, and said unto me: Is all this, because you have a mind to kill me, or
because you would try, how a person that loves infinitely can endure rigor? I
answered him faintly, Your death does concern me no more, then my rigours
concern you. He would have replied, but Leriana came to us, and by her
presence, constrained Damon to be silent; and besides, I turned toward her,
and did not give him the leisure. This crafty woman looking upon me, did make a
sign, that this was an effect of her advice, and afterward whispering in my
ear; This said she, is a very good beginning, continue your sleighting him, and
you shall see a strange operation. Ah, most subtle woman! she had good reason
to say, a strange operation; for it did operate so, as made me as miserable a
woman as ever was. So, sage Shepheardesses, I did continue sleighting him, and
would not daigne so much, as to turn toward this Cavalier, who went out of the
house so much out of himself, as he was ready to sheath his Sword in his own
breast; and I believe, had not his intention of killing Thersander restrained
him, he had executed this strange resolution against himself: And that which
hindered him from falling presently upon Thersander, was his fear of displeasing
me, knowing that it would be a great wound unto my reputation, if, upon that
account, he should assault him; and therefore, when the sury of his passion was
a little cooled, he went on, and studied for some other pretense of quarrel.
When he met Ormanthe, who according to her custom, came, and took him about
the neck he was in no very good humor, did push her a little back, and told
her, That he wondered she was not afraid of that censure, which all people would
give upon such actions. Whom should I fear, or care for, (said she) so I be but
pleasing and welcome unto you? Were it of no other, said Damon, yet you ought
to stand in fear of Leriana. Of Leriana (said she and laughed)? Damon, you are
deceived, for I am sure, that I cannot please her better, then to carrasse and
make much of you. This Cavalier knowing, that Leriana wished him ill and
hearing these words, did presently suspect some treason; which to prevent, and
taking Ormanthe aside, he desired her to tell him, how she knew, that Leriana
would be pleased with her for this? Ormanthe, who was far from a deep
Politician, and who thought, to excuse her self, by laying the fault upon her
Aunt, she told him all the discourse of Leriana, and the commands she had laid
upon her so to do.

Damon, who was very wise, after he had a little thought upon it, did plainly
see, that the change in my affection did proceed from an opinion, that he loved
this Wench; and seeming to take no notice of it, he left her, with a resolution
to tell me, let Leriana say what she would. Fortune, it seemed, favored him
with a fit opportunity; for the same day, Torrismond intended to hunt; and
because the Queen was wont to accompany him, I, with the rest of my Companions,
took horse, and waited upon her. The Stag being roused, and all the Dogs
following full cry after him, all the Company full speed followed after the
Chase. Now began all the Hunters to part; those who had the flightest Horse,
left the rest behind them. Damon, who was well mounted, kept his eye still
upon me, and seeing me separated from all the Company, he took into a way which
he thought I would pass; and feigning that his Horse had fallen upon him, he
seemed as if he had hurt his leg; and to procure the more belief of it, he
dirtyed his head and shoulder on the one side and his Horse also, giving his
Man charge to keep at a distance. When I was passing the way, he crossed it,
and taking my Horse by the Bridle, he stayed him; at which I was much
surprised, fearing, that his love had transported him beyond his discretion:
but fearing, that if I should seem too fearful, he would grow more bold; I
made a virtue of necessity, and spoke to him in a confident tone, saying: What
do you mean, Damon? how dare you be so bold as to interrupt me in my way?
Necessity, Madam, answered he, which has no Law, has constrained me to commit
the fault: if, after you have heard me, you shall deem it worthy of punishment,
I will promise you to receive it, or any thing that shall give you
satisfaction. Then lifting his eyes up to heaven: Oh ye gods, (said he) who
hear and see the secrets of all dissembling hearts, be witnesses unto what I
shall say unto this fair One, and if I do not say truth, you are not just, if
you do not punish me before her fair face. Then turning toward me; I will not
at this time, fair Mandonthe, (said he) either excuse my self, or accuse you,
for the choice you are pleased to make of Thersander before me, and your
forgetting so many vows and oaths which you invoked the gods to witness: But
I must needs complain against my fortune, which will not let me avoid that
misery, which I do foresee. As soon as ever Leriana came to you, me thought
some Demon foretold me, of the harm which she would do me; you know, how often
we resolved never to confide in her; but, my bad destinies, more strong then
all our resolutions, has made you change your mind, and would needs have you
to love her: If you do but find any contentment in it, though I endure the
most cruel torments that ever soul suffered; I shall thank the gods, and pray
them to continue it. But, it being a thing impossible for me to leave you in
any doubt of my fidelity; and though I know it will be in vain, and that you
will not credit it; yet, I must needs tell you, how maliciously and craftily
she has ruined all my happiness. Then he told me, how Leriana loved him, how
she had carrassed him, how he rejected her, and how deadly she did hate him for
this refusal; and to verify what he told me, he showed me the Letters which
she had written unto him, and acquainted me with the counsel and instructions
she gave Ormanthe, to apply her self unto him, only to make me believe, he was
in love with her; and acquainted me, how he came to the knowledge of all this,
and how this malicious woman did not value the honor of her Niece, so she
could thereby ruin me, and make you love Thersander, which she knew she could
never do, but by ravishing from me the honor and happiness of your favor.
But Oh ye gods! is it possible she should ever bring it to pass? can I so much
as ever doubt it, since I saw the Letter in the Gloves, and since I see you so
kind unto him, that is so much unworthy of you? But, what better evidence then
your own words, can I have to assure me, that I am most miserable, that I am
condemned, and that I am for ever lost?

Well, Mandonthe, since it is my bad fortune to be a cause, that the generous
spirit which I ever knew to be in you, is not only stained with Inconstancy,
but with a choice that is base and dishonorable; I am resolved not to survive
your affection, but will make it appear, that I have love enough to wash away
your offense with my blood. Imagine, wise Diana, how I was amazed at this
expression; I was so struck with fear, as I could not answer him, or speak one
word of a long time. And when I began, with intention to give him all the
satisfaction he could desire, I saw the Chase coming upon us, and it was so
near us, as, not to be seen alone with Damon, I was constrained to part from
him, and had not time to say any more but this: Truth shall always prevail.
Then switching my Horse, I rid into the Wood, very sorry that I could not give
him a better answer. I would have commanded him to follow me if I durst, but I
was afraid any should see us together, and therefore referred it until a
better occasion. Now observe, I beseech you, how the gods does mock at mortal
prudence; I made choice of the next morning, to put poor Damon out of his pain,
and it was that day which brought him more torment.

I need not tell you how he passed away that night, it is easily imagined that
he had not any good rest; but, as soon as day came, he went out of his Chamber;
and it being about the hour I was used to rise, he went to walk in a Gallery,
out of which, he might see into my Chamber, when the door was open, intending
to go in, as soon as he understood that I was out of my bed. But, as fortune
was, I awaked very late that morning, as well, because I was weary with hunting
the day before, as because I sat up very late, reading and musing upon the
Letters which Leriana writ unto him, and he had given unto me: In which I found
such supplications and expressions, as were most unworthy of any woman; for in
the conclusion of one of them, I found these words: Accept, Oh dearest and
lovely Damon, the prayers of her, that wholly gives her self unto you, upon no
other condition, but only to be yours; and this, if not out of Love, yet, I
beseech you, out of Pity. Truly I was extremely astonished at it, and I vexed
so, that I should be so extremely deceived, as I could not close my eyes a long
time after I was in bed. But whilst Damon, as I told you, was walking in this
Gallery, Leriana, who saw him there, would try, whether a Lover could be put to
death by displeasure; for, having found Thersander also at the same time, she
carried him unto a window, just under that on which she saw Damon leaned
sometimes, when he was weary with walking; and having observed, that he was
there at that time, she spoke thus unto Thersander, in a voice loud enough, and
purposely to be heard: And to the end you may know, dear Brother, that
Mandonthe does really love you, and that she does but laugh at all those, who
think she loves them, she commanded me yesterday, when she came from Hunting,
to give you this Ring, which she caused to be made purposely for you: She
desires you to love her, and to wear it as a symbol of your affection; she has
another, which she wears her self, just like it, which she will always wear,
as an assurance, that her will shall never differ from yours, more then the
Ring she sends you differs from hers. Oh heavens! what treason is this? Is it
possible such villainy should be invented by any human spirit? For the truth is,
I had a Ring just like that which she gave him, and had worn it long; and this
wicked Devil got another to be secretly counterfeited, purposely for this end.
Damon, who, as I told you, leaned upon the window, and hearing her voice, did
presently know it, and leaning his head further out of the window, to hearken
more attentively, he heard all these words that I have told you: And because
she did put her arm out of the window, purposely that Damon might see the
Ring, he remembered very well, that he had seen me have such another. And
whilst he was thus leaning himself out of the window, he heard Thersander
answer her: I swear by all the gods (said he) that this Ring is so beyond all
expressions welcome unto me, as I do wish Mandonthe may never love me, if I do
not wear it to my grave, as a testimony, that I am eternally hers, and that it
is infinitely dearer unto me, then my own heart. Upon this, he took it, and
after many kisses, he put it upon his finger.

Whether or no Damon was transported, and whether he had not reason to
transgress the limits of duty, I leave you to judge, wise Diana; and yet, he
had so much power over himself in his anger, as he neither did nor said any
thing, which could give any knowledge of it, lest if any knew it, he might be
hindered in the execution of his design. At the same time, the Queen went into
the Temple, to be present at the sacrifices which were offered almost every
morning; and because Lcontidas's Wife never left her, I went also, as the rest
of the Court Ladies did; of which, Damon not being advertised until we were
all in our Coaches, he took Horse, and overtook us, as we were entering into the
Temple. And see how unfortunate we were, I was fully resolved to admit of all
his excuses, and to assure him that I did love him, what demonstrations soever
I had given to the contrary; and to make good my words, I would have broke off
all friendship with Leriana, and all familiarity with Thersander, and sought
out for opportunity to tell Damon as much. But he, being abused by the treason
of false Leriana, when he saw me, he looked with such an angry brow, and so
slighted me, as I became offended with him, not knowing or imagining what
cause he should have so to do; yet, presently after, remembering how I had made
him jealous, I did excuse him. We all went into the Temple, and the sacrifice
begun, during which, I observed, that he looked upon me very often, but, with
such angry eyes, and brow beating frowns, as plainly spoke him to be very much
transported. But hear, I beseech you, into what an ecstasy this passion did
hurry him: When the sacrifice was offered, and every one in the midst of their
zeal and devotion upon their knees, he rose up, and with a loud voice uttered
these words: Oh great god, who art adored in this sacred place, by all this
devout assembly; if thou be just, why do thou not punish a soul, that is
the most perfidious, and most cruel, in all the world? I demand justice of
thee in her presence, to the end, that if she have any thing to allege in her
defense, she may: but, if she cannot, and thou not punish her, I will say, thou
art either unjust, or impuissant.

You may imagine, wise Shepherdess, in what a case I was in, and how fearful
I was, lest he should say more, and make it known, that it was I of whom he
spoke. All the Assembly turned their eyes toward him, as well, because he
spoke with a voice full of terror, as because of his unaccustomed way of doing
it. But he, after this, said no more, only kneeled down upon his knees, and
seemed very zealous at his devotion. This moved many unto various censures; and
it was well for me, that I had a Hood over my face, which kept it from being
seen; for doubtless, my very blushes would have betrayed me, and told all the
congregation, that it was I he meant, His friends and kinsmen thought this
prayer to be very unseasonable, and as soon as all divine service was done,
they sought for him, to tell him their opinions; but, they all missed of their
aims, for he thrust himself into the crowd, and slipped away to his lodging;
where, after he had set all his business in order, he writ a Letter unto me,
and put it into his pocket; then writ these words unto Thersander.

Damon's Challenge unto Thersander.
IF the injury I have received from you were of that nature, as could be
satisfied with any thing but blood, I should not desire, Thersander, to see you
alone with a sword in your hand: But, since I can no other way receive
satisfaction, and being assured, your courage will not be more backward in
fighting then offending, I send this man unto you, whom you know to be my
servant, and who will conduct you to the place where I am, without any other
Arms, then as we usually wear by our sides; promising you, by the honor of a
Cavalier, that you shall find none to defend your self from, but him, whose
name is Damon.


He gave command unto a young man, whose name was Halladine, who served him,
and whom he loved very well, both for his affection and ingenuity, that he
should bring him a Horse to the outside of the Town-walls, and another for
himself, and this in all haste, and so secretly, as none should see Halladine
did as he was commanded. And when they were thus both out of the Town, Damon
left the highway, and choosing out a place fit for his purpose, and out of the
common passage, he acquainted Halladine with his intention, gave him his
instructions and the Letter which he writ unto Thersander. The young man,
desirous to serve his Master according to his commands, found out Thersander,
and delivered his message so handsomely, as none took any notice of it. But,
why should I spend any more time upon this subject? Thersander went, they
fought, Damon was Conqueror, and left Thersander bleeding upon the place, with
three dangerous wounds in his body: It Is true, Damon was but in little better
condition; but he had strength enough to take the Ring, which Leriana gave to
Thersander, off his finger, whilst he was in a sound; and getting upon his
horse, he rid away, commanding Halladine to follow him.

As for my part, I had a great desire to give this Cavalier all contentment,
and looked about for him with as searching eyes as any in the company, wondering
I could not see him. After dinner and not dreaming of this mischance which
happened, as I and one of my Companions was walking in the Garden, I saw
Halladine coming, who addressing himself unto me, asked, if Leriana was not
here lately? And causing her to be called, he addressed himself unto her in
this manner.

Leriana, My Master knowing how welcome the news I bring would be unto you,
has commanded me to tell it unto you, not for any affection that is betwixt
you, but because knows Mandonthe loves you. Then he related the whole passage
of the Combat, and afterward continued on: When he was got on Horseback again,
said he, and when I saw him ride into places least frequented, I wondered; for
he was much wounded, and I could not choose but cell him, that I thought it more
necessary to seek out a good Surgeon, to dress his wounds. He answered me,
we shall find one presently Halladine, never fear it. I thought he had said
true, and believed him, following him still, with abundance of pity, for he
had lost a great abundance of blood. At last, he came to the banks of the River
Garrone, and to a place where there was such a Precipice, as was a terror to
look down. Being come unto this place, he would light from his Horse; but he
was so weak with the loss of so much blood, as I must needs help him to
alight. Then leaning his back against the Rock, he pulled a Paper out of his
pocket, and holding it in his hand, said unto me: This Letter is directed unto
the fair Mandonthe, be sure you give it unto her. Then pulling out the Ring
which he took from Thersander; Give her this also, said he unto me, and assure
her from me, that death is very welcome to me, since I have given a testimony,
that I did deserve it better then he unto whom she gave it; and since my sword
has sent him out of the world, whom she thought so worthy of it: conjure her
by her own merits, and the affection she once vowed unto me, that she never
bestow it hereafter upon one, whose Love is dishonorable to her, and who could
no better keep it. I took the Letter and the Ring which he gave me; but seeing
he had not strength enough to sustain himself, and that he grew very pale, I
took him under the arm, bad him be of good heart, and not thus be a murderer
of himself: And pulling out my handkerchiefe, I would have stopped that wound
which bled the most But he, taking it hastily out of my hand: Stay, stay,
Hallidane, said he, never think of living, now I am out of Mandonthe's favor.
Then holding my handkerchiefe under his wound, be received the blood as it ran
out; and when it was almost full, he held it to me, and spoke these words: Make
it appear, Halladine, upon this last occasion, that my love to thee, and my
choice of thee for thy fidelity, was deserved: And as soon as I am dead, carry
this Letter and this Ring unto Madonthe, and this handkerchiefe full of blood
unto Leriana, and tell her, that since she could never be satisfied with doing
me hurt as long as I lived, I have sent her this blood to stop her insatiable
malice. Oh Sir, (said I unto him) shall I live to see you die for any woman
living? Rather command me to sheath my sword in their hearts, and to let them
know, they are not worthy to use such a noble Cavalier in this manner But, see
the height and strength of his affection! though he was in such a pitiful
weak condition, that he could hardly speak; all he was able to do, was, to lean
against the Rock: yet, when he heard me utter these words, he started up in
fury, took his sword in his hand, and doubtless had killed me, had I not saved
my self by nimblenesse. And seeing he could not reach me: Away, away, thou
wicked and disloyal Servant, (cried he out) dare thou speak so irreverently
of the most deserving Woman in the whole Universe? If I live, thou Shall die by
no other hand but mine. Then finding extreme feebleness to seize upon him, he
endeavored to get near the point of the Rock: You do lose, this day, Oh
fairest Madonthe, (said he) him, whose affection is only worthy of your
merits. Then, (Oh heavens!) he leaned over the Rock to throw himself down, and
was almost quite gone, when I suddenly took hold of his Helmet; but, his
weight, and the terror of the Precipice, was more likely to pull me after him,
than I to pull him out of it; and, I must confess, that fear of death made me
let go my hold, to save my own life. I ran to the bottom of this Precipice,
fetching a great compass round about, in hopes to find him there swimming
down the stream: But alas! I could never see, nor ever find more, of the body
of my poor Master. When I had done all I could, and all in vain, I thought it
my last duty to fulfill his last commands, and therefore I came hither. It is
to you, Madam, (said he) that this Letter and this Ring is due^; and though
they be sprinkled with his blood, yet, be not afraid to take them, for, it is
the most noble and generous blood that ever came out of a man. And this is thy
due (said he to Leriana, and gave her his handkerchief full of blood) take it,
and glut thy damned rage; and be sure, that if the gods be just, they will
shoure vengeance upon thee. Upon this word, he threw the handkerchiefe at her
seet, and beginning to cry, he went away in a sad and desperate sury, and would
not give one word more.

I need not tell you, how this message went to my heart. I cannot, if I would,
express my sad apprehensions; I was so quite past my self, as they carried me
to my Chamber; and, as fortune was, I met those that brought Thersander, who
was not quite dead. When I was come to my self again, and my spirits a little
better settled, I cast my eye upon the Ring which Halladine brought me; I took
it to be the same I did ordinarily wear, and comparing them together, I found
no difference, but that it was a little newer and bigger. I could not imagine
why they should be made so just alike, nor who gave it unto Thersander. At
last, I read the Letter, and found it to be thus written.

Damon's Letter unto Madonthe.
MADAM,
SInce Leriana's malice is more predominant in you, than my true affection, and
has caused you, in lieu of being favorable unto me, to cast your eye upon a
person, who is so much unworthy of you, and to confirm your good acceptance of
him by the gift of a Ring: I am resolved to make it appear by Arms, that he,
upon whom you confer these favors, is not able to preserve them against him,
whom you have so unjustly refused: And that if either Valor or affection can
merit them, none can pretend unto them more then my self. Yet, conceiving my
self not worthy to live, and love one that can disdain me for a man of such
mean merit and valor; if the fate of Arms do favor me, as I do not doubt but
they will, I promise you, that the sight of me shall never make you desire any
revenge, for taking away from you your dear Thersander; if either Sword, or
Water, or Fire, can give death to a most miserable man.


These expressions, so full of extreme transport, did make a most strange wound
in my soul; such an odd stupification of sorrow seized upon me, as I cannot
tell you what I either said or did. So it was, that being got to bed, I lost my
wits, thinking always that Damon followed me, and the handkerchiefe of blood
was still before my eyes; so as it was no more then requisite I should have one
always by me, to add some consolation. Leriana, who thought that I was
ignorant of all her wicked devices, would needs be with me, as usual, and the
better to dissemble it, came crying to my bedside: But, as soon as ever I saw
her, I must confess, I had not so much power over my self, as to dissemble my
hatred of her, and indeed, I thought it in vain, since Damon was dead: Away,
away, most wicked and perfidious wretch, (said I unto her) away, thou very Pest
of all human society, come not near me with thy damned and hellish tricks, had
I as much strength as will, I would strangle thee with my own hands, and tear
thy heart in pieces. Those who were in the Chamber, being ignorant of the cause
I had for these expressions, were infinitely astonished at them. But she, who
had the readiest wit in her wickedness, of any that ever breathed, went from
me, holding up her hands and eyes, and told them, that, to he great grief, I
was mad, and quite out of my wits, which they easily believed, having heard me
utter some odd expressions; and thus she went out of my Chamber with this
excuse.

In the mean while, Thersander recovered, for his wounds were not mortal, and
the loss of blood only was the cause of his sounding. Presently after, I also
began to be my self again and to enquire, what reports went of me at Court: I
understood, that every one talked according to their several fancies, but that
all in general blamed me for the death of Damon, and how every one thought,
that Leriana had told many a tale unto Leontidas and his Wife; and at the same
time, I saw Thersander come into my Chamber: The very sight of him made me
start, and having no mind to speak with him, when he fell down upon his knees
at my beds side, I turned my head the other way. It Is very true, Madam, said
he) you have no reason to look upon a man, who, of all men in the world, is the
most unworthy of your aspect; for, I must needs confess, I merit that less,
then any man that lives, since I have given you so much cause to hate me. But,
if your goodness will be pleased to daigne me a hearing, perhaps you will not
deem me so culpable as now you do. And because I answered him very sharply and
would not give him leave to speak, my Nurse, who was with me, took his part,
and told me, that I ought to hear him; for, if he were not in fault, I had no
reason to treat him so; and, if he were in fault, then I might, after a
hearing, with more reason banish him my presence. Well, well, said I, what do
you think he will, or can, allege? I know as well as he, he will say, that the
affection he bears unto me, has forced him to do what he did: But, what have I
to do with his affection, if it be so prejudicial to me? I shall not, Madam,
(said he unto me) insist only upon that affection you speak of, though perhaps
to any other, that might be a better plea and excuse, as you think it; but, I
shall go further, and tell you, that never any were so perniciously and
subtlely consened, as you and I have been by Leriana. And hereupon he told the
whole story of her juggling artifice, how she infused so much confidence into
him, as to look upon me, to speak unto me, to aspire unto my favor; how she
puffed him up by reports unto him of favors from me, what stratagems she
invented against Damon, how she made the world believe he loved Ormanthe, how
she instructed silly Ormanthe for that purpose, and how she gave him a Ring
from me, which he conceived to be the cause of the quarrel betwixt Damon and
him. Now Madam, (said he, and continued) do you think it possible, but that
such hopes as she infused into me, should swell the most prudent soul that ever
was? Alas, I dare not so much as wish so great a happiness; but methinks, I
may in reason be excused, since I was merely drawn in, and possed up with vain
hopes by the artifice of Leriana, with whose persidie I thought fit to acquaint
you, that you may hereafter beware of her, and her wicked devices, with which
she has cheated both you and me. Then he let me understand, how this wicked
woman, seeing she could no longer deceive me and him, and being also
reprehended by Leontidas and his Wife, for having so little care of me; she, to
excuse her self, had told them all that her subtle imagination could devise
against us; how I was in love, and how I was loved by many, and so many, as she
could hardly number them: and amongst those whom she named, Damon and
Thersander were not forgotten. At which, Leontidas was so angry, and his Wife
more, both against me and against him, as he thought it fit to acquaint me with
it, to the end, I might take the best course I could. And lastly, he made such
humble supplications, that I would pardon him, for daring to love me, and such
serious protestations, to live for the future as he ought, that I was
constrained by the entreaties of my Nurse, to pardon him.

But now, wise Shepheardesses, I shall acquaint you with one of the greatest
villainies that ever was invented against an innocent person. I told you before,
how Ormanthe, by Leriana's command, was extremely fond of Damon; and you must
know, that she was not so ill favored, nor so disgusted, but her kindnesses to
him were well accepted, so as she proved to be with Child. The poor silly Wench
presently acquainted her crafty Aunt with it, who at the first was much
astonished and offended at it; but afterward having recourse to her accustomed
subtlety, she plotted and intended to make use of this occasion, to make Damon
believe, that I had this Child by Thersander; and therefore she expressly
charged Ormanthe, to tell no body of it in the world; and afterward, because
her belly began to swell, she taught her how to dress her self, that it might
best deceive the worlds notice. But when Damon was dead; and that all things
were changed, yet she resolved to pursue her plot, and make use of it to my
ruin; and thus she went to work. Since this sad accident of Damon, I kept my
bed almost continually unless in the afternoones I rose, and shut my self up
in my Closet, and there stayed till nine or ten of the clock at night,
entertaining my own melancholy thoughts alone, and none knew where I was,
except my Nurse and some Maids that waited upon me, whom I had charged, to
tell none in the world where I was. And because it might be thought strange I
never went to the Queen, if it were known I was not sick, I feigned my self to
be so; and to deceive the Physicians, I did not complain of a Feavour or any
other known disease, but sometimes of a Megrim, othertimes of my Teeth, of the
Colic, and such like. And because my friends would sometimes send to visit
me, not daring to come themselves, for fear of offending Leontidas and his
Wife, who were very potent with the King and Queen, I commanded my Nurse to put
some of the Maids into my bed, who should receive the messages for me, and who
faigning to be unwilling to speak, my Nurse should make the answer; the
Windows being close shut and the Curtains drawn, no light almost came into the
Chamber, so as none could tell whether it was I or no. Leriana knew by her
Niece, that it was my constant custom to shut my self up in my Closet, every
afternoon: And because I was no hater of Ormanthe, though she had been simply
isntrumental in my misery, therefore I permitted her to be always amongst my
Maids: for, what she had done, was not out of any malice unto me: And at this
time, she told Leriana all passages concerning me, more out of simplicity, then
any hatred unto me. But her Aunt, whose aim was absolutely to ruin me and my
reputation, nay, even to take away my life, lest I should make known all the
villainy unto Leontidas, she thought, that she had met with a fit occasion to
effect her wicked desires. And because she was sure, Thersander had acquainted
me with her artifices and tricks, which she had used against Damon and me she
turned all her affection to him into mortal hatred. And there being never in
this world a spirit so full of subtlety and malice, as this woman, she aimed to
be revenged upon Thersander and me both at once; and thus she had laid her
plot. She asked Ormanthe, how long she thought her self to have been with
Child? and upon reckoning up of the time, she found, that she was within a
month of her Account; of which Leriana was very glad: And after she had bid her
be of good courage, she commanded her, to keep her big belly very close, and
that as soon as ever she found any throws of Labor to be upon her, then to
acquaint her; and in the mean time to get into my bed in my room as often as she
could. And making this to be the foundation of her treason, she went unto the
Wife of Leontidas, and falling down upon her knees, most humbly beseeched her
to pardon her carelessnesse in observance of me. And because she knew, that the
aims of this Lady were more at my Estate then me, and since there was no
likelihood, that her Nephew would marry me, she added these words: If you will
be pleased, Madam, to take me into your favor again, I shall show you a most
infallible and just way to make all Madonthe's Estate yours. The Lady hearing
this proposition, so suitable to her humor, she began to hearken unto it, and
asked her, what way was it that she meant? I shall in few words acquaint you,
(said this wicked devil) but, Madam, upon condition, that you will pardon a
new fault which I shall acquaint you withal. And commanding her to speak
freely, Leriana thus continued: Madonthe, (in the person of whom, god, Madam,
seems to love you, since he would not let her be in your house) is the most
miserable and lost woman in all Aquitain; and I must confess, I never thought,
that one so young as she could have deceived one of my age; her modest
behavior, her high looks her family from whence she is descended, and those
good examples which she had of you, might well move me to answer for her
chastity as for my own; and yet for all this, I have discovered, that she is
with Child, How! Madonthe, with Child, said the Lady? Yes, Madam, (answered
Leriana) and more then that, she is ready to be brought to Bed. But how,
replied she, and from whom do you know this? Madam, said she, I most humbly
beseech you to pardon me, and to believe that I was not so careless in the
charge which you gave me, as you imagine: Considering her demeanor, I might
easily be deceived, and could never imagine, she should ever look so low, as to
love such a man as Thersander. I see now, that jealousy has clearer eyes then
any prudence; for Damon found this out, which my eyes could never see. At last,
I came to know it by the means of a Midwife, unto whom she had addressed her
self for a Medicine, to make her self miscarry: But, the good woman being
virtuous, and hating such wickedness, did answer her, That she could not,
because now the Child was entirely formed, nay, ready to be born; but, she
would do thus much for her, she could make her labor so easy and speedy, as
none should ever know any thing. Now this woman came and acquainted me. And
because I was very desirous to know who the father was, I asked her, if she
could suspect any person? Very hardly said she unto me, unless it be
Thersander, for, as often as I looked upon her belly, or she thought upon the
danger she was in she would say nothing else, but, Ah Thersander, thy affection
will cost me dear. This makes me judge it to be him. Now Madam I beseech you
consider, how could I keep her from this man? a domestic, a base man,
infinitely her inferior: Could I ever imagine, she should look so low as him?
But, since she has rendered her self unworthy of your alliance, let her be
punished according to her merits, and make her an example unto all of her age,
whilst you do enjoy that Fortune and Estate, which she is unworthy of; and this
is the way: You know, Madam, that by our Laws, every woman who offends in
Chastity, is to die by fire. We shall very easily convict her of this crime,
since she has a witness of it in her own belly. And because those who are
thus condemned, do not only lose their lives, but their Estates are also
consiscate to the King, be you the first that shall beg Mandonthe's. Leontidas
came into the Room, and finding Leriana there: How (said he to his Wife) can
you endure the sight of her, who is the cause of our displeasures? His Wife,
full of desire to be Mistress of my Estate, went to him, and took him to the
window, there told him how the case stood: And though he was a person of
honor, and a generous minded man; yet, she wrought so with him, that at the
last he consented unto what she desired: So calling Leriana, he commanded her
to tell him the truth, and be sure to say no more, then what she could
justify. She, with an incredible impudence, repeated all, that before she had
told unto his Wife, and farther told him, that if he would not believe her, let
him find out any Midwife, so she were one that was unknown to me, and let him
receive the truth from her report. Leontidas thought this to be a good way and
the next morning he sent for one. It happened so, as that day her Niece, by her
command, was in my place in bed; and to keep my Nurse for taking any notice of
what she intended to do, she sent for her unto her Chamber, under pretense of
some earnest business with her, so as there was none in my Chamber of any
judgment; and so Leriana going in with the Midwife, and having fully instructed
her Niece what she should say, she went unto her, and said: Madam I promised to
bring one unto you, who would administer some comfort unto you; I have now kept
my word. Ormanthe, in a low voice, answered, that she was very welcome. Are you
pleased, Madam, said the Midwife, that I should see in what condition you are
in? Yes, said Ormanthe. Then she put her hand into the bed, and upon her belly,
and did such things as are usual upon such occasions: and as fortune was, the
Child stirred, so as the pains of Labor were presently upon the poor Wench;
and in less then two hours, she was, without any noise, or any in the Room
that could take any notice, brought to bed. Leriana seeing things fall out so
well according to her design, she sent the two Maids who were in the Chamber
upon two several errands, and so was alone in the Chamber; she caused her
Niece within an hour after to rise, and in the mean while, they held the
little Child unto the fire. Then to complete her treason, she, with the
Midwife, carried it stark naked unto Leontidas, being very desirous that every
one should see it as she went out of my Chamber and Lodgings: I heard it cry
into my Closet where I was, but never mistrusting any such villainy, I would not
be diverted from my sad thoughts. She addressed her self first unto the Wife of
Leontidas, and this testimony, together with the Midwife, did give her such
assurance, as she did believe it, and Leontidas also. But the better to cover
her treason, she beseeched the Lady to content her self with my Estate, and
that if she would be pleased to spare my life, she was confident, considering
the fault I had committed, that I would be willing to cloister up my self all
the rest of my days, amongst the Druides Daughters or Vestalls: and that this
would be acceptable unto god, to save my life, and not to stain so noble a
Family as mine with an act so infamous. That though my fault was great yet she
could not forget the affection she once did bear unto me, as long as I did
behave my self as I ought; and therefore she could not choose but make this
request. The Wife of Leontidas having no design upon my life, but only upon my
Estate, did consent unto it; but Leontidas himself, being a man of honor, was
long before he could consent unto it: But at last the importunities of his
Wife, together with the dissembling tears of Leriana, and the remembrance of
his obligations unto my Father; all these did so work with him, as they both
commanded Leriana to persuade me, unto what she had proposed.

But this not being the design of this devilish woman, she desired them first
to let some days pass, and beseeched Leontidas and his Wife, to let some go
with her, to see in what condition I was: Which they did, commanding an old
Lady, and an old Cavalier, in whom they had good assurance, to wait upon
Leriana. She, with the Midwife, after the Child was put to Nurse, conducted
them into my Chamber, went to my bed, and when she found me not in it, she
seemed amazed; she turned up the clothes, and showed them the signs of a Woman
in Childbed; and faigning not to know where I was, did seek about for me, and
at last found me in my Closet: She called them unto her, and showed me unto
them through the chincks of the door. All this while I knew nothing, but was
then laid down upon a little Couch, with my hand under my head, musing upon the
miserable fate of Damon, so as they might easily see the sad thoughts of my
heart by my face. This wicked wretch made them believe, that my being ill
proceeded from my being newly brought to bed, which they, seeing my sad
posture, did very easily believe: And being thus deceived, they returned, and
made their report unto Leontidas and his Wife. In the mean time, Leriana
staying alone with the Midwife, did change the sheets of my bed, and all
things, that might give any knowledge of what had passed. Afterward conjured
the woman not to speak of it, but to observe the time and the place very
precisely; and then they went out of my Lodging. My Nurse presently after
returned, and finding nothing altered in my Chamber, did wonder at nothing, but
not to see Ormanthe in my bed; but, supposing she had some business, she made
no great matter of it. Night being come, and the usual time of my going to
bed, I went into it, and slept till the morning, without any manner of
imagination of these things. In the mean time, Leriana had invented strange
Messages and Orations in my name, telling Leontidas and his Wife that I did
most humbly beseech them to have pity upon me; that I did acknowledge my life
to be in their hands; that I did wholly give my self unto them, and that I
desired no more, but to be shut up in some retired place, where none could see
me; that as soon as I was able to stir abroad, I would come and beg pardon for
the fault which I had committed, and desire leave to sequester my self from
the world. To be brief, wise Shepheardesses, this hellish woman did so well
manage her wickedness, that six weeks passed thus on. In the mean time,
Ormanthe was so well recovered, as if she were a Maid again, and so, as none
could imagine she had been with Child, but was fairer then before. Leriana had
so well instructed her, that when I asked her, why she went away without
telling me? she answered, That she durst not knock at my door for fear of
disturbance, and that when she went, she thought, that she should not have
stayed away above two or three days at the most, and so thought to have
returned, before I should take notice she was gone, though her business with
her Aunt did keep her longer. I received her excuse, and only told her, that
she might well have asked leave.

Things being in this condition, Leriana feared nothing now, but the being
convinced of a lie, and therefore resolved to execute her malicious design.
She had two Cosen germans which were Soldiers, and had gotten the reputation
of the most valiant Blades in all the Court of Torrismond; moreover, they were
poor, and had no other hopes, but in being Heirs unto Leriana's estate. She,
intending to make use of their valor did oblige them both by presents, and by
giving them fresh hopes of her Estate; which did tie them so unto her, that she
could not command any thing which they would not execute. After she had made
her self sure of them, she began to change her tale with Leontidas and his
Wife, telling them, that I took courage; that I did not now think any more of
leaving the World, but that I had quite forgotten my duty unto them. To be
brief, within a few days after, she told them, that now there was nothing to
be hoped from me, but by force, and that I did deny all; and in saying so, she
seemed to be so much offended at me, as she confessed, I was not worthy of that
favor which they would show me. And because the Wise of Leontidas gaped still
after my Estate, she asked her, how she could convince me? We have, said she,
very good witnesses; but, though we had not, yet since truth is on our side, I
have some that will maintain it by Arms against any whosoever shall maintain
the contrary: And you know, Madam, that such things as are dubious, and cannot
be made apparent by convincing proofs, the truth of them is to be tried by
Arms. Leontidas, who was a person of honor, and who began to be very angry at
the craft which he conceived I used: No, no, said he, I am very certain she is
in a fault; it shall be my self who will accuse her, and I will maintain it
against all men whomsoever. Leriana, who had made her self sure of her two
Cosen-germans and who above all desired to seem very affectionate unto
Leontidas, she turned toward his Wife: Madam, said she unto her, I had rather
die, than my Lord should enter into Arms upon this occasion; I beseech you
divert him from it, or else I protest I will meddle no more in the matter: I
have Leotaris, my Cosen german, and his Brother, who will undertake the
charge; and indeed it is most fit they should, for it is not handsome to beg
the Estate of one, whom he does accuse. Leontidas persisted in his will; but
his Wife would by no means see him in so much danger, and thinking it not
handsome he should be my accuser, and at the same time beg my Estate of the
King, she so prevailed with him, that he referred it unto the Kinsmen of this
woman. This being the resolution, Leriana spoke unto Leotaris, promised him her
Estate, made an assurance of it by Writing; and briefly, so obliged him and his
Brother, as they would have attempted either against heaven or hell; and, right
or wrong, would arm themselves against me. Leriana being assured on this side,
backed by the opinion of very many, and also with the authority of Leontidas,
she presented her self before the King, accused me, offered to prove her
accusation, and set forth the business so colourably, as every one believed
it to be true: And lest Thersander should discover all her wicked devices and
forgeries, she made him a party in the accusation, saying, he was the Father of
the Child purposely to disable his testimony against her.

The Queen, who was a Princess full of honor and virtue, did join her
prayers with the accusation of this wicked woman, and did require I should be
punished according to the rigor of the Law. Leontidas is called, who being
ashamed of the business, made the same request. This act being to the
dishonor of his family, his wife beseeched the Queen, to become a mediator for
the Estate, which the King did freely grant: And yet this good Prince calling
to memory, the good service which my Father had don Thierres his Father, he was
very sorry for this dysaster. The first news I heard of all this, was, when
the Officers of Justice came to seize upon me locked up my Chamber and Closet
and carried me before the King, never telling me for what. Oh heavens, in what
a case was I in, when I heard the words of Leriana? it was long before I could
speak; at last, recollecting my self, I kneeled down before the Queen,
beseeched her not to believe this wicked woman; I protested unto her by all
that is sacred, there was no such thing, that there could be no proof against
my chastity, and beseeched her out of pity to favor the cause of a most
innocent. The King was more moved at my words then the Queen; whether it was,
because he remembered the services of my Father, or because my youth and face
moved him to pity; but so it was, that turning toward Leriana: If you do aver
(said he) any thing which is not true, I do vow by the soul of my Father, that
you shall suffer the same punishment which you have prepared for others. Sir,
(said she, with an impudent brow) I will prove what I say, both by Witnesses
and by Arms. And both, said the King, are allowed you. Then causing us to be
separated, I was committed to safeguard, and Thersander also; and it was
commanded that witnesses should be produced: Then the Midwife and the Nurse of
Ormanthe's Child, did testify their knowledge in the business; the old
Cavalier and the old Matron of whom I spoke, did the like; she produced
several witnesses, who saw her go out of my Chamber with the Child. To be
brief, the proofs were such, as if god had not preserved my innocence, I had
been condemned. By fortune, the Judges being in my Chamber, and reading the
Depositions against me, I knew not what to do in this affliction but only to
have recourse unto the gods; and then, lifting up my hands and eyes to heaven,
I prayed; Oh! ye most omnipotent gods who do see into my heart, and know, that
I am innocent of all this which I am accused of, be my supporters, and declare
my innocence. And then, as if inspired by some good angel, I turned my self
toward the chimney, and addressing my speech unto the Judges: If these
accusations (said I unto them) be true. I beseech the gods that I may never
breathe again; and if they be falls, I beseech them, that this hot coal may not
burn me: Then presently stooping, I took up a great coal of fire, and held it
in my hand naked, till it was extinguished, not being at all burned. The Judges
amazed at this proof, would needs touch the coal, to try whether it was cold,
but they quickly withdrew their hand; then they looked into my hand, to see if
there was any sign of burning, but they found it no more touched, then if it
had never touched fire; you may imagine whether they were astonished or no: But
so it was, they made a report of this unto the King, who ordained, that Leriana
should be acquainted with it, to see, if this testimony of my innocence, would
make her decline her accusation: But she alleged, that I had procured some
receipt, which kept the fire from burning me, and that her Witnesses which she
produced were without exception, and that this proof by fire might perhaps
have been allowed, if it had been ordained and appointed by the Judges; but,
since it proceeded from my own will, it was to be suspected of much artifice.
To be brief, sage Shepheardesses, she smoothed over her villainy with so many
colorable arguments of truth, as all the favor I could obtain from the King,
was, to ordain, that the matter should be tried by Arms, and that within
fifteen days, we should find out the Cavaliers, which should enter into the
lists for us.

The news of all this was quickly dispersed throughout all Aquitain, so as my
Mother heard of it as well as others; and because Leriana had produced so many
Witnesses, she believed, as almost all others did, that I had committed the
fault whereof I was accused; and she having lived always in great honor and
same, it grieved her so much, as she fell sick, and being old withal, she died
within ten or twelve days after she first heard of it; but, in such a bad
opinion of me, as she would never send to see me nor assist me in my
justification. And see how many several ways the gods were pleased to afflict
me; for, this grieved me more, then I am able to express. Thus was I without
Father or Mother, destitute of all friends, and universally blamed by every
one. I must confess, I did many times intend to throw my self out of the
window, to rid my self out of so many sorrows; but, still the gods preserved
me in hopes that my innocence would at last appear, putting into my mind, that
if I should die so, I should leave all Aquitain in a bad opinion of me. But,
when Leriana offered Leotaris and his Brother for her Champions, and when
neither Thersander nor I could name any, as well, because we were not prepared
for it, as, because no man would enter into so bad a quarrel, as every one
thought this was: I must confess I was astonished, and now more then ever
grieved for poor Damon, assuring my self, that had he been alive, I could not
have wanted a Champion. Thersander, on the other side, he must defend his cause
by fighting, both with Leotaris and his Brother, one after another. But the
term being past, the King in favor allowed us eight days longer, and they
being past, he added three more: without any further delay, at the expiration
of which, we were brought into the Lists, I all in mourning, and without any
other company, but the Officers of justice; and Leriana, on the contrary, all
triumphant, and in the company of many Gallants; she was upon another Scaffold,
opposite to that where I was. Leotaris and his Brother were already in the
Lists, armed Cap ape, and bravely mounted vaunting the more, because they
believed to find no Antagonist but Thersander, for none else could we find,
because Leontidas, who was the Kings favourit, did take Leriana's part; and
those who heretofore had made addresses of Love unto me, and would have
undertaken a hundred such Combats for me, were now all cold and backward,
because I had slighted them for Thersander. Thus you may see, a falsehood is
hardly to be known from truth, when it is subtlely disguised with a handsome
gloss. At last, Thersander enters the Lists against them both, hoping, that
the justice of his cause would bear him out. It was ordained by the Judges,
that if during the Combat, any Cavalier would present him self for me, he
should be received; and that Leotaris and his Brother, might fight with
Thersander, both together, or severally, if they would. These two Brothers were
men of great courage, and persons of honor, so as they would undertake him one
after another; but Leriana would not by any means suffer it, so as they ran
both of them together against him. Judge, sage Shepheardesses, in what a
condition I was; I do assure you, that I was so much out of my self, as I
could not see any thing. I looked at. At last, the command was given, and the
Trumpets sounded. Thersander, who was courageous enough, putting his confidence
in the gods, and justice of his cause, set spurrs to his Horse, and with his
Lance, hit the Brother of Leotaris, and doing him no hurt, brake it; but he
himself at the same time, was dismounted by two Lances, with the sadle betwixt
his legs. Leriana seeing so great an advantage on her side, she was all joy; I,
on the contrary, all fear. Thersander seeing himself in this extremity, did
not for all that lose his understanding, but running to his Horse, he pulled
the bridle off from his head, before his Antagonists could return upon him: The
Horse being of a high spirit, and finding himself without either bridle or
sadle, began to run up and down the place, and, as if the gods had inspired
him, came to Leotaris and his Brother, and began to paw with his feet, and bite
with his teeth, kicking and bounding, and did so fiercely assault them that
they, in lieu of fighting with Thersander, had enough to do to defend
themselves from this Animal: This did amuse them a while, because they could
not kill him so soon as they did imagine because of his nimblence and
perpetual motion; but at the last, they dispatched him, and being animated the
more against Thersander, resolved to dispatch him also presently; and therefore
falling both upon him in the heat of their fury, he had no other way but to run
close to his dead Horse, which lay gasping in the end of the Lists, and which
did him some service after his death; for the Horses of his enemies did boggle
so at him, that their Riders could hardly come near him, and this prolonged the
Combat: At the last, Leotaris seeing he could not get his Horse any nearer he
alighted from him, and so did his Brother from his; and leaving their Horses
both loose in the place, went both up to Thersander, and fell upon him, who
certainly did as much as one man could well do, but having to deal with two of
the stoutest Cavaliers in all Aquitain, at once, it was impossible for him to
make any long resistance. He had received several wounds, and lost so much
blood, as he had not strength to defend himself any longer, when the gods, out
of pity unto me, did send a Cavalier, who desired entrance into the Lists, in
defense of me and Thersander: The door was presently opened unto him; and
because he saw Thersander in great extremity, he spurred his Horse furiously up
unto them; but when he was come near, he stooped, and cried out unto them; Hold
Cavaliers, and do not any longer offend against the Laws of Chivalrie; come
off that wounded man, and fall both upon me, who am sent hither purposely to
punish you. Leotaris and his Brother hearing his voice, did recoile, and were
sorry that they were both on foot, and therefore ran toward their Horses: But
the stranger rid up to them, and told them, That if they had their Horses, they
should receive it as a courtesy from him, and not from their own nimblenesse.
But get up, said he, I scorn to take the advantage of my Horse against you.
They both did infinitely esteem this generous act of this stranger; but I was
very sorry for it, conceiving, that he might very well have taken all
advantages against those, who had fallen both at once upon Thersander. But this
stranger had more noble thoughts, and would not let that which was blamable in
others, be any example unto himself. Whilst I was in these thoughts, Leotaris
and his Brother had both mounted themselves, who never considering the
courtesy they had received, fell both at once upon him; but they found a
stronger arm to deal with, then Thersanders. I cannot, sage Shepheardesses,
particularize this Combat unto you, for my fears were such, as I hardly saw it;
let it suffice I tell you, that this stranger showed such wonderful strength
and valor, that Leriana thought him a devil, and not a mortal man. After
they had fought a while, I perceived, that though he was single, yet he had the
advantage of them. As for Thersander, he was so weak, as he was not able to
rise. But this stranger, to the wonder of all the spectators, did give the
Brother of Leotaris such a fatal blow, that he struck his head from his
shoulders. Leotaris seeing this, his fury swelled with revenge: But the
stranger, having now to do with no more but him, did wound him in so many
places, that he was so weak with the loss of blood, as he fell from his Horse
to the ground, and falling with his head foremost, the weight of his body and
his arms broke his neck. The stranger alighting from his horse, and seeing him
dead, he went unto Thersander, helped him to rise, and set him upon one of the
Horses of his enemies; and then taking his own, he addressed himself unto the
Judges, and asked them, if he had any more to do? And they answering, No: Then
he required that I should be set at liberty, which was commanded that very
minute. Then he came unto me, and asked me, if he could do me any further
service? Yes, Sir, said I unto him, in two things; the one, to conduct me home,
and rescue me from the tyranny of those, who have ravished me from my dearest
Mother; and the other is, that I may know the name of him, unto whom I owe both
my life and my honor. As for my name (answered he) I shall take it as a
favor, if you will not force me to make it known; And as for waiting upon you,
unto the place where you desire to be, I shall do it, so it may be presently.

Whilst things went thus on my side in this place, the gods did evidence, that
they never forsake the innocent; for it happened, that my poor Nurse, having not
so much courage as to see me die, and thinking it impossible, that Thersander
could maintain it out against two such Cavaliers, she stayed in my Chamber,
crying and making most lamentable moan. Ormanthe, who had received all the
courtesies she could desire, both from her and me, was exceedingly moved at it,
and being very simple without any subtlety, she could not choose but tell her,
how her Aunt always assured her, that I should not die, but only desired, that
I should be beholding unto her for my life, to the end, I should be a better
friend unto her. Ah! sweetheart, said the Nurse, it is most certain our
Mistress must die, if Thersander be overcome, the King himself, according to
the Laws, cannot save her. Alas, alas, said Ormanthe, shall my Lady be burned?
Nay, nay, said my Nurse, it is too sure. Ah me! most miserable wretch that I
am, replied the Wench, how can I ever expect that the gods will pardon me for
her death? Why, said my Nurse, are you any ways guilty of her death? Oh
Mother! said Ormanthe, if you will promise me to tell no body, I will tell you
a strange accident. And my Nurse promising secrecy, she told her, that it was
she who had the Child, and told her all that I have related unto you.
Sweetheart, sweetheart, said my Nurse presently, let us go presently and save
her life; believe it, the gods will be well pleased with it; and moreover I
will undertake, you shall have what you will of my Lady. Thus was the truth
discovered.

The Wench followed my Nurse, who, to be brief, addressed herself to the
Queen, and acquainted her with the whole business, whilst the stranger was
talking unto me.

The wickedness of Leriana being thus discovered, both by Arms, and the
confession of this Wench, the King commanded, she should be burned in the same
fire that was prepared for me; though she did inveigh against her Niece,
saying, That my Nurse had suborned her, and that she was not of age to be a
competent Witness, especially against her above all others, because she had
chid and chastized her for these vices. But all these allegations were invalid,
the truth was evident enough, by the particulars and circumstances which this
Wench did speak of, and by the report of the Midwife, who confessed, that she
never saw her face. Every one began to clap their hands and the people seeing
the villainy of Leriana, began to throw stones at her. The King commanded
justice should be executed, and she seeing her self ready to be thrown into
the fire, being much moved at the memory of all her wickedness, she confessed
the truth; she desired audience, declared all her wicked practices, asked me
pardon, and then voluntarily threw her self into the fire, where she ended her
days, to the contentment of all those, who heard of her wicked and malicious
ways.

Whilst these things were thus in agitation, the Cavalier who had delivered me,
desiring not to be known (as it is thought) retired himself, and none took
notice which way; and I not finding him, was extremely grieved, he should
depart with so few thanks for what he had done: I used all the means I possibly
could to hear of him; but after all enquiry, all I could hear, was the next
morning from a Country man, who met him, and whom he desired to come unto me
from him, and let me know, that had he not been urged by extreme importancy, he
would have stayed longer, and waited upon me whither I had commanded him; but
he had promised some assistance to a Lady, who lived toward the Town of
Gergovia; and that if I had any more service to command him, I might hear of
him at the Golden Mount; and that he might be known, he would not change the
Device which was upon his Shield. Then asking the man, what it was, because I
was so astonished the day before, that I took no notice of it? He told me, that
it was a Tiger feeding upon the Heart of an Human body, with this Motto, Thou
give me a Death, and I maintain thy Life.

Now, discreet Shepheardesses, to abridge my story, it was ordered, that I
should be free from the Guardianship of Leontidas, because his Wife had begged
my Estate, and be set clearly at liberty. The poor silly Ormanthe, since she
was only seduced by the subtlety of her Aunt, she was shut up in one of those
houses designed for such punishments, where the women there do live very well,
only they must never come out. I shall now make a strange relation unto you: I
did still love Damon most extremely, and the memory of him since his death was
so imprinted in my soul, that he was commonly always before my eyes: But since
this accident, and since I saw this strange Cavalier, I know not how, but I
began to change my first affection, and placed it upon him; and though I never
saw his face, yet, I must confess, I love him, so as it may be said, I was in
love with a face of Armor: I know not whether my obligation to him was the
cause of it, or whether his valor and courage, and noble mind, forced me unto
it; but so it is, I never loved any since that day, but this unknown Cavalier;
and in testimony of it, after a long expectance of his return, and hearing no
news of him, I resolved to go my self unto Gergovea, and the Golden Mount:
After I had consulted with my self about this design, I acquainted Thersander
with it, who offered me all his assistance; and I addressed my self unto him,
rather then unto any other, because since the day he fought for me, he had
wholly dedicated himself unto my service; and because I had often heard him
say, that he was infinitely desirous to know that valiant Cavalier, who had so
bravely relieved us. I gave out therefore, that I would go and visit my Estate;
I prepared my Train, I left the Court, and came to my own house, where leaving
all my retinue, I took with me only my Nurse for a companion, and Thersander to
defend me, and so setforwards toward the Golden Mount. The Country was
extremely rough and mountainous, almost never without snow and ice; my poor
Nurse dyed there, and having interred her, I was much grieved to be alone with
Thersander; but I presently met with Tircis, Hylas, and Laonice, whose company
pleased me so much, that, not to lose it, I resolved to put on the habit of a
Shepherdess, as now you see me, and Thersander in the habit of a Shepherd.
Then after we had stayed a while amongst the Mountains, in hopes to hear some
news of him I was in quest of, I resolved to come into this Country, since he
appointed us to make that way, thinking, that when I came to Gergovea, I should
happily find this Cavalier, unto whom I was so much obliged.

Madonthe was thus telling her story, and not without bedewing her cheeks with
tears, whilst Paris and the rest of the shepherds were talking together; for
their minds were possessed with that malady, which above all others is an
enemy to sleep. For Tircis, he loved his deceased Cleon, although he was out of
all hopes of ever seeing her again. And because there was none of them so free
as the inconstant Hylas, he bore it out the best of any in the company, and was
least troubled with his Love. Tircis, thinking upon his dear Cleon, he could
not choose but sigh very loud, and Silvander at the same time did the same. See,
said Hylas, what difference there is betwixt these two sighs. What is the
difference, said Paris? The difference is, said Hylas, that Silvander does sigh
so, to cool the fire which scorcheth him; and Tircis sighs and blows, to
kindle that fire which heretofore did scorch him. Hylas had said very well,
said Tircis, if he had said, he had thought so; for this is only a mere
imagination of a soul that knows not how to love. How now, Tircis, said Hylas,
do you also upbraid me, that I know not how to love? I thought there had been
none but that fantastical Silvander, who had been of that opinion. If you
would judge according to reason, said Tircis, you would be of our opinions.
Why, said Hylas, is it requisite, that to love well, I must needs Idolize one
that is dead, as you do? Did you but know how to love, aright, (said Tircis)
questionless, if you should meet with so great a misfortune as mine, you would
think your self obliged in duty so to do. How, how, said Hylas, in love with a
Grave, a Coffin? believe it, shepherd, I will never be in love with any such
Mistresses: But, come a little to reason, what contentment, and what end do you
aim at in such a love? Love, said Tircis, is a great god, which can aim at or
desire nothing but himself; he is his own Center, and has no aim or
inclination, but what begins and ends in himself: Love is like a Ring, it
begins where it ends, and ends where it begins; it is perpetual, it aims at
no ends, but is pleased and contented with its own nature. These are delicate
dreams indeed, said Hylas; for my part, I believe them to be all fables,
invented by some silly women. What is it, Hylas, (said Tircis) which you think
so far from truth? All that you say, answered Hylas, is so palpably gross, as
I were mad if I did not see the simplicity of them.

You say, Love desires nothing but it self, and I say, we see the contrary;
for we never desire any thing, but that which we have not. If you did
understand, answered Tircis, how by the infinite power of Love, two persons
becomes but one, you would know, that a Lover can desire nothing but himself;
for as soon as you do understand, how a Lover is transformed into the person
Loved, and the person Loved into the Lover, and both becomes but one, though
being Lover and Loved they are two, you would find, Hylas, and confess, that
since the Lover desires nothing but the person Loved, and since he is himself
both the Lover and the Loved by this conjunction, he can desire nothing but
himself. See, said Hylas, how the old Proverb is truly verified, one Error
begets a hundred. You would persuade me into a belief of things impossible,
as, that the Lover becomes the person Loved: why, by this argument, I am
Phillis, for I do love her, and yet I am Hylas, and I do desire her. The
conclusion, said Silvander, is not good, for you do not love her: Had you said,
that I, in loving Diana, were transformed into her, you had said right. Well,
said Hylas, are you then Diana? is your Cap there changed into a Coyfe, and
your Coat into a Gown? My Cap, said Silvander, does not love her Coife. Very
good (said the inconstant Hylas) if you be changed into Diana, you should then
dress your self in the habit of a woman: It is not handsome, that so wise a
shepherdess as you are, should disguise your self thus in the habit of a
man. There was none in all the company could forbear laughing at the pleasant
expressions of this merry shepherd; Silvander himself could not hold: But
afterward, he answered him thus: I will, if I can, convince you of your
error: Know therefore, that there are two parts in a man, the one is the Body,
which we see and touch, and the other is the soul, which we cannot see nor
touch, but is known by words and actions; for neither words nor actions are
parts of the Body, but of the Soul, which makes use of the Body only as an
instrument and organ; for the body does not see of it self, nor understand, it
is the Soul which does it; and so by consequence, when we do love, it is not
the Body which loves, but the Soul; and so it is only the Soul which
transformes it self into the person Loved, and not the Body. But, said Hylas,
I do love the Body as well as the Soul; and so, if a Lover be changed into the
thing Loved, my Soul should be changed as well into the Body of Phillis, as
into her Soul This said Silvander, does thwart the Laws of Nature; for a Soul,
which is spiritual, cannot become a Body, no more then a Body can become a
Soul. If it be so, said Hylas, that the change be but in part, and that part be
the Soul, it is that part which I do least care for. In this, said Silvander,
you do make it evidently appear, that you do not love; or at least, that you do
love against reason: For the Soul ought not to debase it self, unto that which
is interior unto it self; and therefore they say, that Love ought to be
betwixt equals; that is a Soul to love a Soul, which is its equal, and not
the Body which is its inferior, and which Nature gave him only as an
instrument. Now to make it appear, that the Lover becomes the party Loved, and
that if you do love Phillis, Hylas is Phillis; and if Phillis love Hylas,
Phillis is Hylas, consider what the Soul is; It does consist, Shepherd, of the
Will, the Memory, and of the Understanding: Now Philosophers do hold, that we
can love only that, which we do know; and if the knowledge, and the thing
known, be one and the same thing, it must consequently follow, that the
knowledge of him who Loves, and her who is loved, is the same. That if the Will
of a Lover, ought not to differ from the Will of the person Loved, and if he do
seek her by his thoughts, which is only an effect of the Memory, as well as by
his corporeal eyes, who can doubt, but that the Memory, the Understanding and
the Will, being changed into the person loved, his Soul, which consists of
these three faculties, is changed also. By Tautates (said Hylas) you fetch it
very high; and though I have been long a Student in the Massilian Schools, yet
I cannot reach you. It was there, said Silvander, where I learned this
Philosophy. Though you have puzzled my brains with your discourse, said Hylas,,
yet you cannot demonstrate unto me, that a Lover is changed into the Loved,
since there is one part left out, which is the Body. The Body, said Silvander,
is not a part, but only an organ or instrument of the Soul; and if the Soul of
Phillis were separated from her Body, would it not be said, there is the Body
of Phillis, and not Phillis her self? And if that be properly spoken, then it
must be understood that Phillis is somewhere else; and if you do love aright,
it is into that Phillis into which you should be transformed; so as if this be
so, you can have no desire out of your self: for, comprising all your love in
your self, you do also comprize all your desires within your self. If it be
so, (said Hylas) that the Body is but the instrument, which Phillis makes use
of, I will give you that Phillis, and let me have the rest, and see whether you
or I shall be better contented. But to end all our differences, it were good if
we could get a little sleep. Upon this, he was silent, and would not give any
further answer: Also all the Company by little and little fell asleep, except
Silvander, whose soul being swelled with abundance of real affection, he could
not close his eye of a long time after.

In the mean time, Madonthe, as I told you before, had related the story of her
fortune unto these fair shepheardesses; and because a great part of the night
was already spent, sleep did by degrees steal into the eyes of Phillis, and
her: But Astrea, who could not sleep, still talked with Diana, who for her
part, seeing how extremely Silvander loved her, she began also to love him,
although her affection to him did insensibly begin, she not taking any notice
of it: At the first, it was no more, then a mere acknowledgment of his merit,
(so requisite is Knowledge before Love) and afterward, ordinary conversation
with him, did win her to a liking of his company; at last, his addresses unto
her, with so much reverence and discretion, made her love him; yet without any
design or intention so to do. Astrea, who entertained the same thoughts of
Celadon, not being in dispose to sleep, and seeing Phillis and Madouthe both
fast, also thinking that none could hear her, she spoke thus unto Diana:
Sister, I must confess, that one imprudent act does draw many sorrows after
it, and when one fault is once committed, it requires abundance of wisdom to
repair it. Consider, I beseech you, how this crime which I committed against
the affection of Celadon, has hurried me into a sea of sorrows; I do verily
believe, that as long as I live, nay, and after my death too, if the dead have
any knowledge of past actions as I believe they have, I shall never cease my
grief, for my offending against the fidelity of Celadon; yet, you see unto what
a pass this fault has brought me: This love, which with so much pains and
care I have so long kept secret, and would hardly acquaint my dearest
companions with it; see, I say, how I do at this hour my self discover it
unto strangers, who are not any ways in the world obliged unto me. Ah! could I
recall that happiness which I have lost, methinks I could manage it with more
prudence. Sister, said Diana, all human imbecility has this property, that
the malady can very hardly be known until it be present; the gods themselves
only will be esteemed perfect and wise: And you must think, that if the loss
of Celadon which you caused, had not fallen out that way, doubtless it had
some other; for, there is nothing firm and truly solid amongst men. I cannot
say, but perfect prudence may a little foresee, and mitigate these accidents;
but believe me, Sister, we must know withal, that we are all but human, and
full of imperfections. You see, answered Astrea, how some do pass their lives:
more sweetly than others, or at the least, their actions are not seen or known
unto the world; and I need not go any further for an instance, then in your
misfortune in Philander; but who can blame you for it? Ah Sister! said Diana,
there is no sharper reproves of our faults, then the knowledge that we our
selves have of them. It is very true, said Astrea, but you must needs confess,
that as any good which we do enjoy; is better and greater for being known; so
also the sorrows and pains, when they are known, are far more bitter and
smarting: And hence it is, that every one strives to hide and conceal the
afflictions which befall them, and oftentimes had rather they were greater and
secret, then less and public. Now, Sister, there is one thing, which my
affection to you prompts me to advertise you of, unto which me thinks your
prudence ought to apply some remedies; and I am sure, if before my misfortune
did befall me, I had met with a friend who had freely spoken unto me, I should
not have been so sadly ashamed as I am. Sister, said Diana, this is a great
argument of your good affection to me; and you will infinitely oblige me, if
not only now, but always, you will tell me your opinion of all my actions,
freely, and clearly, and especially now, when all are asleep.

Although these two Shepheardesses did think, that none did hear them, yet they
were deceived; for Laonice, who was in the company, although she seemed to be
asleep, yet she was awake; and being extremely desirous to hear more, that she
might, according to her design do them a displeasure, she listened with a most
attentive ear. On the other side, Silvander seeing all his company asleep, and
hearing the sheph eardesses talking, he thought that he heard the voice of
Diana; and having an itching desire to hear their discourse, he stole so gently
near them upon his hands and knees, as he could hear them very distinctly; and
by fortune, he came just as Astrea did begin to say thus.

Do you remember what I said unto you yesterday in you ear, when Silvander
disputed with Phillis? Was it not (said Diana) concerning the affection of that
shepherd toward me? The very same, answered Astrea; and be pleased to
understand, that since, I have discovered it more plainly by the discourse
which I have had with him, and you may most infallibly expect a most extreme
and violent affection from him: If this affection be displeasing unto you, it
is requisite you keep him at a distance from you, though I cannot tell whether
that will do any good, since his humor is of such a nature, as the more it is
crossed, the more violent it will grow; but if it be pleasing unto you, it is
most requisite you use abundance of discretion, that it may not be known unto
any but your self. Sister, (said Diana, after she had a while considered upon
it) I see you make your love unto me most evidently appear, and will keep any
thing secret which I shall say; I will therefore open my very heart unto you,
but with a hearty desire, that what e're I shall say may go no further, no, not
to Phillis her self, if it be no offense to the friendship that is betwixt
you. I should think, answered Astrea, my self unworthy of your love, if I
should impart any secret which you shall trust me withal, unto any other; nay,
I should think my self to be a most horrid Traitor: And as for Phillis, be
confident, Sister, that as I would not do any act which might wound that
affection I bear unto her, so she shall never make me offend against the love I
have vowed unto you. Not that I have any diffidence in the discretion of
Phillis, (said Diana) but because I would, if I could, hide it from my own
self. Upon this, she paused a while, and then continued: When I lost
Philander, (as, Sister, I have told you) I was so exceedingly grieved at it,
that for a long time after, I resolved never to love any again, but to spend
all the rest of my mourning days in an eternal widowhood: For, though
Philander was not my Husband, yet I do verily believe he had been, if he had
survived Philidas. In this resolution, I may most safely and truly protest
unto you, I have lived hitherto, so insensible of any love, as if I had neither
any eyes or ears, to see or hear any motion that was presented unto me in that
kind; Amidor, kinsman unto Philidas, can testify as much, who, though of a
wavering humor, had parts sufficient to make himself loved, and who before he
married Alf^runte, did often offer to take me upon what conditions soever I
should require: Witness also the poor Nicander; I call him poor, because of
the strange course which he took after my refusal. To be brief, witness all
those, who since that day have made addresses of love unto me. The memory of
Philander has unto this very day so defended me against all others, as I have
not had so much as any thought of love. But I must needs confess, that since
the feigned address of Silvander, I perceived my self much changed: I know,
this shepherd at the first, did only court me for a wager; and yet as soon as
he began, his addresses did please me. On the contrary, the generous Paris did
very really love me, and quitted the grandeur of his quality for my sake and
yet for all his merits, I could find in my self no other love unto him, then
that of a Sister unto a Brother. To find out the reason of all this, is a
thing impossible, but yet it is most certainly true. Now, Sister, if I do say,
that I do love Silvander after another manner, mistake me not; do not think
that I am in love with him, but that I do resent the very same beginings, which
I remember I resented at the beginning of my affection unto Philander. I
beseech you, Sister, (said Astrea unto her) what is it which pleases you best
in him? First, (said Diana) I perceive, he never loved any before; and this
cannot be attributed unto any stupidity of his understanding, since he does
plainly evidence the contrary by his discourse: Then he does so handsomely
submit himself, and gives me such an absolute power over his will, as he never
speaks a word, but he fears the offending me. Then again, there is a continued
and constant discretion in all the actions of his life, you shall never see him
either too much or too little in any thing he does: and lastly, which is the
prime cause of my amity, I do think him to be an honest, plain, open-hearted
man, and without vice. I do assure you, Sister, (said Astrea) I do observe the
same qualities to be in this shepherd; and for my part, I do think, that if
ever the heavens do destinate you to love any, you will be very happy in him.
But let me tell you, that if you will avoid displeasures, you must use all your
prudence. I do wonder, Sister, said Diana, why you should use this expression
unto me; for know, that though I do love him better then any other I ever saw,
since the loss of Philander; yet, I would not have him to know it, or that I
have any intention to let him serve me; and that if he should be so bold, as to
declare it unto me, I do assure him, I would treat him so, as he should never
dare to speak of it twice unto me. But, Sister, said Astrea, what is then your
intention? To punish us both, answered Diana; I mean to chastise him for his
presumption in loving me, and also to punish my self, for my fault in liking
him, to the end, we may both be more just, and better advised. But, Sister,
said Astrea, this design in my apprehension is very pernicious; for by this,
you bring your self no satisfaction, but much sorrow, and perhaps extreme
shame. Take heed, lest in holding a flint, you strike fire, if you strike it
against any thing which is harder, and so the hidden fire discover it self.
Young spirits and hearts, if they do love well, and if they be prudent, they
will discreetly hide their affections, and not disclose them unto any of their
acquaintance; but, when they are stricken, I mean, when they are rigorously
used, then they are so transported with their passions, as it is impossible
they should dissemble. And this, believe it, cannot be without abundance of
vexation and sorrow, in the soul of her that is concerned; for, on which side
soever the reports go, they cannot be advantageous to the woman. Your wisdom,
Sister, does enable you, to give very good counsel unto any other; but the
wisest eyes are often blind in their own case: And this invites me to ask you,
Whether do you love this shepherd? or you do not love him? for if you love him
not, then break off all manner of conference, and all correspondency with him,
and so entirely and speedily, that he may not have one spark of any hopes from
you: And in this, do not flatter your self and say, that a woman cannot help
it, if men will needs love her, no more then she can hinder them from looking
upon her; this is an excuse to fool some silly person withal: For, at the very
first, the fire must be quenched, all hopes must be taken from him, not in
part, but totally and entirely. If there be found sometimes some opinionative
and obstinate man, it is only for a few days; for certainly, Love, no more
then all other Mortals, cannot live without nutriment, and the proper
nutriment of Love, is Hope. But then, if you do love, as you say, and as indeed
he deserves, then, Sister, me thinks it is a great folly, to deprive your self
of that which pleases you. Sister, said Diana, that which pleases is not
always honorable, nor reasonable; and since they are not, virtue commands us
to shun them; and, for my part, I had rather die, than do otherwise. I make no
question of it, answered Astrea, for I am most confident of Diana's virtue. But
pray let us see whether this act be contrary unto reason or honor. Is it any
way in the world contrary to reason, to love a generous, wise, handsome, and
discreet Shepherd? For my part, it seems unto me so full of reason, as I can
see no contrariety in it. Now any thing that is reasonable, cannot be
dishonorable; and since it is not, why should you not love him? It is an easy
matter to conclude in the advantage of this shepherd, said Diana, as long as
none does contradict it; but to argue thus: Is it reasonable that Diana, who
has ever held a good repatation amongst the shepherds and shepheardesses of
this Country, should marry an unknown shepherd? one, who has nothing but
himself, and what his ingennity acquires? I believe you will decline from your
first opinion upon this consideration: And upon this cause, I am fully resolved
to suffer his addresses and affection no longer, then I can faigne and seem not
to believe it: But, if be should bring me to that pass, as I could not umbrage
my self under this shadow, I do protest I will presently discard him and never
permit him to see me; or, if he did either see me, or speak to me, or love me,
I will treat him in such a manner, as he shall believe me in good earnest, and,
I think love me no longer. And what will you your self do, said Astrea, in the
mean time? Doubtless I will love him, answered Diana, and I will punish my
self for my offense in so doing. I do foresee, said Astrea, that this vain
Chimera will afford you but false contentment, and that this design will beget
in you many a mortal displeasure.

Whilst these shepheardesses were thus discoursing, and thinking that none did
hear them, Laonice was so attentive, that not to lose one syllable of what was
said, she durst hardly breathe, for, there was nothing which she did so
passionately desire, as to discover this which she heard. But Silvander was
ravished, and when he heard at the beginning those favorable expressions of
Diana, Oh! how happy did he think himself? Afterward, when he heard the
counsel which Astrea gave her, and how she took his part, how much did he
think himself obliged? But when at last, he heard Diana's dire resolution: Oh
heavens! in what a dump was his soul smothered? It was well for him, that these
shepheardesses had a disposition to sleep, otherwise it had been impossible,
but he should have discovered himself to be there, by some of his deep and
groaning sighs; for, he could not obtain so much of himself, as to go further
and sigh at ease, so desirous was he to hear the end of their discourse; and
therefore I say, it was well for him, that after they had bid goodnight unto
each other, they presently fell asleep; for then he retired, and went to his
companions, looking whether any of them were awake; and finding them to be all
fast asleep, he began to entertain his own thoughts, and lifting up his eyes,
he contemplated upon the Stars, and the various Chimaeraes which were formed in
the Clouds; but he found none amongst them so various as his own thoughts, upon
the discourse which he had heard, buying his knowledge, that Diana loved him,
very dear, making a doubt, whether he was more obliged to his curiosity, which
let him know she loved him, or disobliged unto it, for hearing that cruel
resolution which she had taken. This imagination held a long debate in his
soul: At last, Love, out of very pity, closed his eyes, and suffered him to
fall asleep.

But now it is full time to return unto Celadon, whom we have long left in his
Cell, without any company but his own thoughts, which had no other subject for
themselves, but his past happiness, and his present misery. Fifteen or sixteen
days passed thus on, with so little care of his life, that sorrows nourished
him more, then any other thing which he eat: All his delight was in his
imaginations in which he passed away his days and nights, which were all one
to him, since being so distant from the eyes of Astrea, all seemed dark. There
was not one passage in all his life which came not then into his memory; and to
his misery, he always stayed longest upon those, that were most sad, as most
suitable to his present condition: If at any time he had any more pleasing, he
presently gave them a check, as not seasonable for so sad a soul, to see any
contentment. Thus spending his time in such sad exercises, and his food being
very bad, his countenance was so altered, as it was not knowable; and certainly
he could not have lived long, if the heavens, (who perhaps reserved him for
some better fortune) had not sent him some consolation.

The same day that he escaped out of Galathea's hands, by the help of Adamas,
Silvia, and Leonida, Galathea was constrained to wait upon her Mother unto
Marcelles, because of some public ceremonies of joy which they were to
perform, for the happy success which Clidaman had in the Army of the Francs.
But when she came there, and heard that Celadon was escaped, she was in such a
fury against Leonida, that she forbid her to come into her presence: This fair
Nymph being weary of the Courts noise, she retired to the house of her Uncle
Adamas, who was as tender of her, as if she had been his own Daughter, as well
by reason of Consanguinity, as because she was recommended unto him by Belizar
his Brother, before his death. And though she lost all hopes from her past
services, yet, she was very glad to recover her liberty at that rate; but much
more, in hopes to see Celadon again, supposing he would be near Astrea; and
though she believed, his affection unto Astrea would dash all her hopes in him,
yet she thought it would be a most pleasing satisfaction unto her, to spend all
her time near him: And therefore finding Paris to be very well disposed unto
such a visit, about some two days after she came unto her Uncles, they went
both together unto the Towns where these shepheardesses frequented; but when
she came there, and enquired of Celadon, and heard that he was not yet
returned, but that they all believed him to be dead, she was extremely
astonished: However, in satisfaction of Paris, who was an adorer of Diana, and
in pleasing her self with their good company; she was a frequent visitant, and
grew into such familiarity with these shepheardesses, that they did infinitely
love her, and she them, and lived with them as if she were a shepherdess,
with which kind of life, she was so pleased, that she would often go unto them
with Paris, and it being not above a mile betwixt both their habitations, she
would often go by her self; and the way was so pleasant, by reason of the
delectable River of Lignon, and the delightful Groves which she went through,
as it was impossible she should be weary. It happened then, that resolving one
day to go alone, she passed over the Bridge, and walking along the River side;
though there was no path, yet the way was delightsome, by reason of the
pleasure she took in looking at the fishes, which flocked by troops unto the
River side; and so delighting her self along the water side, she came unawares
unto the Fountain, where Celadon used to gather his VVater-Cresses, which was
his food. As fortune was, that shepherd being laid down, was fallen asleep a
little before. When the Nymph first spied him, she took him for Lycidas,
because those two Brothers were both of a stature and proportion, and used to
habit themselves both alike; and though Celadon was a little bigger, and had a
more full and pleasing face, yet coming nearer him, she was mistaken, as well,
because she thought Celadon was not in that Country, as, because his face was
much changed; or else because she thought, that Lycidas being full of
jealousy, as she knew he was, might very well be retired from all company into
that solitary place: And therefore she set her self down by Celadon, thinking
him to be Lycidas; but seeing he did not wake, she resolved to go on her
voyage, and leave him to his rest: but before she rose, she espied a little
bag, wherein he was wont to keep his Letters, which hung a little out of his
pocket; she gently took them, without any disturbance to his sleep, and after
this piece of theft, she went away, leaving the shepherd asleep, who presently
after awaked; and because the Sun began to be hot, he went for shade unto the
thickest part of the Wood: But the memory of his shepherdess being the Center
of all his thoughts, he opened a little Case which he wore about his neck, in
which was the Picture of Astrea; and after he had a while contemplated it, he
read these words, which formerly he had written upon the side of it.

VVanting the Substance, Shadows comfort me. Alas poor miserable Celadon,
said he, how can thou now say, that being deprived of the true good, the
false ones should comfort thee? The good thou have is merely imaginary, and the
true good is ravished from thee, by her who is the owner of it. Afterward
looking seriously upon the Picture, and speaking unto it, as if to Astrea her
self: Is it possible Oh my fairest Shepherdess, (said he) that I should thus
displease you? But is it possible, that having displeased you, I should yet
live? If I did displease, it is absolutely impossible that it should be with my
will; nor is it possible, I should desire to live after such a crime. If she
would have me live, Oh! why does she banish me from that place in which I can
only live? And if she would have me die, why does she not positively command
it? But alas, what more express command can I expect, then her command never
to come into her presence? She knows, that the sight of her is my life; and in
forbidding me to see her, does she not command me to die? This, doubtless,
were enough to make me seek a death, did I not know, how that which is
reasonable in the judgment of others, is without any shadow of reason in her.
All others think it a thing most just, to love those that love her, and that
amity ought to be rewarded with amity; but she thinks it reasonable, to hate
those who do love and adore her. Why then should I not think, that this command
of living from her, is rather to make me live and suffer the more, then to
abridge my pain by an anticipated death? But that cannot be it which she
requires of me; for she knows well enough, that I am not able to live so. Did
she ever demand of me any proofs, but such as are impossible? witness this
command from her own mouth, and those Letters, by which she commanded me to
counterfeit affection unto another. Then shutting up that dear Picture to read
those Letters which she had sent him: Well, said he since I must not live to my
own contentment, I will live to her glory. Then putting up the little case into
his breast, he put his hand into his pocket, to take the Letters which were in
a little bag, but when he could not find them, he turned out all that he had
in both his pockets, and not yet finding them, he went to his Cave, thinking
that he had left them there; but not finding them neither, there was not a tust
in all the Cave, nor betwixt the Cave and the Fountain, nor between the
fountain, and all the places he had been at that day, but he turned it over and
over; nay, not a leaf which was likely to hide them, but he sought under it; so
vexed was he at the loss, and so desirous was he to find them: For, as these
Letters were infinitely dear unto him, as being written by the fair hand of his
dearest shepherdess; so he loved them, as the witnesses of his fidelity, and
as the sweetest entertainment that he had in the miserable life which he led.
At last, seeing all his laborious quest to be in vain, and that there was no
hopes of finding these beloved Letters: Alas, alas, (said he, lifting his eyes
up to heaven) what unjust Demon has ravished from me that little remnant of
contentment which I had? for a Demon certainly it must needs be, since no
mortal ever uses to come hither; or if they did, they would never have been
so cruel. Well, well, Celadon, said he, yet thou art happy in this thy
miserable life, though thou have lost those happy testimonies of thy past
felicity; comfort thy self in thy loss, and render thanks unto heaven, that
has made thee so conformable unto the will of thy dearest shepherdess, and
make it appear, that neither her rigor, nor the force of Fate, can ever make
thee weary in obeying her, nor ever separate thee from the thoughts of her; it
is but sit, that since thou have lost her good will, thou should also lose
all manner of consolation.

In the mean time, Leonida rejoiced very much in her Larcenie, and having got a
good distance from this shepherd, she opened the little bag which contained
these Letters, which she believed had been written by the hand of Phillis; and
being out of measure desirous to see into the secrets of that shepherdess,
she poured them out into her lap, and the first which she light upon, was this.

Astrea's Letter unto Celadon.
THat you do love me, I believe, and you may know it by this, that I am well
pleased you should give me assurance of it. If you have as much understanding,
as you have resentment of Love, you may know, that I do love you; by my
permitting you to tell me, that you do love me: And by this, you may assure
your self, that you have from me as much, as it seems you wish to make you
happy. If after this declaration you are not contented, I shall say, that you
do not love Astrea, since Amity ought to desire nothing, but Amity again.


When Leonida saw the name of Astrea, she stopped, and lifting the paper nearer
her eyes, she read that word two or three times over. At last, remembering the
jealousy that had been betwixt Celadon, Lycidas, Astrea, and Phillis, she
believed, that perhaps it was not ill grounded, but that Astrea did love
Lycidas; and therefore lapping it up, she put it in her bosom, and took
another, which she found to be thus written.

Astrea's Letter unto Celadon.
MUst it not needs be now confessed, that I do love you more then you love me,
since I have sent you my Picture, and could never obtain yours by all my
prayers? But, Love is just in it, since he knows, that he always ought to
help those, that are in greatest necessity. The faintness of your affection
has more need of such a remembrancer, than mine has. Receive it therefore as
a testimony of your own fault. But, what do you think of me, Celadon? Can you
believe, I love you, and yet doubt of your affection? No, no, I do but feast,
Shepherd; for, had I that opinion of you, I would not desire, you should have
that belief in me, and therefore never doubt it; but be most certainly
assured, that as long as I make it appear, that I have a memory of you, I do
think my self truly loved by my Son.


Surely (said Leonida, extremely astonished) Lycidas has found these Letters,
amongst some of his Brothers things, after his death; methinks if it had been
so, he should not have carried them about him, for fear of losing. Then she
took another, which she found thus written.

Astrea's Letter unto Celadon
IT seems, my Son, that you have less courage then I have: You say, that it
is a sign, that I do love the less, but see how I prove the contrary: That
which makes me surport all the miseries which I endure for your sake, is
certainly the affection which I bear unto you. Now that affection which makes
me surmount the greatest miseries, must needs be great; and therefore this
courage which you blame in me, is a mark of my great affection. Never be
startled at the threats of our common Enemies (for so, Celadon, I call call
them, and not Parents) if you will have me think your affection equal unto
mine; which, for your sake, does not only surmount, but scorn, all manner of
miseries and afflictions.


Leonida read this Letter, not well knowing what she did: Now she began to
suspect, that it was Celadon and not Lycidas; and much more, when she
remembered, that Galathea had spoken to her of some such Letters. Oh heavens!
said she, certainly it is Celadon: Where was my eyes, that I could not know him
when I saw him? Then she lapped up the Letters, and went with all speed unto
the Fountain, where she left him; but extremely angry she was with her self,
when she found him not there, and broke into many expressions of grief: Then
she turned about every way, to see if she could find any relics of him; but
he was retired into his Cave, after his long and laborious search, for what she
had stolen. At the last, Love, which is always very circumspect, prompted her
to take notice, that the grass about the Fountain was trodden, and that there
was a new Path, not half beaten; she imagined very aptly, that this Path would
conduct her to the place where the shepherd was: And indeed, Celadon using to
pass between his Cave and that place, had made a kind of a Path. Leonida then
taking it for her guide; she had not followed it four or five hundred paces,
but she came to the Rock, where Celadon made his retreat; yet, the trees and
bushes being very thick about it, she was afraid to approach near, lest it
should prove the den of some Wolf or wild Boar, or at the least, of many
Serpents. As she was standing thus in suspense, she thought that she heard him
breathe, which assured her, that some was there; but knowing, that Serpents do
sometimes hiss in the same manner, she therefore trod very circumspectly and
cautiously, and so softly, that Celadon never perceived her: And though she did
afterward make some noise, yet the shepherd was so attentive upon his own
thoughts, that he took no notice of her. Now she was got so near the entrance,
that she heard him breathe plainly, and sometimes speak, yet she could not
understand the words; but coming a little near, and putting her head a little
into the entrance, she heard him say thus: Now heart begin to hope well; for,
as the snuff of the Lamp cease to burn, when the flame has consumed all the
Oil; so may I hope my miseries will cease, having by little and little
consumed all the comforts and contentments that I have. Oh happy loss! how I
would cherish thee, if by thy means, I go out of this miserable life which I
lead? Oh my dearest Papers! how I would bless the day on which you were
ravished from me, if my grieving for your loss would end (...)? For, alas!
there is no hopes left, that my sorrows should ever end, but with my life.
Leonida hearing this, was moved with much compassion knowing him now to be
Celadon; and was also surprised with such a sudden joy, that though she had a
great desire to let him complain on, and hearken longer what he said; yet, she
was constrained to go to him with open arms, and cry unto him: Ah Celadon,
away with these lamentations and sorrows, you have had too many of them; it is
time now to change your course of life, and enjoy some pleasant days. You may
easily imagine, that Celadon was extremely surprised, when he heard this voice
upon a sudden, and seeing her come unto him, for he had not seen any of a long
time; and his spirits being wholly retired into his thoughts, she had spoken
all this, before he heard or knew what she said. He started up upon a sudden,
but the life which he had lived, and bad food together, had so weakened him,
that he was constrained to sit down again presently. Then the Nymph gave him
leisure to recollect himself, and sitting down by him, took him by the hand.

Well Celadon, (said she unto him) did you so impatiently desire to get out of
Galathea's hands, only to live thus? Is it possible, our company should be so
displeasing to you, that you had rather be amongst senseless Rocks and wild
Woods? The Shepherd having recollected his spirits, did faintly answer: You
see, fair Leonida, unto what Love has brought me, and what power you have over
those that love you. How is it possible, said she, that Love should make you
thus neglect your own preservation? Is it possible, answered the shepherd,
that you, who vaunts to know what Love is, should doubt, but that my affection
can endure the greatest extremities? However, replied the Nymph, if I were
condemned to die, I would at the least ask him that condemned me, the reason
why I am condemned. What better reason can be given, said Celadon, then that
she, who has the sovereign power over me, will have it so? so as the reason of
my ill-being is, because my well-being displeases her. Oh Celadon! (said the
Nymph, and pittyed him) in what a miserable condition you are? See, sage Nymph,
said he, how you are mistaken, I cannot desire more happiness, then the misery
which I endure; for, can I wish a greater happiness, then to please her? If my
misery please her can I grieve for it? No, no, I must rejoice at whatsoever is
pleasing unto her. Oh happy Celadon (said he) and in one thing the more happy,
that Astrea does not know that thou art happy. Leonida hearing these
expressions, stood astonished, and looked upon him with admiration: At last,
after she had been a long while mute, she said unto him: I must needs confess,
shepherd, that if this be the way to love, there is only you amongst all men
living, that can follow it. But, shepherd, take heed, that as many good things
are corrupted and spoiled with abuse, so your melancholy and obstinacy do not
corrupt your affection. I care not for all the accidents that can come, said
the shepherd, so my Love be not offended. But, said Leonida, do you love
Astrea? You ask me a question, answered he, unto which you are able to give an
answer your self. If you do love her, (said the Nymph) you ought to love all
that is hers, and if so, then you ought to love your self, since you are so
entirely hers, that you are not your own. Since I do love Astrea, replied the
shepherd, I ought to hate all that she hates: Astrea hates the miserable
Celadon, why then, fair Nymph, should not I? Every one, said she, is obliged,
to have a greater care of their own preservation, then of the love or hatred of
any other. That Law, said the shepherd, is good and allowable amongst Men, but
not amongst Lovers. Why, said the Nymph, do they cease to be Men, when they
become Lovers? If you do mean a man, said he, that is subject unto all sorts of
miseries and inquiotudes, I do confess, that a Lover remains a Man still;
but, if that Man have any will of his own, and judges of things as they are,
and not according to the opinion of another I deny, that a Lover is a man,
since as soon as ever he becomes a Lover, he does so dispossess himself of
his will and judgment, as he neither wills nor judges, but as she wills
and judges whom he loves. Oh, the miserable condition of a Lover! (said the
Nymph). But much more miserable (answered the shepherd) is he, that loves not,
since he cannot enjoy the most perfect and highest happiness, that the world
affords; for, the very least of Loves joys, does exceed all others that the
world has without it. Is there any pleasure comparable unto those, that
consist in the thought? When a Lover thinks upon the beauty of her that he
loves; nay, when he does but remember any one of her actions, nay, even the
very place where he last saw her; do you think he would change his contentment,
for any diversion in the whole Universe? He is so jealous, and so careful to
entertain this very thought, that lest he should make any a sharer with him, he
will retire into the most solitary and unfrequented places, that he can find;
he cares not for the society of men, or all the delights that men can devise,
and use to court with such care, so he may but enjoy his own thoughts. Now,
Leonida, since the contentment of thoughts are such, is it possible, the
weakness of any human heart should think to endure so much bliss, as to enjoy
the sight of her whom he loves, to hear her speak, to kiss her hand, to hear
her own mouth pronounce the word, I love you? Is it possible he should hear
this, and not be ravished, and be disordered with too much felicity and
delight? I do not mention those great and last assurances, which one receives
when he is loved, nor those languishments in the breast of the person loved;
for, these are contentments of so high a nature, as they cannot be gusted
without transport, and absolute ravishment out of our selves, nor can they be
expressed by any words, unless imperfectly. Now tell me, fair Nymph, whether
the condition of a Lover be so miserable now, I say, when you know what high
felicities he does enjoy? I do confess, (said the Nymph, after she had heard
him with admiration) that Celadon does love, if to love be, to be out of his
wits, and to live only upon bare thoughts. Alas! I cannot choose but think his
condition extremely miserable, in finding such contentments in such vain
imaginations and Chimeraes; and I am so far from thinking them felicities, as
my opinion of the contrary is much fortified. But Shepherd, let us leave this
discourse, since I see it will do you no good, and tell me, how you have lived
since I left you? Wise Nymph, answered Celadon, as I have lived since you met
me, so have I lived since I parted from you; for, as soon as ever I left you, I
shut my self up in this place, expecting until either Love or Death released
me. But why, Celadon, said she, do you not go unto your own Town, where your
friends and kindred do so much grieve for you? Astrea, said he, who has a far
greater power over me, than either any Parents or friends, has forbidden me
ever to see her, until she command; and therefore, as I told you, I have shut
my self up in this Cell, until either Love or Death release me. But, if my
adored Shepherdess had commanded me never to see her again, doubtless I had
shut my self up in my grave with death: And as soon as I came to my self
again, after my fall into the River, I knew, that Lignon would not give me a
death, because she did not peremptorily command it; but, remembering her words,
and that her banishment of me was not for ever, only until she commanded me to
return, I have lived in this manner as you see, expecting till Love recall me,
as it seems she has promised; or else until death do it for her, which shall
be welcome unto me in this life which I live. But poor deceived shepherd,
replied the Nymph, how can you ever hope she should recall you, as long as she
is ignorant where you are? Love, answered he, which conducted me hither, knows
the place well enough where I am, and does daily visit me; and since it is by
it, that I do hope she will recall me, there is no doubt, but it will without
me let her know the place, unto which it has conducted me. If your
imaginations, replied the Nymph, had an influence upon others, as they have
upon your self, all this you say might perhaps be; but believe it, shepherd,
the gods will never help those, who will not help themselves; and do not think,
that I speak without good reason, for I am very certain, that if Astrea did
know you were alive, she would passionately desire your company. How fair
Nymph, (said he presently) do you know that? I know it, said she, by that
sadness which sits in her face. Perhaps, said the shepherd, that proceeds
from some other cause. But where have you seen her since we parted? I shall be
very glad, said she, to entertain you with a discourse upon this subject, and
to relate unto you all that has happened since we parted, so I can but by it
cheer you a little up, and rouse you out of this dull kind of life. Believe it
(said Celadon) that the sight of you does bring me more content, then any thing
in the world could, except Astrea; and since I am deprived of her, your
discourse will be very pleasing unto me. Then Leonida began thus.

The History of Galathea.
SInce, Celadon, you do desire to know, how I have lived since I parted from
you, which is some fifteen or sixteen days since, I will very willingly make a
relation of it unto you, upon a condition that if you be weary with the length
of the discourse, we may break it off, and finish it another time, when any
convenient opportunity shall present it self. Know therefore, that in my
return from conducting you, I came into the Palace of Issoures, at the same
time when Amasis was taking Coach, to go unto Marcelies, and carrying Galathea
with her; because being desirous to render thanks unto Hesius, for the happy
success of her Son Clidaman, which he had in the Battle against the
Neustrians, she would by all means have Galathea with her, purposely to render
the solemnity more celebrated. And because retardment in such actions as these,
does in some sort resemble oblivion; and oblivion, ingratitude; she departed so
soon, that she scarcely gave the Nymph time to tell us what we should do with
you; and though she was extremely troubled at it, yet she durst not let it
appear, lest Amasis should take notice of it, who always held her by the hand,
not out of any suspicion, but only the more to carrasse her. she being thus
constrained to go with her into the Coach, all that she could do, was to say
thus unto me: You, Silvia, and Lucinde, come after us in my Coach, and follow
us with all the haste you can. I made a low reverence, and showed by my
actions, that I did understand what she said; but I did not intend to obey her,
because my aims were only upon you: And though I did well enough foresee her
anger, yet, I preferred the good office which I intended to you, above it,
choosing rather to fail in my duty to that Nymph, then in my affection to you.
However, faigning as if my going out were in obedience to my Uncle, I met
Silvia, who was in quest of me, and I told her, how you was escaped, whilst
none took any notice of you. But I was never in all my life so surprised, as
when in my return from you, I met Amasis and Galathea, as they were taking
Coach; for, I had been utterly undone, if they had spied me out of the doors.
But I did address my self unto my Uncle and Silvia: Father, said I unto him,
and smiled, and you my dear Companion, you must needs both of you help me out
in this business. Daughter, answered Adamas, never fear any blame for what you
have done, as long as it is but what you ought to do, nor ever grieve upon such
occasions; the gods, upon whom all events depend, are so just, as they will
ever bear you out; and if at any time the contrary seem to happen, take
special notice, Daughter, that it is to redouble the contentment, and as if
they happened only to augment your joys. And because it is very expedient, you
endeavor to preserve your self in the favor of your Mistress, Silvia shall
testify, that you did not any thing, but what she knows of very well; and to
make the matter more easy for you, I am contented, that you shall both of you
have some suspicion of me; for, I shall not be sorry that he should think, that
I do hate any thing which is contrary unto virtue: and I would permit you to
charge me downright with the act, but that it is necessary I should be
something in her esteem, only to draw her off from those foolish and false
imaginations, which Climanthes has infused into her. With such discourse as
this, my Uncle did encourage us to continue in this laudable design:
Afterward he went homewards, and we toward Marcelles; but first consulted
together, what Answers should be given unto Galathea, lest we should contradict
one another, knowing very well, that no eye is so quick and penetrating, as the
eye of Jealousy. In the mean time, Galathea's mind was only on her dear
Lucinde, commending my wit and subtlety in putting you into that habit, hoping,
that under that shadow, she might without any suspicion have you always with
her; not, shepherd, that she had ever any unchaste or unworthy thoughts, but
designing to marry you, and not daring to declare it as long as Amasis lived,
she thought she might always have you in her presence under that umbrage. And
though she could not doubt of the affection which you had unto the fair Astrea,
yet flattering her self she hoped, that the sight of so much grandore and
magnificence, would easily withdraw your love from that shepherdess; so as
hugging her self in these thoughts, she was the most contented woman in the
world, and nothing seemed tedious into her, but the length of the way: But,
when she came to Marcelles, and did not see her dearly beloved Lucinde amongst
the rest of her Nymphs, Oh! how she was disordered? and what haste did she make
in going to her Chamber, and from her Chamber into her Closet? I, who plainly
foresaw this storm, did follow her, but not with that alacrity as usual; and
I must needs confess, that being in some sort guilty of treason, I did fear
her presence; and yet, lest she should suspect me, as soon as she did call, I
ran unto her, and commanding me to shut the door: Well Leonida, (said she unto
me) what is become of Celadon? Madam, (said I unto her, seeming much astonished
and displeased) I cannot tell; for, as soon as ever you were gone, Silvia and I
looked for him all over the Palace, and not finding him, we cannot devise what
should become of him, unless Adamas can tell us. How Is this, (said Galathea,
surprised at this unexpected answer) do you know no more of him? And seeing I
did not answer: Did not I command you, said she, to have extraordinary care of
him? Am I no better obeyed than thus? Go, go, Leonida, go immediately to your
Uncle; if Celadon be there, bring him hither, or otherwise, never come again
into my presence; and assure your self, I shall make you fell the smart of
this offense, as well as my self. Seeing her so angry, and fearing, that
replies would but aggravate, I made her a low and humble reverence, I went
away, to acquaint my Companions with it. Silvia not being far off, followed me
out of the Chamber, and I acquainted her with all the discourse of Galathea,
and how she commanded me to retire. I knew, said Silvia, that it was impossible
this business should end, without making her extremely angry; but I should
have imagined any thing, rather than this course she has taken: What will
every one think of your departure? How can she hide it from Amasis? Well, my
dear Companion, (said she unto me) I see, all the blame is laid upon you,
though I have equally contributed to the same fault, (if that which we have
done deserve not praise) but since it is so, I shall use all my best
endeavors, to have you recalled as soon as possible: In the mean time, if any
enquire of me the cause of your absence, I shall say, That Adamas desired
Galathea, to let you be with him for a certain time, in hopes that some
affection may grow betwixt his Son Paris and you; and I shall say this as a
secret, to the end it may make the less noise in the world. After this, we
kissed, and recommended each other to the tuition of the gods: And so I went
unto my Uncle, unto whom I related the whole passage.

In the mean while, Galathea being alone in her Closet, and seeing all her
hopes, and all her designs blasted, she was so surprised with sorrow, as she
laid her self down upon a green Bed, and could scarcely breathe: At last, she
started up with a deep sigh, and casting her eyes upon a great Glass which was
over against her, she saw the tears that trickled down her cheeks: Alas, alas,
Galathea, said she, what is thy Beauty worth, which has caused so many
Idolaters, since it is not able to captivate him, whom thou most desire to
please? a poor despisable Shepherd despises it. Am I not the most unfortunate
woman in the world, since a mean and ungrateful Shepherdess is able to do
more then I am? Oh! how pleasing and sweet were my designs, at the first; and
at the last, how bitter and vexatious are they all turned? Then being silent
for a while, she broke out again: But is it possible, Celadon, thou should
not love me? Can I no way wean thy affection from a silly shepherdess? Can a
rustic country Beauty have a greater influence upon thee than mine? Has the
heavens, to torment me, made thee so pleasing and so silly? She had continued
longer in these exclamations, had not Silvia knocked at the door, and
acquainted her, that Amasis her Mother was coming to see her. She presently
drying up her tears as well as she could, and lying down upon the bed, she put
a handkerchiefe over her face, feigning to be asleep; and therefore Silvia went
to meet Amasis at the door, and acquainted her, how Galathea was not well,
telling her, that she thought her disease to be nothing but a little headache,
which a little rest would cure. Amasis did easily believe it, when going nearer
Galathea, she saw her face red, and burn like fire. The Nymph, at the coming
of her Mother, seemed as if she were asleep, and starting up, did her reverence
unto her; and holding her hand before the eyes, she confirmed what Silvia had
said. Amasis advised her to go into bed, and to rest that night, that she might
be better disposed to be a spectator of the public Bone-fires of joy, which
were to be made, and last two or three days. After this, she retired,
purposely to give her the more time of rest. Galathea was very glad of this
excuse to be along; and when all was gone out of her Chamber she undressed her
self, and went to bed, suffering none to be in the Chamber but Silvia, whom
she commanded to stay by the bed side, that she might near if she called.
Silvia, who knew her disease, prepared her self with remedies accordingly; but
she was mistaken, for the Nymph stayed until it was night, and never gave one
word, expecting that Silvia should first begin. At last, when it was supper
time: Go Silvia, said she, go to supper, and send some other in you room; as
for me, I will not eat any thing. Madam, answered Silvia, I beseech you give
me leave to stay with you; for, my meat will not do me any good, as long as you
are not well. Sweetheart, said the Nymph, I thank you, and believe it, I take
you good will unto me very kindly, in spite of the ingratitude which I find
in others. But tell me freely and ingenuously, I entreat you (said she, and
drew the Curtains) did you ever observe, that Leonida helped Celadon to escape?
Madam answered Silvia if she did, I must needs say, she is the most subtle
woman that ever lived, for she never stirred one step without me; and if you
will be pleased to let me tell you what I think, I will assure you, Madam, that
if any helped him to escape, it was Adamas; for I observed, that as soon as
ever you were set at dinner, he took Celadon apart, and talked with him very
passionately a long time. Moreover, I observed, that after you were gone, when
he saw us searching all about, and much troubled, he smiled two or three times
and told us, that it had been well, if Celadon had never come there. How, said
Galathea, is it so then, that Leonida never consented unto it? Madam, (answered
Silvia, very discreetly) I will not swear she is innocent, but I dare swear,
that I think she is not; and that if any be to blame, besides that ungrateful
shepherd, it is Adamas. Do not tell me thus, said she, to excuse your
Companion; I know that you are very good, but had she any advantage over you,
she would make use of it against you; she is the craftiest and most jealous,
that ever I saw of all those that are about me, and especially when I speak of
you. Madam, answered Silvia, the consideration of any of my Companions, shall
never make me fail in the duty which I do owe unto you; and as for their envy
and jealousy, it shall never make me start or recoile from my well wishes unto
Leonida; for I believe that if she did not love you, she would never be jealous
of any that comes about you. Sweetheart, said Galathea, and kissing her, I do
find you so discreet for your age, as for your sake, I will recall Leonida,
whom I have forbid my house; but with this intention, that you shall be always
nearest unto me, and unto you I will impart all my secrets; your young years
has hitherto kept me something reserved from you, but now I find, that though
you be young in years, yet you are old in wisdom and discretion: and therefore
from henceforth keep as near me as you can; and though I do not call you, yet
enter freely into what place soever I am, for I would have it so. And to the
end Leonida should think her self obilged unto you, send her word what you
have done for her, and bid her return. Madam, (answered Silvia, and making low
reverence) the honor which you do me is so great, that I shall never forget
it, and shall not think, that any merits of my own, but only your free
goodness, did invite you to do me this honor; I shall receive it as the
greatest blessing: of heaven, and do vow, Madam, that I will never fail in that
fidelity, which is owing unto your service, more then I will in my duty to the
gods themselves. And as concerning Leonida, would it not be expedient, that you
stayed until the day of public joy, when Adamas will be there, to the end,
you may seem as if you remitted the offense for his sake? But, sweetheart,
answered she it is Adamas that I am angry withal, for it is he that has
offended me. Madam, replied Silvia, give me leave to tell you, what counsel my
Mother gave unto me when I left her: Daughter, (said she unto me) whenever
any of your Companions does you any injury, remember that you never show as if
you wished them any ill, until you have found the means how to be revenged;
for, if you do it at another season, and show teeth before you be able to bite,
it will but exasperate them the more against you. So, Madam, you should not
show your self displeased at Adamas, until you can make him resent your
displeasure, lest when he sees himself out of your favor, he should either
say or do something, that may more displease you. Thus by the prudence of this
Nymph, Galathea's anger against me, was partly mitigated, and she resolved to
make no show of any displeasure to my Uncle, until times changed; of which,
Silvia did presently advertise me, to the end, Adamas might be at the Feasts,
which Amasis prepared.

But in the mean time, Polemas was not without abundance of vexation; for he
saw, that by every Letter which came from the Army, L^ndamor was highly
extolled, and the Trumpet of Fame sounded his name louder then any's else, and
thereby extremely eclipsed the glory of his Rival; But that which vexed him to
the heart, was, The Imposture of Climanthes did not operate unto his advantage,
and not knowing what was become of him, he was the most blanked man that ever
was, yet, though he did daily see the Nymph, and often talk with her, he never
seemed to take any notice of it; so as one day as Galathea was talking with
him, to try whether what I had told her concerning the stratagem of Polemas and
Climanthes was true, he seemed to know so little concerning it, that the Nymph
believed, I had invented all those tricks to the advantage of Lindamor, as I
heard since by the report of Silvia, to whom Galathea imparted every thing.

However, I lived a life in the mean time not disagreeable to my mind, had I
had the happiness which now I have, of seeing you. For, Celadon, you must
know, that Paris is so extremely in Love with Diana, as he, quitting his former
garb, is now in the habit of a shepherd, and affects no exercises, but such as
belongs to them. Do you mean that Diana, (said Celadon) which is Daughter unto
the wise Belinde? The same, answered the Nymph. I assure you, said the
shepherd, she is one of the fairest, the wisest, and most accomplished
shepheardesses, that I know, and one who deserves a good fortune; and I pray
unto Tautates, that she may enjoy all the good fortune in the world. I am of
your opinion, said the Nymph; but I do not believe, that she will marry Paris,
for she has told me, that truly she does love and honor him, that she knows
what an honor it is he should make any addresses unto her, and what a great
advantage such a Match would be to her; but yet, though she knows not why she
cannot love him otherwise then as a Brother, and that though she knows him to
be a man of great merit, yet she can love him no otherwise. How, (said Celadon,
and interrupted her) does she speak of these things so familiarly unto you? I
assure you, I think it very strange, when I remember her humor, which was wont
to be so reserved and close, even from her best beloved Companions, Astrea and
Phillis, that they knew very little of her intentions. Oh shepherd! (answered
the Nymph) there is great alterations within this three or four Months, since
you have been there; for Astrea, Diana, and Phillis are all one, they are
always together; and since your supposed loss, Diana may be said to succeed
in your room. Moreover, if you remember Silvander, whom they called, the
Shepherd without affection, he is now so deeply in love, that except Celadon,
none is comparable to him; and it came thus to pass: Phillis and he fell into
some difference concerning their merits; and because that shepherd, being
educated in the Massilian Schools, and having an excellent acute wit, did
produce better and more valid reasons, then that shepherdess could, she, out
of a pleasant humor, propounded, that Silvander, to give a testimony of his
merits, should court and serve Diana with as much obsequious observance, as if
he did really love her. The shepherd accepted of the proposition, upon
condition, that Phillis should be constrained to do the same. After much
discussion, Astrea, Diana, and I, did ordain, that both of them should court
and serve the same shepherdess, and that at the three months end, that
shepherdess should judge, which of them two had most merits to make
themselves loved. This being thus resolved, Diana was made choice of to be
their Mistress; so as since this time, Phillis has acted a passionate part so
very well, as no shepherd could better acquit himself. Now, see what is the
issue of this fiction, Silvander, who, as I told you, was all insensibility, is
become by his counterfeiting so desperately in love with Diana, as every one
does plainly see that he goes farther then the bounds of a siction; and I know,
that Diana will give her judgment on his side; for, though she is a
shepherdess of great modesty and wisdom, yet it is well enough known, that
this courtship does not displease her; and for my part, I must confess, that I
know no shepherd, except Celadon, who is more worthy to be loved. And because
of this feigned courtship, Phillis is almost continually with Diana, and
Silvander leaves her as seldom as possibly he can. Lycidas, your Brother,
thinks, that there is a matter of Love betwixt Phillis and Silvander, and is so
fully persuaded of it, as he is so jealous, that he cannot endure they should
be together. And since Phillis cannot banish her self from the company of
Astrea, and since Diana is always with Astrea, and Silvander with Diana, poor
Lycidas, not being able to endure it, never sees Phillis, unless at such
meetings when he cannot avoid it. This is a great alteration indeed (answered
the sad Celadon) and I must confess they are all much to be pittyed,
especially Lycidas, who is fallen into the very worst disease of Love; but I do
not think it strange, for I know, the nature of my Brothers temper was always
apt to take such impressions: For my part, I must protest, that we are not
Brothers in that: I cannot deny, but that I was once jealous, but I think it
is, because all Lovers are once in their lives subject unto it, as they say
little Children are, of a certain dangerous malady, which never comes unto them
but once. Phillis also is to blame, who, having given so many assurances of her
good will unto Lycidas, will suffer him to enter into any doubt of her
affection; but I do believe, that she knowing this jealousy of my Brother does
proceed from an excess of Love, she suffers it with more patience. As for
Silvander and Diana, I must confess, it is impossible, that two subjects for
love should be more equally met; for, as Diana does surpass Silvander in
Beauty and Estate, so the virtue and merits of the shepherd, do equally
balance the Scales: Yet, I do infinitely pity them both, for I know them most
absolute Masters of themselves and actions; but now I know by experience, into
what a Chaos of confusion and troubles they are plunged so as I must needs
pity them, for making such a disadvantageous change. Thus, wise Nymph, we may
see, that there is no assured happinesses amongst mortals. Celadon, answered
the Nymph, you would be Tautates himself, if you could persuade them, that
they are not much happier then before; nay, Silvander himself thinks so, whose
company is much more pleasant then it was wont to be, as I have heard from
those who knew him before. For my part, said Celadon, I am of that shepherds
opinion; for, though there be some pains in the life of Love, I pray tell me,
in what kind of life there is not so as well? But if you do consider those
contentments which a Lover receives, in loving and being loved, I believe you
will agree with me, that there is no happier life then that of Love. Ah
Celadon! (said the Nymph, with a great sigh) how dearly are those contentments
bought, I refer it unto your own self, if you would but ingenuously confess
your passion. Every one that loves, replied Celadon, does not meet with
Astrea's. But, said Leonida, since you are of this opinion, why do you say, you
pity them? Because, answered Celadon, as it is a pleasing thing to conquer, so
the contrary, to be conquered; therefore I fear, that there being abundance of
labor and pains to be taken in Love, lest they should be overcome or
astonished at the difficulties, and retire, before they have surmounted them.
And therefore, have I not good reason to pity those, who I see do enter into a
danger, the issue whereof is so uncertain? But I do much wonder, how you should
know so much of Diana, whom I know to be always the most reserved and secret
of all our Shepheardesses. The love of Paris, answered she, is the cause of it,
who has made me see her ofter then otherwise I should. I had a good
inclination of my own to go unto your Town, in hopes to find you there; and
when I was thinking upon some good excuse for it, I met with Paris, who, that
night I returned, spoke thus unto me: Sister, (said he, for Adamas would have
us call Brother and Sister) do you remember how much contentment we received
that night, we lay in the Town of Astrea and Diana, and how pleasing their
conversation was? I, who knew very well he had been often there since, did answer
him thus: I do, Brother, said I; but I do believe, you have a better memory
then I, and, as I have heard, have better reason. It is true, said he unto me;
and I cannot deny, but that the merits of those fair and discreet
Shepheardesses, have much invited me to get their friendship, and more then I
make appear. Brother, said she, you tell me more then I ask. It Is no matter,
replied he, and smiled, I will ingenuously tell any thing unto you, in hopes,
that you will not deny me one request that I shall make unto you, and which I
do conjure you unto by our friendship. Ask what you will Brother, (said I unto
him) for I cannot deny you any thing upon that conjuration. I beseech you then,
(said he) that since you do not return unto Marcelles, you will be pleased to
walk sometimes upon the banks of Lignon, and pass away some afternoones in the
company of those fair and discreet Shepheardesses, and give me leave to wait
upon you: you will think this place here to be very dull, having been
accustomed so long to the Court; but the banks of Lignon have shades so cool
and pleasant, as it is impossible you should be weary: you shall see the silver
streams so clear, and so filled with all sorts of fishes, as you will admire;
you shall hear all sorts of Birds make the Woods Echo, with a thousand
varieties of voices; you shall find such clear, cool, and curious Fountains,
as will invite you to drink of them. To be brief (said I unto him, and smiled)
we shall meet there the fairest and sweetest Shepheardesses in all the Country.
It Is very true, said he, and I hope all these will invite you to go thither.
All these invitations, said I unto him, do not move me so much, as the desire
you have of going thither; you are my Brother, and my friend, and under that
notion I will fulfill whatsoever you shall desire: But since your desire is to
see those Shepheardesses, I would gladly know which of them you love best, I
mean, Astrea or Diana. Sister, said he, you are grown very inquisitive of
late. I confess it, said I unto him; but if you put me to ask the question
twice, I will say, you are grown very secret of late; for even now, you told me
more then I asked. But, Sister, said he, which of them do you think I may in
justice address my self unto? I understand your meaning, said I unto him; you
think I will say, Astrea, but, Brother, take heed, lest Diana do not make your
desires devour you. I protest unto you, Sister, said he unto me, I would with
all my heart be in danger to be devoured by my own Dogs, as Acteon was, upon
condition, I had the happiness to see this Diana naked Is it possible, said I
unto him, that you should value your life so little? Nay, said he, I esteem my
life at a high rate; but I do esteem the sight of so much beauty infinitely
higher, since I must die, and perhaps soon, before I can enjoy any contentment
equal unto this; have I not reason to venture it betimes, to enjoy so high a
felicity whilst I may? For my part, answered I, though I think these desires a
little too loose and extravagant, yet I will not blame you; but I am afraid,
they will cost you much pain and sorrow. I will venture that, said he; but,
Sister, tell me freely, will you, for my sake, become a Shepherdess one hour
in the day? How do you mean, (said I unto him) would you have me take the habit
of a Shepherdess, as you do of a Shepherd? No, no, said he unto me, that
would be too troublesome to you, and nothing conducing to my ends; I only
desire you to be with those Shepheardesses, and let me accompany you. I shall
do, Brother, what you would have me, said I unto him; but take heed, this way
do not prejudice your design; for in seeing Diana, under color of keeping me
company, she may perhaps think her self not obliged unto you for your visit.
Diana, said he unto me, is not a person who insists upon such ceremonious
vanities, but is able out of her judgment to discern my actions, and discerning
them, commend my discretion.

This resolution then was fixed upon amongst us; and that very night, Paris
told Adamas, that if he thought good of it, he would wait upon me the next day
a hunting, and that I much desired it. Whithersoever she please, said Adamas
unto him; for such was my love to her Father, as I can never sufficiently
acquit my self of it unto his Daughter. This declaration did answer the
expectation of Paris, and therefore the next day, as soon as we had dined, we
went down the Hill of Lacquier, and passing over the River Lignon, at Trelin
Bridge, we followed the Riverside, until we were over against Boutreux, we
left the Temple of the good goddess on the right hand, and came unto a little
rising hill, from whence we might see all the turnings and windings of Lignon,
and the Plains, where the Shepherds and Shepheardesses did drive their Flocks
to feed: Then, by a little path, we descended into the plain: See, Brother,
said I unto him, and pointed with my finger, yonder upon the right hand, is
that tuft of Trees, where I first saw Astrea, Diana, and Phillis; and had you
been with me in Silvia's room, perhaps we had observed more then we did; for,
we being weary with walking, we fell asleep, and in the mean time, these three
shepheardesses came, and sat down close by us, and not spying us, doubtless
they did not sit in silence; but as ill-fortune was, when we awaked, they were
gone. It Is true, that since I came by my self, and it was then when you met
me, and when I heard all the story of Diana. Ah Sister, (said he up on a
sudden) I remember the time very well; it was then when I began to love another
above my self. But, Sister, I conjure and beseech you, by all obligations of
friendship, to tell me all that you know: Does she love any one? See, said I,
and smiled, how jealous you are already? What did it concern you, if I knew
more? Be contented, that I tell you what I think is requisite and necessary for
you to know. Ah cruel Sister, said he unto me, you use me as they do Children,
show them an Apple, to make them the more desire it, and then not give it them.
Lovers indeed, said I, are little different from Children. But, Sister, said
he, can you not tell me, whether she loves me or no? It is more to be feared,
that she will not love you, (said I unto him) then that she will love any
other. Although you threaten me extremely, said he, yet I am more glad of the
assurance which you give me, that she loves no other; then I am sorry for the
doubt which you make, that she will not love me. Why, answered I, will you not
enjoy a good, if another have any share with you? Before I can give you a full
answer, said Paris, I must make a long distinction of Goods; but I will briefly
tell you, that there are some, which the more communicable they are, the better
they are; and others, which are more to be esteemed, the less they are
communicable: and in this last order, must I rank the Goods of Love. I think,
answered I, that if I were in a capacity of loving, I should be of the same
belief. But, let not this fear diminish the favors you receive; for you may
be most certainly assured, that those favor you receive from her, (if ever
you arrive at that Good) they will not be common.

Now, Celadon, I have made this long discourse unto you, to the end you may
judge, how deeply Paris is in Love. Now I shall tell you something concerning
Silvander and Lycidas. Walking thus down into the Plain, we espied Silvander,
who sitting under a Tree, was so intent unto the Music of his Bag-pipe, as he
took no notice how Diana, knowing his voice, stole gently behind a Bush to
hear him, and not be seen; and Diana was so desirous to hear, that she did not
see Astrea and Phillis, who seeing her, and having the same curiosity, did
steal on the other side, unseen either by Diana or Silvander; but we were most
pleased at Lycidas, who being upon a little Hill, looked upon Phillis, as she
crept gently upon the ground, lest Silvander should see her; for having an
opinion, that the love which she bare unto that Shepherd, was the cause of her
desire to hear him, he stood with crossed arms, and eyes so fixed upon her, as
if he were a Statue; I had not known him at that distance, but for Paris, who
saw him often. Now as we were walking down the Hill, we saw your Brother pull
down his Hat upon a sudden, and turning his back upon his Shepheardess, he came
stamping toward us, and never saw us; but still as he went, scratched his
head, stamped upon the ground, struck himself upon the breast, and lifted his
eyes often up to heaven. These passionate actions made us very desirous to hear
what he said, and therefore hiding our selves behind a great Bush which was by
the way side, we took notice, that upon a suddian he fell down, as if he had
been troubled with a fit of the falling sickness: We stole nearer and nearer
unto him, until we could hear him sigh out a hundred symptoms of jealousy,
saying, That he had all the reason in the world to be jealous, and that all
oaths, and former assurances of affection, should never persuade him to the
contrary; but that he was jealous with judgment, since he saw Phillis upon her
knees before him she loved. Then after a hundred such expressions, we saw him
rise up, and look backward, to see what Phillis did, and a little after, went
nearer her, then returned again to the place from whence he came. He did not
perceive us, because he was so totally taken up with his thoughts of Phillis,
so as I think, if we had stood directly before his eyes, he could not have seen
us. We followed him; and when he had couched himself close by Phillis, we
couched behind him, and heard Silvander sing these Verses.

Love's World.
1.
GRand Fabricator Love, the form has laid,
And out of me another World has made:
The Earth is my Fidelity, which stands
Immovable, by any mortal hands.
And as the World upon the Earth is founded,
So this, on my fidelity is grounded.
2.
If any sits of jealousy do make
This Earth of my fidelity to shake,
And cause my constant heart to quake and tremble,
Imprisoned winds exactly they resemble,
Which being in the earth enclosed, they make,
All hearts to tremble, and the earth to quake.
3.
My Tears the Ocean is; as soon you may
Empty the Sea, as them dry up or stay.
My Tears so many storms are, which rebel,
And makes this Sea to bluster and to swell.
The flowing Rivers of my eyes do pay
Their constant Tribute to this swelling Sea.
4.
The Air my Will is, which is pure and free,
And always waits on my Fidelity.
The VVinde is my Desire, which moves my Will,
As wanton Air by wind is moved still.
And as in caverns we do see the Wind,
So my Desire is in my heart confined.
5.
That Fire invisible, which in the Air,
Those secret Flames which burn my heart up, are*
And as this Element no eye does see,
Even so my Flames with in me smothered be.
But as all flames some nourishment do crave,
So must mine die, or nourishment must have.
6.
My Hopes the Moon is, which does still increase,
Or else diminish always more or less:
And I do find it by experience true,
She has no light, but borrowed from you.
For if you do not, like the Sun to th'Moon,
Some luster lend, then all my hopes are done.
7.
The Sun is your incomparable eye,
Which does out-lustre any in the sky:
As the other Sun life to the World does give,
So Lovers die, unless you bid them live.
It Is day when you appear, and it is night,
Most dismal dark, when you are out of sight.
8.
My Summer is my joy, when you do please
To shine upon me, and my heart to ease.
My VVinter is my fear, when you withdraw,
And is not pleased my frozen fear to thaw.
But now, alas, what fruit can Autumn bring;
When I can find no flowers in my Spring.
Thus Silvander ended his Song, but not his thoughts; but on the contrary,
descanting upon the last Verse of it; Alas! said he, though Love will not let
my Autumn bring any fruits, yet he might very well let my Spring afford me
some flowers. Is it not thy custom, (Oh thou little god) to nourish hopes in
many, whom thou never meanest to content, and why does thy custom fail in me?
But still I must needs say, thou art just, for thou could not chastise my
presumption with a lesser punishment. Yet, I must needs complain; for though
the punishment be just, yet it smarts; and though I am culpable, yet I am
sensible withal. After these expressions, he was silent, and whilst he was
turmoiling himself in a sea of various thoughts, he gave Diana leisure to cast
her eye upon her companions; and seeing they perceived her, she was ashamed;
therefore stealing gently unto them, she said thus unto Phillis: I pray,
Servant, whilst Astrea and I get a little off, stay you here, that if the
Shepherd do hear us, you may amuse him; for I would not upon any terms have
him know, that I heard him. So Phillis making a sign that she would, Diana and
Astrea went away. I observed, that Lycidas supposed, these two Shepheardesses
would have persuaded Phillis to go with them, but that her love, which he
supposed she had unto Silvander, would not let her leave him: The actions of
his head, hands, and feet, persuaded me in this opinion. In the mean time,
Silvander began to sing this Song.

That to adore Diana is the only Happiness. A Song.
SIt still, Silvander, never complain,
Against thy fate or any pain:
For, such a Mistress is thy lot,
As never man a fairer got.
Be thankful, Man, and think it honor,
To sacrifice thy self upon her.
For never since the world was made,
Was so much light without a shade.
Put heaven to boot, the Angels there,
(Compared with her) they are not fair.
Cease then complaints, and think it sweet,
If thou from her thy death do meet:
A better death thou can not die,
Then murdered by so fair an eye.
Love on, Silvander, never faint,
But still adore so fair a Saint.
It Is perfect Martyrdom to die,
For such a sweet Idolatry.
This Shepherd perhaps had continued longer, if Driope, Diana's Dog, had not
broke loose from her, and run fawning upon Silvander, for he was wont to make
very much of him for his Mistresse's sake. The Shepherd presently rose up, and
looked round about, but could not see her; yet, he saw Lycidas hearkening, and
Phillis, who seeing him rise, went to him, as Diana desired; but as she went
toward him, she espied Lycidas, which made her change her intention; for she
knowing, that he was jealous of Silvander, she turned another way: and this
made Lycidas the more suspect her, thinking she did it purposely to hide it
from him. Silvander, who knew both their hearts, and being resolved to augment
the jealousy of Lycidas, he feigned, as if he did not see Lycidas, and ran
unto Phillis, and taking her hand, did imprint two or three zealous kisses upon
it; afterward asked her, how Diana and Astrea did? The Shepheardess was very
sorry that Lycidas did see all this, and so perplexed at it, as she knew not
how to answer him. Paris and I, who intended to follow Astrea and Diana, we now
went unto Silvander and Phillis. Lycidas, extremely ill satisfied with all
this, turned another way, as if he had never seen us. We four being together,
we went that way Astrea and Diana went, after Silvander had taken order, both
for his ownflock, and that of Phillis's. This was a sore heart-burn unto
Lycidas, and his jealousy was much more increased by it, when he saw that
Shepherd so careful about the flock of Phillis, so as your Brother was
continually turning his head toward us, to see what we did.

I profess (said Celadon, and interrupted her) he is much to be pittyed; for I
have found, by my little experience of it, that jealousy is one of the most
extreme fortunes of a Lover. But, fair Nymph, what became of him afterward? I
cannot tell, answered she, for I saw him not all the day after: and as for us,
we went unto Diana and Astrea, who, as I believe, stayed for our company: and
we spent all that day together with much contentment: Paris, he applied
himself unto Diana; Silvander, unto Phillis; and I unto Astrea, whom indeed I
find to be most worthy of Celadon's affection. Fair Nymph, said Celadon, I
beseech you give me leave to be a little more inquisitive. What is it, said
Leonida, that you desire to know of me? Did you ever hear, said Celadon, so
sweet a voice as hers? has she not a kind of an harmonious accent in her
pronunciation, which charms the ear? Certainly she has, said the Nymph, and
that which most takes me, is, that she uses no art or affection in her
language, but all her expressions are plain, and full of modesty and civility.
But I beseech you, sweet Nymph said Celadon, did she never speak of me? She
did, said I, but it was my self who began the discourse; for I knew, the
reason why she spoke so little of you, was, the opinion which every one had of
your affection to her. For heavens sake, sweet Leonida, (said the shepherd)
tell me what discourse you had together? It was not much, (said she unto him)
yet I know not whether I shall remember it or no: I was very desirous to hear
what was become of you; and when Paris desired me to go unto your Town, I had
not the confidence to speak of you: And when I saw Paris so deeply in love with
Diana, as he minded nothing but her, and not finding you amongst the
shepheardesses, I was extremely troubled. At last, after some other discourse,
I told her, how I did not think, that the shepherds of Lignon had been so
civilized as I found them: The first time I stayed with them, was purposely to
see, whether the reports I had heard were true; and Silvander that day
confirmed them all. I must confess, (answered Astrea) that Silvander is a very
well accomplished shepherd. But, Madam, had you come at another time, I
believe you would have found better satisfaction; for there was a time, when we
had a most excellent company of shepherds. What is become of them, answered I?
Some, said she, are dead, as the poor Celadon; others are so grieved for the
loss of him, as they are grown so many lumps of melancholy, and frequent
none, but solitary places, as Lycidas; and some are so astonished at the
accident, as they have quite left the fatal Lignon: and indeed, we are all so
sad ever since, as we do not seem the same we were. Celadon, replied I, was not
that he whom I heard talk off, when I was last here? The same, (said she unto
me, with a deep sigh) Was he your Cozen (said I unto her)? No, answered she,
but on the contrary, his Father and mine were most mortal enemies: But, Madam,
he was the most gentle and finest shepherd in all the Country; and though
there was a most deadly enmity between our two families, yet his sweet and good
conditions constrained me, and every one that knew him, to resent his loss. At
this she changed color and putting her hand before her eyes, she seemed as if
the rubbed her forehead. I perceived by this discourse, that you were not yet
returned unto her, since I left you; and knowing, that she could not tell me
any thing, that could satisfy my longing desires of seeing you, and that such
talk would only grieve her, I changed discourse; and presently after, it being
late, Paris and I retired. It was then I heard from Silvander of your Brother's
jealousy; for walking by the River side, I asked him the cause of your
Brother's sadness, and why we could never see him? And he told me, that
Lycidas being a devoted servant unto Phillis, he was jealous of her and him;
and that he, to torment him the more, did seem as if he were in love with
Phillis, and gave out all the demonstrations of it that possibly he could.
Thus, Celadon, did we spend that day; and since that, because I could not hear
any news of you, I visited this Company every day, thinking, that being in the
company of those whom you loved, I was in some sort with you. This was the
reason, that when Amasis, after great preparations of joy, was constrained to
leave them, because of the news of Merovea's death, though Silvia, by the
command of Galathea, did let me know, that I might return unto Marcelles when I
would, yet I would not go, because I took abundance of delight in the society
of these discreet shepheardesses. Why (said Celadon) did Amasis grieve so, for
the death of that King? Because (as I believe) Clidamant was with him,
(answered I). Now, lest my Uncle should make me return unto that Nymph, I did
conceal Silvia's Letter from him. But, Celadon, tell me truly, do you not envy
me, for seeing Astrea, and speaking with her as often as I would? I shall not be
sorry at any thing that pleases you, answered he; but I could wish my self a
share in the happiness. And why (answered the Nymph) do you deprive your self
of it? Ah Leonida! (said he) could you but look into my heart, you would see I
do not; but I can take no delight in seeing her, and in seeing her displeased.
But why (said the Nymph) do you think she will be displeased with seeing you?
Because (answered the shepherd) she has commanded me never to see her, until
she command otherwise. How can she command otherwise (said Leonida) if she
never see you, nor knows where you are, but thinks you to be dead? Ah Nymph,
(said the shepherd) Love is a most puissant god; and as he has blindely found
out a way to banish me her presence, he may also find a way to recall me when
he pleases. Are you then resolved (said Leonida) not to present your self
before her? I had rather die, answered he, and therefore let Love do as it
lists. Upon this, he arose, purposely to change discourse, and taking the
Nymphs hand, he came to the door of his Cave; but when she saw him in the
light, and perceiving him so extremely altered, she could not restrain her
tears; which Celadon seeing: Nay, nay, sweet Nymph, said he, never grieve at
the alteration which you find in my face, for it is a sign, that ere long I
shall have a long rest. It would be too tedious to relate all their discourse.
But, to be brief, all her arguments and persuasions could obtain from him no
more, then this, that he would suffer her to visit him sometimes. At the last,
the Sun being almost set, she was constrained to leave him, with a promise to
see him very often.

For all Leonida's resolution, of not loving Celadon, yet could she not
extinguish the flames of her first affection to him; so difficult a thing it is
to expel this passion, when it has once taken deep root in a heart which
entertains it; and therefore this meeting with him was no small contentment
unto her; but her sorrows, to see him in such a miserable condition, were as
great, and the greater, when she thought upon his strange resolution; so as her
joys to find him, and her sorrows to find him thus, did a little puzzle her
which to adhere most unto: All the way she went, she was inventing what course
she should take, to dissuade him from this course of life: Sometimes she was in
a mind, to acquaint the shepherdess Astrea with it, in hopes, that her
influence might effect it. But this mind changed, as soon as she considered,
that this was the way to put her self out of all hopes to get his love,
knowing very well, that if Astrea once knew he was alive, and could find him,
she would give him such sweet demonstrations of her good will unto him, as
would blast all her hopes of him. Changing therefore this opinion, and having
heard, that Adamas had been a great lover of Celadon's Father, she thought it
expedient to acquaint him with his course of life, assuring her self, that he
would do all that was requisite and fit. Yet notwithstanding, when she
considered, that the place where Celadon was, was as fit a place as she could
wish, to enjoy his company alone, and to express her own passion, she
conceived the best way was, to acquaint none as yet, but to try what time would
do, and to divert him from his sad thoughts as much as she possibly could; and
if she found, that her presence and artifice could not work upon him, then it
would be time enough to acquaint her Uncle. This then was the course she fixed
upon; and to effect it, she failed not to visit him every day. The shepherd
knowing, that all this could not proceed from any thing but love, he was
displeased at it, thinking, that if he suffered so much indulgency from this
Nymph, he did offend against the promise of fidelity unto his shepherdess:
Besides, he thought all those hours that were spent in these visits, were
lost, because they kept him from entertaining his own dear and sweet thoughts;
so as in lieu of growing more joyful, he became more sad; which the Nymph
perceiving, and seeing that he did every day grow leaner and paler; she
consulted with her self, and at last resolved, to have recourse unto the sage
advice of the grave Adamas; but to acquaint him with it in such a manner, as he
should be sure not to suspect any thing, to her disadvantage.

Being therefore one evening in a better humor then ordinary, she went unto
her Uncle, whom she found walking upon a Tarrasse, which had the prospect of
all that plain from whence she came: After salutation, the Druide asked her,
where she left Paris? To which she answered, that all the shepheardesses were
so kind and civil, as to accompany them as far as the Temple of the good
goddess, and Paris went to conduct them back again: But, Father, said she, I
have met with a fine encounter, which stayed me so long, that I thought Paris
would have been back before me. What is it said the Druide? It is Celadon,
answered Leonida; you must know, that since he went from the Palace of
Issaures, in lieu of going to his kindred and friends, he has retired himself
into a Cave, where he so hides himself from all his acquaintance, as every one
yet thinks him dead. Why, said Adamas, does he so? I believe, answered sh, that
he is very sick in mind, and will not live long, for he can scarcely go; he
eats nothing but grass, and is grown so lean and sad, as you cannot know him.
Why, think you, said the Druide, that it is in his mind? I conceive so, said
she, because he speaks after an interrupted manner, and so little, as it is
easy to see, that discourse displeases him; I do believe, the love he bears
unto Astrea is the cause of it. If it be so, answered Adamas, he is the more
like unto his Father; for, Alcippe was once so very much transported with his
love unto Amarillis, that I did never in all my life see one commit greater
follies; and therefore it was, that he left a Country-life for the Court, and
continued long in the exercises of Chivalry. Is it lawful for them, said
Leonida, thus to change their quality? Child, said the Druide, neither Celadon
nor any of these shepherds about the banks of Lignon, nor most of those about
the Loire and Furan, are of a worse extraction then you your self are; you
must know, that their Ancestors made choice of this kind of life, as most
sweet, and least subject unto inquietudes. Indeed, this Celadon, of whom you
speak, is your near kinsman: For, the House of Laigneau and his, did branch
both out of one stock, so as Lindamor and he are your Cosens in the same
degree: My Grandfather, and the great Grandfather of Lindamor and Celadon, were
Brothers. Leonida hearing how nearly they were allied, was astonished, fearing
lest this consanguinity should forbid the banes of her loving him, as Love
commanded her to do; yet, lest her Uncle should take any notice of her fears,
she said unto him; That since they were so nearly allied, they were the more
obliged to have a care of him, and that the savage life he led was such, as she
verily believed he could not live long. It is very fit, said the Druide, that
we have all the care of him that possibly we can; and therefore, to show my
indulgency toward him, I will go unto the Cave of the old Cleontine, and
consult with her about him: Perhaps the heavens have a care of him, and keep
him thus hid, to prevent some great misfortune; for I have known some others,
that have been so preserved from diverse blasts of malignant fate, which did
threaten them. Whilst they were thus talking, Paris came in, and interrupted
them, for they would not acquaint him with it, so as Adamas and Leonida went
betimes to bed, that they might be the more early up in the morning, to go unto
Cleontine.

Mount Verdun is a great Rock, resembling a pointed Diamond, which stands in
the midst of the plain toward Mount Brison, between the River Lignon, and the
Mountain Issaures; were it a little more upon the right hand toward Laigneau,
then Marcelles, Issaures, and Mount Verdun, did make a perfect Triangle. It
seems Nature took delight in imbellishing this place above all others in the
Country; for, it being elevated in the very heart of this Plain, so equally on
all sides, it raised it self by such eeven degrees, and at the top did leave
just room for a Temple, which was dedicated unto Tautates, Hesius, Tharames,
and Belinus; and being the most famous in all the Forests, it is here where
the Lubages, the Sarronides, the Vaces, and the Bardes, do dwell in Grattoes,
which they have made about the Temple, in which they assemble themselves when
the Druides command them. But that which is most admirable, is, that this great
Rock, which is above four thousand paces about, when it begins to rise from
the level, and above four hundred paces high, and at the top above five
hundred paces broad; yet, it is so covered with earth, planted with Vines, so
full of grass, and so green, that those of the Country corrupting its name, do
call it Mount Verdun, or green Mountain, in lieu of Mount Vatodun, which
signifies the Mountain and dwelling of Priests or Sacrifices; for in the
language of the Celts, Dunum signifies Fortress; and Vates, in the Roman
language, signifies Priests, Prophets, or such as give Oracles; and since the
Gauls had any communication with the Romans, they have not only mixed their
language, but also their manner of sacrificing, complying themselves with a
victorious people, so made such a miscellany, as they do retain unto themselves
equally half Roman, half Celt. This Mountain became thus peopled with Bardes,
Eubages, Surronides, and others, by Dryus, the first Institutor of the Druides,
who inspired this place with a certain kind of divinity, and left a mark of it
unto Posterity. This Rock, which, for its magnitude, may well be called a
Mountain, is naturally so hollow, as within it is but one vast Vault; it has
three entrances, so spacious, that a Coach may enter; they are commonly kept
shut, and opened only when the Oracle is to be consulted with, and then a
Druide, after a sacrifice, opens the door, and asks the question: Presently
there issues an impetuous wind, which coming from the concavities of this
Vault, makes a strange confused noise, seeming to be a kind of ill pronounced
voice. The Druide holding his head as far in as he can, stays there, with his
mouth open as long as the noise continues; afterward comes away, with his hair
disordered, his eyes staring, his face changed, and voice altered from what
they were, and with actions, as if transported, does give the Oracle, which
very often, the pronouncer her self does not understand.

Now these three entrances, are dedicated unto three of their gods, or indeed,
unto one god under three several names; the one unto Hesius, whom they consult
with in matters of War; the other unto Thamaris, when future events would be
known; and the other unto Belinus, unto whom all Lovers do address their
sacrifices and supplications. And these three entrances are never all open at a
time, but upon the sixteenth day of July, when having gathered abundance of
Misleto, they come and strew it all about the Vault. At this time, if the
Sovereign Lady of the Province have a Daughter, she may enter, and make choice
of him whom she will have for her Husband; with whom, and the grand Druide,
they may view all that is in this Cave, and see all the wonders which the great
Druide left in it.

This was the place unto which Adamas with Leonida did resort in the morning,
to consult with Thamaris; and after the sacrifice of a white Bull, according to
the custom, and after Cleontine had dressed her self in Vervin, and sprinkled
the blood of the sacrifice at the entrance, she put a piece of Laurel in her
mouth and chewed it; then touching the door with a branch of Misleto, presently
it opens with a great noise, and she taking hold of the hinges, leanes all her
body in, and opening her mouth to receive the wind which comes out of the
Cave, she stays there a good while, and at last, comes unto the place of
sacrifice, where the Druide and all the rest do stay upon their knees, and
bare-headed, praying unto Tentates. When she is come back, she goes unto the
Altar, and there, with an afrighted visage, and hair staring, with a strange
hoarse voice, she uttered these words.

The ORACLE.
SAge Adamas, the heavens decree,
You by your prudence must be he,
That must help out his Infancy.
The gods themselves do it ordain,
When he his Mistress does obtain,
Your age shall happy be again.
Adamas, after thanks unto Thamaris, and beseeching him to make him understand
his will, lest by ignorance he should err, he went away, fully resolved to
assist Celadon all that possibly he could, since the gods did promise to make
his age happy, if he obtained his Mistress. He had before a very good
inclination toward him, as well because of the near consanguinity betwixt
them, as because of that shepherds merits; but much more, since this answer
from the Oracle, evidencing hereby, that a person interested, is much more
solicitous in any business, then one that is only obliged by duty. Taking the
way therefore toward Lignon, he asked Leonida, where Celadon's habitation was?
And she showing him the way, they came at last to the bush which covered the
entrance into the Cave, where he took up his habitation; and fearing, lest if
he saw them, he should fly them, they went as softly as they could to surprise
him. As fortune was, he lay just at the entrance into his Cave, so near the
River, that as he leaned upon a hillock, and saw his tears drop into the River,
they heard him utter these words.

Celadon comparing himself unto the River Lignon.
HOw I increase this Christ all River,
Which of my sorrows is a mirror:
I may my self compare to thee,
And thou of me resemblance be.
From Scources two thou do arise,
Which may be from my flowing eyes;
More swelling waves thou never had,
Then I misfortunes great and sad.
As thou do glide without design,
So without hope away I pine.
Thy scource from Mountains high does flow,
From Beauty high proceeds my woe.
Through Rocks so hard thou find'st a way,
Through Rocks of griese I pass each day.
Though our resemblances be such,
Yet, in one point we differ much.
Thy waves increase by falling snowes,
And frist adds tears unto my woes:
And yet, (which I do most admire)
Thou art all Cold, and I all Fire.
Ah! River, River continued he, thou that art a witness, how I am now the most
miserable, as formerly I was the most happy, shepherd in the world, why wast
thou so merciless, as to save my miserable life when it was in thy power to
put an end unto all my sorrows, by taking this pitiful life away? Will
things that are insensible conspire against me, and deny me that, which
naturally they bestow upon others? But perhaps thou art loath to lose thy third
scource, knowing that my tears did more abundantly swell thy Channel, then both
those from whence thou have thy original: If this was the motive that moved
thee unto this cruel pity, I Will assure thee, thou art not deceived since as
long as I live, my tears shall never fail thee. Upon this last word, a most
profound sigh gave a stop unto his voice, so as for a while his tongue was
silent; and as he was beginning again, Leonida unawares stirred. He turning his
head that way, he was extremely surprised, to see Adamas with her in that
place; he presently arose, and came to salute the Druide, who advanced toward
him. The thin and pale looks of Celadon did not a little astonish Adamas. And
having former experience of the force of Love, he conceived, that this violent
malady might reduce him unto a more dangerous condition, if no remedies were
applied. Therefore after common saluations and discourse, he took him by the
hand and caused him to sit down and then began this discourse unto him: Son,
what a strange condition is this, in which I find you? Was it to live thus,
that you requested me to help you out of the pain that you were in, within the
Palace of Issaures? Did you intend to shut your self up in this Cave, and live
like a salvage from the society of men? You are born, Celadon, unto a better
fate, the great Thamaris tells me as much; he has bestowed upon you great
Flocks, and large Pastures; and do you think your self not obliged to render
an account of them? All under the cope of heaven is his, we are all but his
Stewards, and questionless he will exact a particular account; and, Soh, when
that time comes, what will you then answer? Although he has submitted these
things unto our wills; yet, our very wills are not our own, and we may expect a
severe punishment, if we dispose of our selves otherwise than as we ought. How
can you think it reasonable to live without any care of Flocks, or Friends, or
Kindred, or Men? Dare you contemn those remedies, which that great god has
upon this occasion put into your hands? Perhaps you will say, that your
affection unto the shepherdess Astrea, does force you unto it. But, Son,
consider well with your self, that if you have offended her, all your services
cannot wipe away the offense, as long as you keep at distance from her; and if
you have not offended her, how can you ever hope or think she should know your
innocence, if she never see or hear of you? Now, my Son, I do grant, that for
the time past, you had some reason to absent your self from her presence, nay,
from all the world, to the end she may see, what power she has over you, and
that you value the loss of her favor as the loss of your reason. But now
that time is expired, you must now return unto your self again, and make it
appear, that you are both in Love, and that you are a man. Though your sorrows
may deprive you of your reason, yet, now reason ought to revive, that she may
not repent of having a Servant who is not a Man. Unto this Celadon returned
this cold answer: I would to god, Father, that your sapient advice were
addressed unto one capable to receive it; as for me, I must confess, there
remains nothing of a man in me but my memory, having lost both my
understanding and my will; and I believe, this memory that remains with me, is
only as a nourishment of my sad thoughts; so as he whom you now see before you,
is not Celadon the Son of Alcippes and Amarillis, whom the great Druide Adamas
heretofore did honor with his friendship; but he is only one, that the heavens
conserves here amongst the Woods, as a testimony, that Celadon knows how to
love. In answer unto all you object, let this serve for all, I love: For, sage
Adamas, if I do love, I need not fear, that Tharamis will be offended at me,
for doing that which Love commands, since he would have me, or at least permits
me, to love. Now those who do permit a thing, they permit all that depends upon
it; and who can deny, but that this miserable life which I lead, is a
dependency of this love? Can he be called a Lover, who has eyes that will look
upon any thing but that he Loves? Ah! Father, doubtless I do love, and I am
blind unto all Flocks, and Friends, and Kindred, and all Men living. If the
heavens, as you say, have given me any thing, why should it exact an account of
me, since I do resign them back again as freely, as ever they were bestowed
upon me? If any account be required of Celadon, it must be required of her
whose Celadon is; as for me, I have nothing to account of, for I have resigned
all, the heavens would have it so, for it is by destiny that I do love, and the
heavens do know it: As soon as ever I had any will, I gave my self wholly unto
her, and have continued so ever since. To be brief, the heavens are pleased
with it, otherwise I had not been so happy as I was many years. If therefore
the heavens would have it so, do know it, and were pleased with it; how can
they in justice punish me, for doing that, which I cannot choose but do? Do what
thou will with me, Oh great Thamaris let what will become of my flocks, let my
Friends and Kindred have what opinion of me they please; they all ought to be
satisfied with this answer, that, I do love. But, answered Adamas, will you
always live thus? The election (answered the shepherd) does not depend upon
him, that has neither will nor understanding.

If you do, (said Adamas) you will cease to be a man. That (replied the
shepherd) has been a long time the least of my cares. But, if you do love,
said the Druide, why do you not enforce your self to see her whom you love? If
I do love, answered he, do you think I will displease or disobey her whom I
love; nay, do you think, that I do not receive extreme contentment and delight
in pleasing and obeying her? But, said the Druide, she does not know that you
do obey her. It is no matter, answered he, whether she do or no, I must do my
duty. The Druide knew not whether he should esteem him for the acuteness of
his wit in these answers, or blame him, for the errors he was in: but
conceiving, that his malady was not yet at the height, therefore he would not
apply any violent remedies, until he had tried some more milder; and
therefore, after a while of silence, he said thus unto him: Now, Celadon, what
I have said, was, because I thought my self obliged unto it by the Laws of
friendship, and duty of my charge, and not to contrary you in any thing; only
one favor I shall desire from you, which I hope you will not deny, since it
will conduce much unto my contentment: You must know, that I have a Daughter,
whom I love above all the blessings, which the goodness of Tharamis has
bestowed upon me; I have long wanted my greatest contentment, in wanting her,
and I am afraid, it will be longer before I shall see her again. Now the first
time I saw you at the Palace of Issoures, it is true, I loved you for Alcippe's
and Amarillis's sake, but much more, for your great resemblance of my dearest
Daughter; therefore I conjure you, by her that has most power over you, to be
pleased, that I may sometimes interrupt your solitude, that I may in your face
see the Picture of her, whom I love above all the world. The shepherd, who was
full of courtesy, answered, That he would take it for a very particular favor,
if he would be pleased to take the pains; and that he thanked Nature for
favoring him so much, as to give him a resemblance of any he loved; and that
if he had not excluded himself from all the world, he would come to his house
and present him his service. To be brief, Adamas resolved to visit this
shepherd very often, hoping by degrees to draw him out of his melancholy
Cell. True it was, that Alexis his Daughter had a little resemblance of this
shepherd; and she being by their Laws to stay amongst the Druides Daughters,
in the Cells of Carnutes, until she was forty years of age, Adamas did take
delight in seeing Celadon, who had a kind of resemblance of her. It had been
ordained by Dis Samothes, and since confirmed by great Druis, the first
Institutor of the Druides, that those Priests which had any Sons, should send
the eldest of them unto the Schools of Carnutes, where they spent ten years in
learning their Science, ten years more in teaching others; and ten years more
yet, they officiated in the public Sacrifices and Judgments: and afterward
they might return to their homes, and exercise the charge of Druides throughout
all Gaul. If they have none but Daughters, they are constrained to send their
eldest, after ten years of age, unto the same place; where they are instructed,
do instruct, and at last, judge, as I told you before. For, the Gauls do build
very much upon the judgment of these Female Druides: And these times being
expired, they may return to their Fathers, and may marry.

Now this course being resolved upon, Celadon was he that reaped the most
profit by it; for Leonida did at the first restore unto him those Letters,
which she stole from him, which was a good presage of better fortune, having
often heard say, that as one misfortune seldom comes alone, so also one good
fortune draws on another. And he being very often visited, sometimes by
Leonida, and sometimes by the Druide, he was much diverted from those sad
thoughts, which would quite have consumed him; besides, the care of Adamas was
such, as he sent him victuals very often secretly, which much revived his
drooping spirits.

The affection of this Nymph, and the goodness of Adamas, was a happy
encounter for Celadon, for both of them were careful of him beyond measure,
and indeed beyond their duty and quality; but, the greatest comfort unto this
shepherd, was, that this Nymph furnished him with Pen, Ink, and Paper,
because being alone, he did employ himself much in putting his passionate
thoughts into writing, which gave him much contentment in the reading them.
For, the wounds of Love are of such a nature, that the more they are smothered
and kept in, the more they fester; and talking of them is as sovereign a
remedy, as can be received in absence. Now Adamas conceived, that too much
thinking did but fester and rancle the melancholy of this shepherd, and
therefore he advised him to pass away his time, sometimes in the sacred
Groves, which were near, and there engrave some fancies upon the barks of
Trees, and furnished him with tools fit for the purpose. This Shepherd having
gotten a little more strength, and recovered some of his former complexion,
also reassuming his understanding facultle, he was sensible of this good
counsel which Adamas gave him, to shun this careless and idle kind of life
wherein he lived; and therefore he took his advice, and fell to work. Adamas in
this did, like a good Physician, consider the disease which he was to cure, and
there seasoned all his counsels with some designs of Love. You see, Son, said
he unto him, that though according to our Statutes, we ought not to erect
Temples unto Teutates, Hesius, Belinus, and Tharamis our god; yet, since the
Romans, by their Arms, brought in strange gods unto Gaul, and losing our
ancient freedom, we were constrained to sacrifice after their fashion, we have
Temples, in which our god is adored amongst us; and because the custom of it
is become a Law, it is lawful for you, Celadon, to dedicate part of this
Grove, not only unto the highest and prime divinity, but as a most perfect work
of that divinity, unto your fair Astrea, which our great god will as well
allow, as those Temples that are dedicated by strangers, unto the goddess
Fortune, unto the goddess Sickness, or the goddess Fear. Therefore, said he
unto him, let me advise you to prime and dress up this goodly Oak, to cut
away the thick underwood, and make a place, which we will dedicate unto Amity.
At the root of the Oak, cast up a bank of grass, in form of an Altar, upon
which I will set a Table, which shall be an emblem of Amity. When this is
finished, we will make another more spacious, which shall be under that Oak,
which truly is one most admirable; for out of one stock three branches do grow,
and afterward reunite themselves into the same bark.

You see, (said he unto him) that this is a most lively symbol of Teutates,
Hesius, Belinus, and Tharamis our god. How, Father (said Celadon) you name
four, and yet you say, our god? you should have said, gods; and I have
observed, that you have used the same expression more then once. Son (said the
Druide) this is one of our greatest mysteries in divinity; and though we
Druides ought not to reveal it unto any, but such as are instructed in our
Schools, yet I shall declare unto you as much, as you are capable to
understand.

Know therefore, my Son, that the great Dis, Samothes, presently after the
division of men, by reason of the confusion of Languages, being well instructed
by his Grandfather, both in the worship of the true God, and in other Sciences,
he came by the Armorick Sea into this Country, which yet unto that very day we
called Gaul, and which a little after, changed it for the name of France: Who
afterward peopling it, he settled his Scepter there, planted the Religion of
his Fathers, and instructed some of the best Wits amongst them with his own
Documents and Sciences, who ever since after his own name were called Samothes.
This man was the first King of the Gauls, who was so pleasing both unto god
and men, that he had a long, prosperous, and peaceable Reign; and after him
his Posterity in such renown, as all the world did ring with his, and the
valor of the Gauls. Afterward the Romans usurped the Dominion of the Gauls,
by reason of our own civil dissentions, who being full of animosity and
faction amongst our selves, did invite them amongst us, and asked aid of them,
whose ambition has since devoured us; teaching us, but too late, that no
strangers will ever love us better than we do our selves. But that great god,
whom Samothes taught us to adore in purity of heart, not desiring to continue
his anger against us for ever, after we had been a while under the Dominion of
these strangers, did deliver us from them by the Arms of the Francks, who say
themselves to be descended from the ancient Gauls. Now to return unto our
discourse. The fourth King which reigned in Gaul, who descended from the great
and holy Samothes, was the wise and learned Dryus, from whom the Druides took
their denomination. But those are mistaken, as well as the over-bold Greeks,
who boast, that they were so called from their word Drys, which signifies an
Oak; for, before Letters or Learning ever came into Greece, we called them
Druides, and the Sciences were in Gaul before they did know so much as how to
read, as the name of Druide teaches us, which in the Language of Samothes's
Grandfather does signify, Contemplator, from the word Drissim; and, as you
know (my Son) our principal part of Profession, consists in contemplation of
the works of God.

Now this great Dis, Samothes, and after him, our holy Dryus, did command us to
worship god, not according to the erroneous custom of Nations, but as they had
been taught by their Fathers, and because the dull ignorance of the people was
such, as they could not comprehend that supreme goodness and infinite power,
which they called Thau, comprehending all, they gave him three names; Hesius,
which signifies Strong; Belinus, which signifies Man god; and Tharamis, which
signifies Preserver, teaching us by these three names, that god is the
omnipotent Creator and Preserver of men. But since, through the alteration of
time, and ignorance of people, which changes all things, especially names, in
lieu of Thau, they say Thauta, and Thautes, and Theutates. In lieu of Jehus,
Belenas, and Thaharamis, the aspiration in the middle being harsh to pronounce,
they say, Hesus, Belinus, and Tharamis: And the people had such a power over
the more knowing part of men, as they, to be understood, were forced to call
them as the people did, and consent unto their error.

But, Father, said the shepherd, are not Teutates, Hesus, Tharamis, and
Belinus, the same gods which are called Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, and Apollo? Are
all these but one god? Son, said the Druide, I wish I were able to make you
understand what you ask; but where your understanding will not reach, let the
belief which you have in me supply. Know therefore, that strangers seeing how
the Gauls adored and called upon Thautates in all their affairs, when they
took any journey, and in all their actions; moreover considering, that they
were naturally lovers of eloquence, they thought, that it was Mercury whom they
called upon, saying, that he was the god of Eloquence, the director in Voyages,
the inventor of Arts, and the Protector of all Merchants and Traffic.
Afterward observing, that in our Wars we invoked Hesius, they thought him to
be Mars, who was by them held to be the god of Arms. And when we desired to be
purged from our sins, they saw us call upon Thamaris, and they thought him to
be Jupiter, from whom they expect all chastisement, by reason of the
thunderbolts that are attributed unto him. Besides, they conceiving, that
pardon of sins being to be had from the greatest of all the gods, they said he
must needs be Jupiter, because he was the greatest and most puissant. Then,
because we had recourse unto Belinus, when we wanted health for our selves or
friends, or desired to have children, they persuaded themselves, that it must
needs be their Apollo, whom they thought to be the first inventor of Physic;
besides, attributing unto him the guidance of the Sun; nay, very often taking
the one for the other; and knowing, that the Sun gave life unto all Animalls,
and moreover, that Man and the Sun did generate Man, they had some reason to
think, that it was our Belinus.

But most certain it is (dear Son) that there can be but one god; for, if one
be not omnipotent and all puissant, he is not god: if there were two
omnipotents, or two puissants, the omnipotency and the puissancy would be
divided. Moreover, they must needs be either alike or dislike; if they be alike
in all things, they must be the same, and so only one; if they be dislike, then
good must be different from good, which cannot be. I instance only in these
familiar arguments, because I will not puzle your understanding with such as
are more obscure and more sublime, although they be stronger and more pressing.
I did ever believe (said Celadon) that there was but one god and one lord over
us all, and above all the rest of the gods; but, I believed also, that as
amongst Men, we see, that Kings have their subordinate Officers, so that there
are inferiors or petty gods under him, which is the supreme and great one of
all, whom we call Tautates, and the others, Hesius, Tharamis, and Belinus,
which, next to him, are to be adored. This belief (answered the Druide) has
some color and reason in it, yet it is a great error; for those whom you
named last are not gods, but only denominations of the great Tautates: But,
though I must confess, he has subordinate Officers under him, as Terrestrial
Kings have; yet, you must understand, that worship and adoration is due only
unto one god. Why then, Father, said Celadon, are they placed in our Temples so
near the great Tautates? Son (said Adamas) I told you before, that the Romans
mixed their Religion with ours: You must know, that by our Laws, it is
forbidden to make any image of god; for, an Image being a representation of
something, and there must needs be some proportion betwixt the thing
representing and the thing represented; we do conceive, that there is nothing
amongst men, which can hold any proportion or resemblance with god, and
therefore we do expressly forbid it; and indeed, we do disallow of any Temples,
thinking it most gross ignorance to imagine, an infinite immense deity within
any walls can be confined; and think it a most presumptuous boldness to
imagine, any house can be worthy of him. And therefore, after the manner of the
Ancients, the Father and Grandfather of the great Samothes, did command us to
adore god in Groves and in Fields; yet, Groves were consecrated unto him, by
the devotion of the people, lest they should be profaned: And in those places,
they made choice of great Oaks, under which god was worshipped. And hereupon
it was, that the Romans entering into our Country, and seeing our sacred Groves
and manner of our Sacrifices, did with amazement say, that we, amongst all men,
had the greatest knowledge of god, and that the Gauls were the most religious
and fullest of devotion, of any people in the world. But the Conquerors always
giving what Laws they list unto the Conquered, they did most tyrannically
usurp, not only upon our Land, but our Souls also; changed our ceremonies, made
us worship their gods, forced us to build Temples, and to receive their Idols,
to represent Tautates, Hesius, Belinus, and Tharamis, under the figures of
their Mars, Mercury, Apollo, and Jupiter. And because this went much against
the consciences of our Druides, one of their Emperors by public Edict in
Senate, banished and abolished our Religion, and chased the Druides out of the
Empire: But for all that, the great Tautates permitted this only, to make
trial of their virtues, and not to abolish them; manifesting, that he never
does entirely forsake the good. So as maugre the malice and tyranny of these
strangers, we have still preserved some purity in our Sacrifices, and worship
god as he ought to be, and even in this Country, we have ever acknowledged the
power of these usurpers, out of the respect they always had unto Diana, of
whom they think our great Nymph is a representation. And now at this time, the
Francks have brought with them their Druides, and making it appear they were
formerly Gauls, our authority and sacred customs are revived again in
splendour. But, Father (said Celadon) I have seen in our sacred Groves, Images
of great Dis and of Hercules. The reason of that was, (answered Adamas) because
they were men and not gods; and being but men, they may be represented. But
(replied Celadon) if they be not gods, why do you set them upon Altars? You
must know, (answered Adamas) that they were men, who for their virtues were
like unto gods, and as such, we ought to honor them, and preserve their
memory, to the end, others may take them for paternes of virtue: But strangers,
who were ignorant of our intentions, did think, that we did adore and worship
them, and say, that Dis was Pluto, from whom we say we are descended; and gave
unto Hercules the surname of Gaulois, because we much honor his memory, as
well because he was full of heroic virtues, as because he married the fair
Galathea our Princess, and Daughter of Celtes our King. You tell me things,
said Celadon, which do much ravish me, and I beseech you, Father, go on, and
tell me what I shall do, when I shall enter into those Temples, where I shall
find the Images of Jupiter, Mars, Pallas, Venus, and such like gods and
goddesses. Son, answered Adamas, you must be very well advised when you do go
thither: and above all, be sure you do not take them for gods, but only Virtues
Puissances, and Effects of one only god. In Jupiter, you must adore the
omnipotency and majesty of god; in Mars, his power; in Pallas, his wisdom; in
Venus, his beauty, and so of all the rest: By this means, you will render unto
our great Tautates, that worship which is his due, and show your self just
unto those virtuous Persons and Heroes, in honoring them dead, as you would
have done if they had been alive. And so much for this time; and if you do
frequent my company, I shall acquaint you with more. Now, Child, leaving this
discourse, let us make the form of a Temple here in this Grove, which was long
since dedicated unto Teutates our god: It being in a Grove, we shall observe
our ancient Ordinances; and because a Temple, we shall obey these strangers. I
will write upon this miraculous Oak, the sacred name of Teutates; and upon the
three branches, that on the right hand, I will write Hesius, on that in the
middle, Tharamis, and on that upon the left hand, Belinus; and then upon the
top of all, where they are united together, we will engrave the sacred name of
Teutates, to show, that we mean only one god, under the notion of these three
words or nominations.

If I durst discover unto you the sacred and profound mysteries of our
religion, I should acquaint you with an Interpretation, which Samothes, the
most knowing man, did leave unto us, and which, by tradition from Father to Son
is come unto us, how that these three names do signify three persons, which
are but one god, god the mighty, god the man, and god the preserver; the
father, the son, and the preserver; and all these three, do make but one
Tautates, which is god: And it is unto the Mother of this god man, unto whom
our Druides, twenty ages ago, did dedicate an Altar in the Cave of Carnutes,
with the statue of a Virgin upon it, holding a Child in her arms, with this
Inscription: To the Virgin, who shall bring forth a Child. But these mysteries
are too high for your capacity, and lest we should profane them, it is better
to be silent. Let us go on with our work. Perhaps some learned Druide may come
into this sacred Grove, and will adore Teutates in purity of heart as we do; he
will commend our work, and approve of our good intentions.

Thus did the Druide discourse upon the hidden mysteries of his religion; and
because they were above the understanding of the shepherd, he would say no
more. But as soon as those three names were engraved upon the Tree, they
kneeled down and adored them, and never approached them, but with abundance of
reverence. Now lest Celadon should be tired in his devotion by working, he
called the Temple by the name of the goddess Astrea: And, Son, said he, this
is no offense unto the great god, so you honor this Astrea only, as the most
perfect piece of work that ever they showed unto men. Celadon did easily
consent unto this, and with incredible zeal, he worked so assiduously, as
within a few days he finished the Temple, according to the Druide's
appointment, who commending his diligence and industry, and the more to
encourage him, did bring him the Laws of Love, and the Emblem of reciprocal
Amity. But approaching the Altar of Astrea he knew not what to set upon it; yet
after he had a while thought upon it: If you were a good Limner, said he unto
him, I am sure the features of the fair Astrea's face is very fresh in your
memory, you may draw her Picture, and set it upon this Altar, which is
dedicated unto her; but since you are not yet so good an Artist, I will cause a
Table to be made, and only write her name upon it. To which, the shepherd
returned this answer: You have some reason, Father for your belief, for the
features of her fairest face are not only imprinted fresh in my memory, so as
me thinks I always see her; but also her speech, her garb, her attire, and all
her actions, are so lively in my soul, as methinks I do continually see them.
But, though I am no Artist in Limning, yet I am able to show you her
resemblance, upon condition, you will restore it unto me again: Upon a promise
of which, he unbuttoned his breast, and opening the Case which he wore about
his neck, he showed him Astrea's Picture: But, Father, (said he) if you do lose
it, or not restore it unto me again, most certainly I shall die, no excuse or
consolation can save me. After Adamas had vowed by Tautates, that he would
restore it, the shepherd, after a most zealous kiss of it, did trust it into
his hands. The Druide looking upon it: Truly, Son, (said he) I must needs
confess, I never saw a face more fair, nor in which I discover so much modest
love and sweet severity; happy is the Father of such a Child, and happy the
Mother who bare her, happy the eyes who see her; but infinitely happy he that
must enjoy her. Afterward he put it up into the Case, with a promise to
restore it very shortly, which he did accordingly, within five or six days.

It was in this place, where Astrea and all the Company did find so many
Verses and Writings of Celadon's; for he was so pleased with his works, that he
was continually before the Image of his shepherdess, and adoring her in his
very soul; As imaginations and fancies came into his head, he writ them down,
and laid them upon the Altar, as offerings unto the goddess Astrea. It was
this shepherd and Adamas whom Silvander saw in the night; for the Druide, by
frequenting him so continually, did make him forget most of his sad thoughts;
and the shepherd also, did think him self so exceedingly obliged unto him,
for his indulgent assistance, as he did infinitely honor him. Leonida, since
this, went not so often to visit the shepherdess as she was wont. In the mean
time, Celadon lived thus, sometimes more, sometimes less afflicted, even as
his thoughts gave him leave, until he met with Silvander, into whose hands he
put the Letter which he writ unto the shepherdess Astrea, who since, caused
all these shepheardesses and shepherds to come into this place, where having
lost their way, they were constrained to rest themselves, with intention to
depart as soon as the Moon began to appear; but the pains and toil which the
shepheardesses had taken all the day, and a great part of the night, had so
tired them, that they slept longer than they intended; for when the Moon was
up, and very light, the shepherds themselves were all asleep. But on the
contrary, the sad Celadon, according to his custom, was up betimes, purposely
to entertain his own thoughts, and none met him, for his use was, to walk most
out when others slept, and shut up himself all the day. The Sun did not yet
appear, when it was his fortune to walk toward the place where this company
was; and being wholly taken up with his sad thoughts, never minding any thing
about him, never man was so planet-struck as he was, when upon a sudden he
espied Astrea: she had a thin handkerchief upon her eyes, which did a little
cover her face, one arm under her head, and the other by her side, her
petticoat a little ruffled up, so as one might see the delicate proportion of
her leg; the admirable pureness of her neck was plainly seen, the azure veins
upon a snowy skin did ravish; and because she was a little strait laced, she
unlaced her self, and the rich treasure of her breasts appeared; her hair was
loose and lay negligently upon her lovely cheeks. Oh! what a vision was this
unto Celadon? he was so amazed, that he stood stock still, without any pulse or
breath, or any sign of life, but the beating of his heart, and his sight which
was fixed upon this fair object. It was with him, as with those who have been
long in darkness, and come suddenly into the rays of the Sun, and are dazzled
with too much light, and cannot see. Presently after, having a little
recollected himself, he began to consider what he saw; looking sometimes upon
her lovely face, sometimes upon her breast, whose treasures were never before
discovered; and he wished, Argos-like, that he had a body all of eyes. But in
the midst of this pleasing contemplation, a thought came into his mind, which
blasted all his joy. Retire, retire, unfortunate shepherd (said he) retire
from this blessed place, let it be no longer profaned with thy unhallowed eyes:
Have thou so soon forgot her commands? Do thou not remember, it is not
lawful for thee to present thy self before her eyes? Away, away, for shame
offend no longer. Thus he went away, with folded arms, and eyes lifted up to
heaven, as if he had left heart soul life, and all behind him: His thoughts
and his way were much different; for the further he went from Astrea, the more
his thoughts followed him. When he was out of sight, he was so troubled, as he
was forced to stay: To go on, said he, I cannot; to return, I dare not; and to
stay here, is to no purpose: What then should I do? Go, go, said he, and
receive that favor, which the heavens, unasked, does bestow upon thee. But how
can I contradict the command of her, whom I did never disobey? But, answered
he, it is not contradicting her command; for she did not command me, not to see
her, for then I should put out my eyes; but her command was, that I should not
come in her sight; and how can she see me when she is asleep? Take Love
therefore for thy guide, and under his conduct go and adore her. Being moved
with this consideration, he turned back, and went as softly as he could, lest
he should awake her; as soon as he came so near as to see her, he kneeled down,
adored her, and presented this prayer unto her, in a whispering voice.

Oh great and puissant goddess! since it is more god-like to pardon then to
punish, I most devoutly prostrate my self upon my knees before you. I will not
argue the matter with you, nor ask, whether my torments, which I have suffered
through my sins, be not above the grandeur of them, since I sinned ignorantly;
only I beg for pity. Show your self all divine in pardoning, and remitting me
to my lost felicity; for my submission may as well move you to pardon, as my
unknown offense unto punishment.

This was the prayer of the sad shepherd, not daring hardly to let the words
go out of his lips, for fear of waking her, unto whom they were addressed. Then
he arose and went nearer to her, the better to look upon her: As he was deeply
in his contemplation, Phillis turned her self from one side to the other, yet
not opening her eyes, nor waking. This put Celadon in such a fright, that he
ran as fast as he could unto his sad habitation, where he no sooner was, but
thinking upon this encounter, and that of the day before, he knew not whether
he should take it as a good or a bad presage. At the last, thinking upon that
Letter which he put into the hand of Silvander, (for he supposed Astrea did
know of it) he resolved to hazard another; and therefore, to lose no time, he
went to write it; lest he should be too late, and the shepheardesses awake. He
superscribed this as he did the first, and went with all haste to the place
where he left his shepherdess; but being afraid she should be awake when he
came near her, he crept behind some Trees, and looking every way, he knew they
were still asleep; but he found the company was greater then he perceived at
the first, because then he did not see the shepherds, of whom we spoke before;
and, to see whether any of them was of his acquaintance, he went gently toward
them; the first he saw was Silvander: Oh faithful friend, (said he, in a low
voice) how much am I obliged unto thee, for doing more for me then I durst ever
ask? Then turning his eyes upon the other four shepherds, he knew none of
them; yet he thought, he had seen Tircis heretofore. Finding them all thus
asleep, he went toward the shepheardesses. The Sun was already a good height,
and finding passage through the leaves, it began to shine in some places upon
them, so as if this shepherd had been as impartial a Judge of Beauty, as he
was a perfect Lover, he could hardly have told unto which of all these he
should have given the prize of Beauty: But as the long griefs of Astrea had
then made her yield something unto Diana, so the affection of this shepherd
did supply that defect, and gave judgment on Astrea's side. Then looking
particularly upon Astrea, he kneeled down, and could not choose but kiss her
fair hand, afterward did put the Letter into her breast; and being transported
with love, he could not choose but kiss her mouth: Oh how the shepherd was
ravished! he had almost quite forgot all fears of waking her, and leaned so
upon her, that she began to awake, and opened her drousie eyes, when he was
half risen up; and had not the Sunbeams, which shined upon her face, dazzled
her eyes, doubtless she had known him; this was the reason she could not see
him, but as a shadow, and when she began to look after him, her hair was so
intangld with a few rushes that was under her head, that they did hinder her;
so as she could not choose but cry out aloud Phillis started up and asked her
what the matter was? But Astrea was so astonished, that she could not speak,
but still untangled her hair. Phillis seeing Astrea up, and let a paper fall,
she arose also, and was very officious to take it up, following her some twenty
paces from the place where they lay. Then Astrea sat down under a Tree,
extremely pale, and ready to swound, which Phillis seeing, she helped her all
she could; and when she was a little come unto her self: Oh dear Sister, (said
she unto Phillis, with a deep sigh) what is this which I have seen? Then she
was silent a long while, and could not speak for sighing; a little after, she
began with a very great sigh, and said: Oh Sister, I have seen Celadon, I mean
his Ghost. At this word [Celadon] her voice failed, and her tongue could not do
its office; but she joined her hands together, and listed her eyes up to
heaven, as if from thence she begged help. Phillis seeing her in this condition
believed, that she had been in some afrighting dream: Sister, said she unto
her, there is no credit to be given unto any dreams, they are no more but the
working of the fancy and imagination, upon such subjects as have been seen or
thought upon; nor are they any presages of things future, only images and
fancies of things past. Ah Sister, said Astrea, this was no dream; I saw him
with these eyes, and as soon as ever he saw I looked upon him, he vanished into
air. Perhaps, Sister, (said Phillis) you did but think your self to be awake,
for so it often happens in sleep. No, no, (said Astrea) I was awake. And how
did you see him, said Phillis? I was (said Astrea) betwixt sleeping and waking,
when I heard some sighing about me, even about my face; and when I opened my
eyes, I saw the soul of Celadon before me: but, Oh heavens! how glorious and
full of light it was? the Sun it self had no more splendent luster; And,
Sister, I was even dazzled at the sight of it, until I came hither; but as soon
as ever I did cast my eye upon him, he vanished like lightning. Oh glorious
Soul! thou had good reason not to let the sight of her fully thee, who was so
undiscreetly careless of thy life. How infinitely am I obliged unto thee, who
having so much reason to hate me, yet makes it appear, that thy love continues.
Phillis, with much amazement, did now believe, that certainly it was the soul
of Celadon, and therefore said thus unto her: All we can do for those who are
departed this life, is to preserve their memory, to talk often of their
virtues, and to render them the last office of pity, which is burial;
therefore I am of opinion, that it is requisite, for your own contentinent, and
satisfaction of this soul, who so much loved you, that you do cause a Tomb to
be built, in which it may rest, and to preserve the memory of him amongst us as
long as possibly we can. That shall I do, said Astrea, as long as any life is
in me. But, Sister, (said Astrea) would it not be taken ill, that I, who am not
a kin unto him, should render him this last office of a Sepulcher? What can be
said, (answered Phillis) but that his kindred neglecting their duty, you have
done what they ought to have done? Were he alive, there might some doubt be
made of it; but being dead, they may well imagine, that your past amity, which
is known as well as your name, would require so much of you. As Phillis was
thus talking to her, she held in her hand the paper which she took up, and
Astrea casting her eye accidentally upon it, and knowing it to be Celadon's
hand, she asked her, what Letter that was which she held in her hand? Phillis
answered, that she took it up, seeing it fall from her as she arose. I did feel
something (said Astrea) fall from my breast; but I was so much out of my self,
that I never minded it. Then taking it, and reading the Superscription, she
said, it was that Letter which Silvander found. That cannot be, (said Phillis)
for I have that in my pocket; and putting her hand into it, she pulled it out.
What should it then be, said Astrea? I am sure it is the same hand. Then
reading it, she found these words.

Celadon's Letter unto the Shepherdess Astrea
IF the occasion of your coming into this place, where all that remains of
Celadon yet is, was only to see what power you have over him, it was too much
pains for a thing of so little value. If any sparks of compassion brought you
hither, what services can merit so great a recompense? If fortune only, without
any design, was your conductor, it was too kind unto one that is so
miserable: So as whatsoever the occasion was, there was no reason for it. That
affection which I had unto you, was beyond all bounds of reason, and therefore
it is most just, that reason should disdain him, who disdained reason. However,
I thank you, as the vam shadow of a man can do, (for truly ^am no more) for
coming to see what power you have over me, for it is one of my greatest
desires to live in your memory. I thank you also, that you would permit pity
to bring you hither; for though it be very late, yet consolation is better late
then never. Also I do thank you, For ^o lowing fortune into this place, since I
know by it, that it was only long of her, I did no sooner resent the effects of
your sweetness. This last consideration moves me to say, that as you are the
fairest Shepherdess in the whole Universe; so since fortune and my own
constancy wi^^ have it so, I am the must unfortunate, but the most
affectionately faithful, of all your Servants.


Now did these shepheardesses believe, that Celadon was dead indeed, and Love
made Astrea resolve, to render him the last duty of her amity. Then she went to
wake Diana and the other shepheardesses, because it was late; when they came,
they found Silvander looking upon Diana as she slept; and, gazing like an
immovable Statue, he uttered these words in a very loud voice: Oh! how this
fair one deprives me of that rest which she takes her self? See how many
Cupids play about her lovely face! Who can choose but love her, and lose that
rest which she finds? To look upon her and to love her, is one and the same
thing. And if she captivate thus when she is asleep, and without design, what
is she able to do when she is awake, and will use her power?

He spoke thus loud, because he was not afraid of awaking her, since she
commanded him so to do, as soon as the Moon shined. But Celadon's good fortune
would not have it so, to the end he might enjoy the happiness of seeing his
Mistress in that place. After Silvander had uttered these words, he kneeled
down to kiss her hand; but fearing to be seen by these two shepheardesses, who
he saw were not in their places, he rose up, very sorry he had done so much, if
he were seen. In the mean time, these two shepheardesses looked upon him, and
Phillis, who was very desirous to divert Astrea; Never trust me, Sister (said
she unto her) if this shepherd do not love Diana, and is not so subtle as he
thinks himself. I spoke yesterday with Diana (answered Astrea, very sadly) and
for ought I could perceive, he can expect nothing but much sorrow; for, she
will neither love him, nor suffer him to love her. That resolution (said
Phillis) may in a short time bring Silvander into the same condition with
Celadon, and Diana into the same state with Astrea. Ah Sister, (said Astrea)
Silvander may run that fortune; but as long as Diana is free from love, her
fortune will never be so bad as mine. I do confess (replied Phillis) that if
she be really exempt from love she is not in that danger; but, if she be exempt
only out of dissimulat^^^, what think you then? That she will be happy only in
opinion, said Astrea, and in deed and truth miserable. But there is no
likelihood of that, Diana's humor, and Silvander's perfections, being such,
that neither the shepherdess nor he, can be subject unto such dysasters. Upon
this, Phillis took her by the hand and walked toward Diana; yet answered her;
Oh Sister (said she) you are deceived, if you be of that opinion: for, as
concerning the merits of Silvander, believe it, that when a shepherd has a
design to please, he spruseth himself up, and is quite another man from what
he really is: And hence it is, that we often wonder to see some shepherds
loved and welcomed, who are thought not at all pleasing or handsome; and from
hence, I believe, the Proverb came, that, Love makes all seem handsome: Nay, I
will say more, I never yet saw any shepherd displeasing unto her he courted,
if there were not some other occasion of hatred then his love; for, their
courtship and desire to please, does make them dress up themselves in the
smoothest garb they can, purposely to render themselves complaisant: as this is
the quality of all in general, so more specially in Silvander, whose wit, and
handsome composure by nature, may easily supply all defects. And as for the
humor of Diana, her affection unto Philander is an infallible argument, that
she has not been always insensible of Love; and why may not that which was
once, be again. For my part, I do believe, Love is as good an Archer as ever he
was, and has not forgotten the skill he used, the first time he wounded her:
and Silvander may have the same fortune Philander had. In this (said Astrea)
you and I do differ in opinion, and I do think it impossible, Diana should ever
love again; for I think, a Maid, who never was in love, may easily be allured
by the pleasing flatteries of it; but impossible, that a stayed person, who did
once love, and lost the person loved, should ever let love take any root again
in her soul: And methinks the Cypresse-Tree is a right emblem of my affection,
which, when once cut, never puts out branch again. As soon as she had said so,
they were come so near unto Diana, that Phillis could make no other answer but
this: Sister, we shall quickly see, which of our opinions is the right.

Whilst these shepheardesses were thus talking, Paris, Hylas, Tircis, and
Thersander, being awakened by Silvander, they came to the shepheardesses, and
spoke so loud, that they awaked Diana. She was much ashamed, to see her self
almost quite undrest, amongst all that good company; and therefore holding her
hair with one hand, and covering her breast with the other, she went further
from them behind some Trees: Astrea and Phillis followed her, and whilst she
dressed her self, related unto her Astrea's vision, how the Letter fell from
her breast, and how Astrea had resolved to build a Tomb for the soul of
Celadon, since his Kindred neglected it. This office (answered Diana) is indeed
full of piety and pity, and for my part, I should not disapprove of it, if it
would not be an occasion of much talk and wonder, that the enmity of your
Parents should be changed into so much good will. What wonder will it be,
replied the sad shepherdess? It would be more strange, if this enmity should
continue after death. If Celadon were alive, doubtless I should not let the
affection which I bear unto him, be known. But, alas! since to my souls
eternal sadness, he is not alive, I would not have both earth and heaven
ignorant of it. And upon this reason, I do ground my resolution; my friends
will never find fault with any thing that shall please me, and as for the
rest, I will never deprive my self of my contentment, to content them. Since
you are resolved upon it, answered Diana, I conceive, that the sooner you do
it, the better; and if you will take my counsel, it shall be before you depart
hence. But (said Phillis) where will you find things necessary for it, unless
we first go unto our Town? The Temple of the good goddess (said Diana) where
the Druides Daughters, and the Vestalls do inhabit, is not far from hence, and
they will not deny any thing that is requisite for so good a work. But let us
call Paris and the shepherds, and ask them their advice. Upon this, Phillis
called them, and they came unto her. Then Diana taking Paris aside, acquainted
him with the vision and design of Astrea; and because, said she, detraction
and calumny is apt to asperse the purest innocence, I desire this courtesy
from you, that this Tomb may be erected in your name, though intended by the
shepherdess. You may command me all that is within the compass of my power,
said Paris, for I am devoted wholly unto your service. After Diana had given
him very hearty thanks, she desired him to acquaint all the Company with this
intention; which he did, so discreetly, as every one, except Silvander,
believed, that this design proceeded from him; but that shepherd, not being
ignorant of Astrea's affection unto Celadon, did suspect this to be an handsome
umbrage: And because he highly esteemed Astrea's ^he, he himself helped in the
dissimulation, and offered to go unto the Temple of the good goddess, to
borrow such things as were necessary for it. Astrea her self would go also,
thinking that her presence would prevail much, because of the affection which
Chrisante, the Governesse of the Druides Daughters, had unto her. She therefore
desired Phillis and Laonice to stay there with Diana, whilst Madonthe and she
went with Silvander and Thersander unto the Temple, which was close by, with a
promise to be back again, as soon as Paris and the other shepherds had raised
up a bank of grassy Tur^es, and prepared flowers and all things necessary. Thus
went the shepherdess Astrea away; and Paris beginning to work, made choice of
a place near that where they slept, which was a little plain, void of Trees,
where abundance of several sorts of flowers did grow, as if it were purposely
reserved for such a business. Tircis and Hylas, with the iron of their
sheephooks and knives, for want of better Tools, did cut the Sods of grass,
and pilde them one upon another, in the model of a Tomb, whilst Diana,
Phillis, and Laonice, did gather variety of flowers to strew upon it, when the
ceremony was to be performed; every one was so diligent in their several
charges, that they finished it in a little time. Now there wanted nothing but a
column to be set upon it, which should demonstrate the place where Celadon
dyed, and contain his Epitaph: but having no Hatchet to cut it, nor Ink to
write withal, they were at a great stand. At last, Tircis remembered, that at
the Temple of the goddess Astrea, Hylas had found some way to write, when he
falsified the Laws of Love, and therefore doubtless he left the pen and ink
there; therefore they desired him to go and fetch it. He, in obedience to the
commands of his Mistress, went immediately, and promised to return presently.
Paris, desirous to have all things ready, addressing himself unto Diana, he
told her, that it was requisite to make choice of a Pole to support the
Piramis, that they would try if they could cut it with their knives; and lest
they should be wanting when Astrea came, they would go to look for one that way
which she was to come. Leaving therefore the River upon the left hand, they
went into the Wood, to look for this Pole amongst the young Trees: But they
went through the Wood, and never minded this Pole; for Diana, she thought, that
Paris did look out for one that was fit, but Paris was so taken up with the
thoughts of her, that he never minded either North or South-Pole, nor any else;
which Diana perceiving, she said unto Tircis: I thought, that we should not
have been so curious in our choice of this Pole, as not to find one in all
this Wood. I conceive (answered Tircis) that there are many good ones for the
purpose. It must be a very great one (said Paris) otherwise it will not serve.
But it must not be too great and tall (said Tircis) lest the wind should
presently blow it down; so as if it be about twenty foot long, it will be big
enough. It Is very true answered Paris; but I must needs confess, that my
thoughts were so much upon another thing, as I never minded or looked for one.
How, said Diana, and smiled, have you made us lose all our labor? Then Paris
turning toward Tircis, desired him to make choice of one that was fit, and
said unto Diana: Blame me not, I beseech you, fair Diana, for the fault which I
have committed, for it is absolutely impossible to be so near you, and think
upon any thing else. That excuse (answered Diana) might be mine as well as
yours; for I being so near you, my thoughts also might have been as much of
you. If your merits and mine were equal, (answered Paris) or our wills the
same, then perhaps it might have been your excuse as well as mine. If there was
any fault, it was on my side, answered Diana. Yes, said Paris presently, for
there was nothing in me which could take up your thoughts. I do not apprehend
that to be the cause, said Diana, for I do esteem and honor you as I ought to
do. I would to god, Diana, (answered Paris) that you were as just as you are
fair. Wherein do you think me unjust, (said Diana) for how should I esteem and
honor you more then I do? This esteem and this honor, of which you speak
(said he) is not that which I demand; but if you would be pleased to change
this esteem into affection, and this honor into familiarity, I should be fully
contented and satisfied. I know you (answered she) more reasonable, then to
desire any more: Content your self, generous Paris, that I do love and esteem
you as much, as if you were my Brother: I know, that I being a shepherdess,
and you as you are, I ought not to go any further; but I had rather offend
against the Laws of civility, than displease you, since it is your pleasure to
have it so. This, replied Paris, is a beginning of what I desire, but not all.
In this (answered Diana) as in all things else, your desires must be ruled by
reason. Is it not reasonable (said Paris) that Diana should make choice of one,
whom she will create happy, and with whom she may live happily? This choice
(replied Diana) is a piece of great difficulty, and I will ever refer it unto
those, that are wiser than my self. Who are they, said Paris? Who should they
be, answered Diana, but my Mother and my Uncle? Paris would have replied, if
Tircis had not interrupted him, and told him, that he had found out a fit Pole.
Diana was very glad of this, for this discourse began to vex her. Paris, on the
contrary, was very sorry; for he desired to know of her, whether she would be
pleased to let him speak unto them concerning it. But Diana fearing it, she
desired Phillis not to be so far from her as she had been, lest Paris should
fall into this discourse again: But having made choice of a Pole, they tried to
cut it; but their knives not being strong enough, they were constrained only to
mark it, and stay till Astrea returned, believing, that Silvander would not
forget any thing that was requisite for the business. Walking therefore
toward the Temple of the good goddess, and Paris still hoping to fall into
his discourse again, they espied, as they were going out of the Wood, a
shepherdess, sitting under a shady Sycamour, and her hair being very long and
curled, as it covered her almost all over as she sat, they could not imagine
what it should be; but approaching a little nearer, they knew her to be a
shepherdess; yet, since her dishevelled hair would not let them see her face,
they were very desirous to approach nearer: And as they were looking upon her,
they saw a young shepherd come, and fall upon his knees before her, who
surprised her before she had time to rise: Neither this shepherd nor
shepherdess were known unto any of this Company, although they were both
inhabitants in their neighboring Town. As for the shepherdess, she might
well be said to be fair, and the negligence of her hair and habit, rather added
then took away from her handsomnesse. But this Company was most of all amazed,
to see another shepherd, who espying them, did look upon them with a strange
discomposed action, yet had a desire to conceal it, and himself both;
sometimes he thrust his head out of the bush which covered him, and hearkened
what they said with a most attentive ear; othertimes he did shake and scratch
his head, and upon a sudden hold both his hands up to heaven, then let them
fall again in a passionate posture. To be brief, he was so impatient to see
them together, that abundance of passion appeared in all his actions. On the
other side, the shepherdess seemed so displeased with the sight of him that
kneeled before her, as she would not daigne him a look, but made all the haste
she could in dressing her self, that she might be gone from that place. Diana
and her Company seeing the beauty and disdain of this shepherdess, also the
affection and submission of him that kneeled before her, and the passionate
apprehensions of him that looked on, they had a great desire to know more of
the business; and therefore, until Astrea returned, they approached as near
as they could unseen unto them, and then they heard the shepherd with a deep
sigh say thus unto her: Is it possible, fair shepherdess, that neither my
desire to serve you, nor the power you have to make your self adored, should
have any prevalence with you? I know not (answered she disdainfully) what your
desires are, nor what my power is; but I am sure, that any thing which comes
from you can never please me. This (answered the shepherd) is the worst of
misfortunes that ever could befall me. If custom (replied the shepherdess)
do make things difficult to be easily supported, me thinks you should not so
deeply resent the misfortunes of it, since you have been so long accustomed
unto it; for, ever since the first hour you declared your mind unto me, I did
so clearly acquaint you with mine, as you might that first time have known as
much, as you have since found, or ever shall do. Oh Doris, (answered the
shepherd) if my soul were as regardlesse of your disdaines, as your heart is
of my prayers, certainly I should never have resented them: But alas, this
custom renders me more sensible, as he, who has a heavy burden upon his back,
the longer he carries it, the more insupportable it is. The shepherdess was a
long while without reply, and was intent only upon dressing her self; but
seeing he offered to begin again, she interrupted his speech: Adrastes, said
she, all your language is to no purpose; and let me tell you this once for all,
that I will neither love nor be loved; and unless you will have me most
abominably hate you, trouble me no more. Oh ye gods! (said the shepherd) what
dismal doom is this? Then turning toward her: Is it possible, said he unto
her, that the gods should be weary of being adored by mortals, and that you
should be weary of being so by me? Nay, Adrastes, said she, never wonder at it,
for I am no goddess; or if I were, any sacrifice should be more acceptable
unto me than yours; and I had rather be without any temples or altars, then
have such adorers. Upon this last expression, she had done dressing her self,
and therefore she took up her sheephook and went away, leaving this poor
shepherd so sadly afflicted, that he had not power or boldness to follow her.

Diana seeing her depart thus, she had a mind to call upon her; but seeing
also that she went toward the other shepherd, she thought it better to stay,
and hear more: And indeed, the other shepherd seeing her coming toward him,
he went to meet her, and held her by the gown, lest she should go away; she
desired to be out of his hands, but the shepherd presently kneeled down, and
begged pardon for his fault. It is not your fault only in thus holding me, that
you ought to repent of, said she; but, shepherd, because of that fault, which
has quite extinguished all the good will which I did bear unto you. As for
that, answered he, in lieu of language, I will expiate it with my blood and
life; but dare not beg, unless in silence and submission, since indeed I do
not well know what it is Palemon, replied she, there is none so ignorant, as he
that will not know when he may: But that is all one to me, for I am so
perfectly cured of the wound, that there is not any mark of it remains. It is
an easy matter, said the shepherd to cure a wound that was but very small. I
will not tell you, answered she, how it began to fester, lest I should increase
your vanity; but let me tell you, that I had rather die, then relapse into that
disease out of which I am recovered; and I had rather never see any whilst I
live, then see you in the condition and state in which you were wont to be:
Also, I charge you to talk no more of it, nor to retain me by any force. Since
you are pleased, said he, to forbid me speaking; yet, I beseech, permit me to
sing, what my heart does sadly resent. Then he sighed, and sung out these
Verses; which she, to vex him, answered.

A Dialogue, between Palemon and Doris. Pal. IF I do any love but you, may I
Be damned, and tortured be eternally.

Dor. May I a Statue turn, and never move,
If any other but my self I love.

Pal. Love or love not, yet you l'le still adore,
That you my constancy may see the more.

Dor. Love or love not, faith all is one to me:
But that I love you, you shall never see.

Pal. Though heaven and earth conspire to cross my will,
Yet will I vanquish them, and love you still.

Dor. My heart is so averse to love, that I,
Rather than love, a hundred deaths will die.

Pal. Your pride, in scorning all men living, must
Be punished in you, if heaven be just.

Dor. If heaven be just, as none deny it dare,
It will us keep both in the minds we are.

Pal. It is most just, if you, to love, it move,
But most unjust, in taking hopes from love.

Dor. If you to love, and me to hate, it move,
'I will punish you, and will revenge my love.

Though Doris was very tart in all her answers, yet the shepherd did take some
kind of delight in seeing and hearing her talk, but she, desiring to avoid his
company, she came toward the place where Diana was, who seeing she could not
hide her self any longer, she and her company advanced toward this
shepherdess, and after common salutations, said unto her: I wonder not, sweet
Doris, that these shepherds whom I see with you, should be so much captivated
with your beauty, since it is such, as those must needs be blind, that do not
admire it; but, I must needs wonder at the cruelty you use toward them, since
you are the only she, who disdaines that which is their own, and which you have
gotten by such fair and deer arms. Whilst Diana was saying so, Palemon came to
them, and heard Doris return this answer.

Sage shepherdess, that beauty, which out of your complaisance you are
pleased to call mine, is most really and truly your own, and to be admired by
all such as see you: And I do not know with what arms I have captivated these
you speak of unless such as are very unhappy in making such a conquest.
Beauty, said Diana, does well become all women, but pride and presumption does
much eclipse beauty. Did you know, answered Doris, the occasion which makes me
speak thus, you would wonder at the power which I have over my self, in being
able so much as to look upon this shepherd. Upon this, Palemon kneeled down,
and with his hat in his hand, addressed himself thus unto Diana: I do beseech
and conjure you, Oh most wise and discreet shepherdess, by the person whom
you most do love, and by that sweetness which your eyes do promise, to take so
much pains as to hear our difference; if you shall think me culpable, I will
not value my life; but if, on the contrary, she be in the wrong I shall only
ask leave to serve her as long as I live.

Diana would have answered, when she saw Astrea returning from the Temple, with
a greater company than she carried with her; for the Nymph Leonida was there,
and Chrysante, the Governesse of the Druides, with some of the Virgins, who
came to honor the Funerals of Celadon, bringing with them the Priest of that
place, who did officiate in the daily sacrifice of the Town, in the Temple of
the good goddess. This Priest brought thither all that was necessary for the
empty Tomb of Celadon; the Druides Daughters were loadned, some with flowers,
others with milk, and others with wine and water, and did drive before them the
sheep and young bulls requisite for the sacrifice. Lycidas also, being come
that morning unto the Temple of the good goddess, to pay some vows, and make
some prayers, which happily his jealousy prompted him unto, he likewise came,
being acquainted with the design of Paris, for the Rest, of his Brothers soul,
though it went to his heart to see Phillis and Silvander there; and having made
choice of a great Sow to sacrifice, according to the custom, unto Ceres and
the Earth, he gently followed after this Company.

Diana therefore seeing this great company following Astrea, she could not give
answer either to the shepherd or shepherdess, only this, that the Nymph
Leonida, who was coming with so many Druides, would beglad to hear their
difference; and after the Ceremony was ended, at which they would do an act of
pity, if they would be present she could compose all the business betwixt
them. So, not staying for any answer, she with Paris advanced, and went to
salute the Nymph and Chrysante. After some common discourse, the Priest asked,
where Celadon's Tomb was erected, and being conducted thither by Paris, he
went about his work: But first, he began with the Sow which Lycidas brought,
as a sacrifice unto Ceres and the Earth; then killing the Sheep and young black
Bulls, he kept the blood of them in bowls; he ordered the Druides Daughters
according to the Ceremony, unto some he gave the sacred Milk, unto others the
Wine, and made choice of Lycidas to carry the Altar-water. Then going to the
Tomb, he sprinkled all these things with a little bough of Cypress, calling
diverse times upon the soul of Celadon. Then they poured the Water, the Wine,
the Milk, and the Blood upon the Tomb, calling still upon the soul of Celadon.
Then all the Druides Daughters and others, with their hair disheveled begun
with tears and sad condolings to lament the loss of Celadon: When they had
continued a while in this pitiful office, the Priest began to go round about
the Tomb three times, and every one following, and strewing Roses and Flowers
upon the grass, he said in a loud voice: Adieu, CELADON, adieu, for ever adieu;
may thy soul rest, and the earth be light upon thee. The Nymph Leonida did the
like, strewing Flowers upon the Tomb, though she knew well enough he was not
dead. Paris followed her, and all the shepherds and shepheardesses in a file
after him. Whilst the Druides Daughters were singing this sad Hymn, and
lamenting the loss of this shepherd, every one, according to the custom told
what they knew of his life and actions, how generally he was loved, how he
honored his Father and Mother, how affectionate he was unto all his Kindred,
how often he had vanquished all those that contentended with him at any
Exercise, usual amongst shepherds, and how every one lamented his untimely
death, as a great loss unto all the Country. It was well for Astrea, that all
these shepherds and shepheardesses went about Celadon's Tomb in a confused
order, and bad eternal adieu unto him; for had she gone by her self alone,
she had given them all a knowledge of her sorrows, which, being amongst
others, did not at all appear. Now all these Ceremonies being performed, there
remained no more but the erecting this Pole, in resemblance of a Column,
intimating the place where Celadon dyed; which the Priest not knowing, Astrea
was to inform him, which was no small renewing of her sorrows; this Column
then being erected, there remained no more, then to fix upon it Celadon's
Epitaph, which Silvander had writ in a Table which the Priest had brought; for
Hylas was not yet returned from fetching the Ink and Pen from the Temple of
the goddess Astrea. The Epitaph and Inscription which Silvandar writ, was this.

To the Eternal memory of the most beloved Shepherd about the River Lignon.

Love, that had imprudently been a cause of CELADON 's death, has paid his
repentant tears, broke his Bow and Arrows, and extinguished his Torch.

Full of sorrows and lamentation for so sad a loss, he leaves them upon his
Tomb, as an eternal testimony of his tears, who having lost so amiable a
Subject will never employ his Arrows and his Torch again, in vain.

Every one applauded the Genius of Silvander, especially Astrea and Diana,
conceiving, that had he known their minds, he could not have composed a better
Epitaph. When all their lamentations were ended, Leonida took Chrisante by her
hand, and went with her out of the Wood, all the Company following them. And it
seems, Diana had forgotten Palemon's request, when Adrastes and he beseeched
her, to move Leonida and Chrisante unto a hearing of their complaints, and to
judge as they thought reasonable. Diana therefore addressed her self unto
Leonida: Great Nymph, said she, a little before your coming, these shepherds,
offended against this shepheardess, would have referred their differences unto
me; but I advised them to stay, until this ceremony was ended, and then to
address themselves unto you and the wise Chrisantes, if you would be pleased to
take so much pains as to hear them, assuring my self, that the judgment which
you two should give, would be so just, as they would willingly be concluded by
it. The Nymph, who was all civility, did lend a willing ear unto this
shepheardess, and these two shepherds: Chrisante did the like, and when she
offered to speak, Palemon and Adrastes falling upon their knees, said thus unto
her: If any Lovers ever merited any pity upon their pains, believe it, Madam,
these two are they that may best claim it; so as you do an act worthy of your
self, if you will be pleased to hear their difference, and to ordain, not as
reason, but as love inspires you; for it is only from Loves justice, and not
from any other of the gods, that we expect or desire relief. Truly, said the
Nymph, if you, fair shepheardess, do think, that the venerable Chrisante and my
self, are able to hear and determine your differences, we shall be very glad
to settle you all in tranquillity, if we can. Doris, with a sweet and reverend
modesty, answered thus: Great Nymph, these shepherds here, will but abuse that
favor which you do them, in hearing them, and do make unto you a supplication,
which is very disadvantageous unto themselves, manifesting, that they know not
what they ask for if you should be pleased to take so much pains, as to hear
us, you will discover the knavery and infidelity, and the soolery and
troublesomness of the other. However, Madam, since your goodness does
infinitely surpass our follies, I will refer unto the judgment of you and the
reverent Chrisante, upon condition, that both they and I be obliged, to obey
and abide whatsoever you shall doom. I do vow, said Palemon, that I will rather
disobey the gods, then your commands. And I, said Adrastes, do protest, that I
will love you as long as I live, what doom soever be made to the contrary; but
I do protest withal, by the holy Misleto, that if I be doomed to quit you, you
shall never be troubled with my affection. And by this you may know, that the
affection of my Rival is inferior unto mine Adrastes, Adrastes, (said Palemon
then) you are much mistaken, if you think, I will obey the doom of this great
Nymph, if it command less then the end of my life; so as you intending to live
after the sentence, and I to die my passion being greater then yours, I am
superior to you in true affection. Adrastes faintly answered: Since you can so
absolutely dispose of your life, and of your death, it argues, that you have a
power over your self. But alas! my affection is so wholly Mistress of my will
and soul, as it will not let me dispose of my self so freely as you do.

If Leonida had not interrupted them, they had not so soon ended their dispute,
so exceedingly desirous they were to show unto Doris the grandeur of their
love. But the Nymph, taking the venerable Chrisante by one hand, and Doris by
the other: Let us (said she) find out a place convenient for us to sit down
in, that we may with more ease hear the reasons which each will allege. Upon
this, every shepherd took a shepheardess by the hand; Tircis, Astrea; Paris,
Diana; and Silvander, seeing his place taken up, and observing, how Lycidas
looked asquint upon Phillis, and would not come near her, he resolved to
augment his misery, since he was without any reason jealous of him; and
therefore he addressed himself unto Phillis, and would by all means take her
hand: But she, who observed the eye of Lycidas, turned away to avoid him,
seeming as if she went to call some of her companions. But for all that,
Silvander was resolute, and turned as well as she. Phillis, durst not publicly
refuse him, lest those who saw her should take it ill; and not enduring he
should thus follow her, she said unto him: Do you think, Silvander, that I am
at all obliged unto you, for being thus officious about me for want of another?
Silvander knew very well why she said so, but, as if he were ignorant, he came
to her ear, and seeming to whisper, he presently went away from her, and
seemed very angry that Lycidas saw him. This went to the very heart of Lycidas,
for he thought, that he left Phillis only because of him, and that certainly
there was a close corespondency betwixt them; and therefore, not being able to
endure this sight, he endeavored by little and little to retire.

But Phillis being very desirous to be reconciled unto him, and seeing him
slinking away: Lycidas, said she, will you go away? I pray you come hither, and
hear the discourse of these strangers. There is very good Company without me,
answered he, since there is too much constraint where I am. Were I of your
counsel, said Phillis, I would advise you to value your own contentment above
any others. I see, said Lycidas, that you give me such counsel as you do
follow your self, and I am very sorry I cannot do the like; but truly, I have
not so much power over my self. Phillis did very well understand what he
meant, and was netled to the very soul: yet, faigning otherwise, she answered
him thus: I believe, Lycidas, that if the Nymph should undertake to agree all
differences in the Company, you and I should not be out of the number. I do
believe the same (said the shepherd, and blushed for anger) but it would be
Silvander that were the fittest judge. And why Silvander, said the
shepheardess? Because, said he, there is none that is better informed. Upon
this, not staying for any answer, he flung away into the Wood as fast as he
could. This passage did so sting the soul of Phillis, that one could not get a
good word from her all that day.

Whilst Leonida and the venerable Chrisante were in quest of a convenient place
to sit down in, they espied some shepheardesses in the Wood, coming toward
them; for, the Trees being at a good distance from one another, without any
underwood, one might see a great way, both through and beyond it. When Leonida
asked who they were, none could tell her; but when they were a little nearer,
Hylas, who was amongst them, was known to be one; and presently after, the
shepheardesses were also known to be Palinice and Florice, with whom Hylas met
upon the way, and stayed with them, never thinking upon the Ink which he went
to seek; and had they not asked him whither he went, and from whence he came,
he had not remembered what he went about; but this question putting him in
memory, he desired them to stay a little, till he went for the Ink, and he
would return to them. Then he acquainted them with the Ceremony of Celadon's
Tomb, unto which they came to be assistants; but they came too late. Leonida
not knowing who they were, she desired to see them. And Hylas, whose tongue was
never mute, came on a jolly pace, singing these verses.

That he is a Fool, who loves and is not loved. A Song.
WHen I a Lover pale do see,
Ready to faint and sickish be,
With hollow eyes, and cheeks so thin,
As all his face is nose and chin:
When such a Ghost I see in pain,
Because he is not loved again;
And pute, and faint, and swound, and cry:
Oh! There Is your loving Fool, say I.
For, love with love should be repaid,
And equally on both sides laid.
Love is a load, a Horse would kill,
If it do hang on one side still.
But, if he needs will be so fond,
As rules of reason go beyond,
And love, when he is not loved again,
Faith, let him take it for his pain.
These strangers were so near Leonida and Chrisante, that the Nymph knowing
Hylas, she rose up to salute them, and Chrisante also, being informd by her who
they were, she did the same. And because Phillis laughed at Hylas, for not
bringing the Ink: Do you think, shepherdess, said he unto her, that I came
into Forests to do any service for the dead? Thircis, that has nothing else to
do, may do well to employ his time in such melancholy moods; but as for Hylas,
he is of another temper: And therefore do not think it strange, if by an honest
leave I tell you, that if you do not like me as I am, you must never think to
find any alteration in me when I am old. Phillis, who had other matters in her
head, did thus answer him: I swear, Hylas, if you were of any other temper then
what you are, I shall not love you so well as I do. But, as I must not hope to
change you, so you must not think to make me any other then what I am; and
therefore, when I would laugh, let me laugh, and let me be silent when I have
no mind to talk, and I will allow your humors the like liberty; so in this
freedom we shall live both contentedly, and without any trouble to one
another: Oh Mistress, said he, how dearly do I love you, nay, rather adore
you, for this humor; I did never think to meet with such a jolly one: And in
saying so, he hugged her, and would have carried her in his arms, but she
would not let him. Every one laughed at the anger of Phillis, and the humor of
this shepherd. In the mean while, Leonida and Chrisante having found out a
convenient place, they took their places; as for Paris, he kept always close
unto Diana, which was no small displeasure unto Silvander, since he durst not,
out of respect, approach: This was the reason, that being deprived of the
happiness in talking with her, he would enjoy the happiness of seeing her and
therefore seated himself just over against her. Every one being set, Palemon
and Adrastes kneeled down before Doris, and, say what the Nymph and Chrisante
would, they would not rise. At last, the shepherdess, by command, began thus.

The History of Doris and Palemon.
I Have ever been of opinion, great and wise Nymph, and you, venerable
Chrisante, that if there be any obligations amongst Mankind, to tie one unto
another, it is Amity: Whether this be so or no, I refer it unto the judgment of
any who were ever loved. I being thus in this belief, after I had been long
loved by this shepherd, I thought my self in some sort obliged, to render him
amity for amity. The truth is, this amity at the first, had but a very slender
and faint beginning, and I could not imagine, it should ever grow into that
magnitude it did; it did insensibly take so deep a root by long continued
conversation, as when I perceived it, I found it was not in my power to root it
out; and so, as I never questioned his affection, nor could he desire any thing
of me, which he obtained not, atleast, in any reason. Yet notwithstanding, I
know not how, to my misfortune, when he was in full assurance of me, he did
even then mistrust me, so as he was not contented, I should leave frequenting
all those whom I was accustomed to see, but would needs have others deprived of
seeing me; so as not being contented with my not visiting any of my Companions,
but if any of them came to see me, it was a thing intolerable unto him.

Have I not all the reason in the world to be offended at him, for this bad
opinion of me, which his jealousy has infused into him? For gods-sake judge,
into what extreme tyranny is his amity changed: Yet nevertheless, rather then
displease him, I chose rather to lose the good will of all my friends,
neighbors, and acquaintance, rather then he should receive any
dis-satisfaction from me. God knows, in what a strange constraint I lived; and
though I did strive to be as agreeable to his humor as I could, and to content
him, and though it was pleasing to me so to do; yet, my strange retiredness
from all shepherds and shepheardesses, from all my friends and acquaintance,
as if I were sick of some infectious disease, was extremely hard unto me. If
this jealousy of his did proceed from his affection unto me, was not he as
much obliged to do as much for me, as he constrained me to do for him? But he
was so far from that, as during all this time, which I may well term a salvage
life, (for truly so was mine become, only to be suitable unto his humor) he
would not visit me above half a quarter of an hour in a day, visits so short,
as I could do no more then see him, but hardly speak one word unto him. Judge;
I beseech you, whether I have not good reason to say, that his affection is
turned into tyranny, since he was grown like unto those, who at the first,
under a color of good husbandry, do afterward grow so niggardly, both unto
themselves, and those that depend upon them, as they will not allow a
sufficient competency to live upon. For, I do believe, his life was no more
pleasing unto him, then mine unto me, unless in this, that his was voluntary,
and mine constrained. But see, whether I was not very good unto him, and loved
him very well: I endured all his tyranny without the least murmur; and had not
he himself released me, I my self never had. The last testimony which I gave
him of my obedience (for so I may phrase it, better then affection) was such,
as was enough to qualify all his perverse and odd humors.

Be pleased to know, great Nymph, that I lived very young without Father or
Mother, under the tuition of a Brother, who being elder then I, was ever so
affectionate and indulgent toward me, as he did very well supply the want of
Father, both in the education of my Person, and management of my Estate, and
abundantly officious, in doing me the offices of a very Father. He being thus
good unto me, common reason, besides other considerations, commanded me, to
conform my self unto his will, as much as possibly I could, and contrary him
in nothing. Palemon, without any consideration of all this, would needs have me
absolutely to break off from him; not that I should go out of his house, for he
knew not whither else I could go, but that I should not have any corespondency
with those whom he loved; nay that I should forbid them the sight of me. Those
who live under the authority of another, do know, whether this be feasible or
no. Yet, to let him see, how ready I was, to give him any testimony of my
affection, I did attempt to give him satisfaction in this. My Brother, amongst
the rest of his neighbors, did love a shepherd whose name was Pantesmon, a
man, truly, who was qualified with all good conditions to render him amiable
and pleasing; he was wise, civil, respective, affable, courageous, and a good
friend, and amongst shepheardesses, he was the most discreet in all the Town.
These qualities did invite my Brother to love him, and there grew so greet a
familiarity between them, that they were never assunder. Now I must needs
confess, that as he loved my Brother very well, yet I know not, whether he
observed any thing in me which pleased him, or whether it was, that he bore
good will unto the Sister for the Brothers sake; yet so it was, that I knew he
loved me. Now you shall see, whether I did not behave my self as I ought to do
with Palemon: As soon as ever I knew this, I told him of it, and related unto
him all passages, and all the demonstrations of affection which I observed in
him. If I had had any designs, you may imagine, I would never have done thus.
Oh heavens! what reverence, what honor, and what submission did this shepherd
render unto me? His merits and affection were so worthy of all entertainment,
together with my Brother's friendship, that as I did understand since, he did
intend to marry us together. But I, notwithstanding the relation of a Brother's
friend, did receive his addresses with more saintnesse, then any other: For
knowing he loved me, I thought it an injury unto the affection of Palemon, if I
gave him any countenance, though civility in any other might have done it
without offense. This was the man, whom Palemon charged me not to see. And how
do you think it was possible for me to obey him? Pantesmon had a greater desire
to obey me, then Palemon had reason for his request; for, how could I give him
satisfaction? which way should I forbid him my Brothers house, who perhaps
loved him better then he loved me? However, I took Pantesmon aside, and
acquainted him with my will. I will manifest my affection unto you, said he,
not only by the effects of my affection, but also by the effects of your
hatred: You are pleased, without any reason, to banish me your presence; and
the wrong which you do me, shall evidence my love, since to show what power you
have over me, I will without the least murmr obey your commands, though most
unjust; to give you contentment, I will deny it unto my self, and retire out
of your sight: Though I lose this happiness, yet shall I not lose the least of
my affection to you, but will preserve it entire as long as I live, though
without all hope; for your merits bid me to love, because you are your self,
and not to leave loving, because you do not love me. Pantesmon, (said I unto
him) this power which you give me over you, does make me extremely sorry to
banish you from me, and that I am not in a condition to dispose of my own will;
and I do assure you, that your merits, and that affection which you express,
makes me grieve, that I can do no more for you; but I beseech you, believe it
for a most certain truth, that it is not without some reason, and much grief,
that I do make this request unto you. If you could have any hopes in me, you
had the more reason to be angry; but since you cannot, what pleasure can you
take, in rendering me miserable by loving me, without any hopes, but in my
displeasure? You need not use any more words to persuade me (answered he; my
affection, which is wholly devoted unto your will, prompts me unto more then
you can say: I shall, until the very last minute of my life, do whatsoever you
shall command me, without any other aim, end, or design, but only to obey
you. Yet, if my affection, my services, and obedience, can merit so great a
favor, I shall beseech and conjure you, by him you love most, and who perhaps
is the cause of my banishment, that when I bid you my last and eternal adieu,
you will permit me so much honor, as to aspire unto a kiss of your lip. I
cannot choose, Oh great Nymph, but blush in my relation: But however, I must
confess the truth, I did permit him, conceiving, that his goodness did oblige
me unto as much. Presently after, he departed, and I never found him since in
any place, where it was probable I should see him.

Now, I beseech you, were not all these testimonies of my affection enough, to
oblige this ungrateful shepherd for ever unto one? But I found him quite
contrary; for afterward, he would never see me, neither in the way of a Lover,
no, nor so much as in the way of a Friend. I much desired to know the cause of
his retreat, and therefore I did employ a faithful friend to go unto him from
me: But no other answer could be gotten, but this, that, Love drives out Love,
as one nail dxives out another. Upon this, I had two conceptions: First, that
he was fallen in love with some other shepherdess, and this second love had
driven out the first unto me. Secondly, that by his sleighting of me, he gave
me counsel to do the same. Being thus abandoned and forsaken, though it was
extremely requisitie to use my best arms against such an accident, yet would I
not make use of any such, as my enemy sent me; for scorning them as his, I
thought them unworthy of my self, and I esteemed them perfidious, because I
esteemed their Inventor so. I had recourse therefore unto other remedies,
which, though more slow, yet more certain in their effects, which was, Time:
Time, I say, was my Arms, and it which taught me the use of them; it was both
my Physician and my Physic. And truly, as most things that are slow, are yet
most sure, so the cure it wrought, was through; not for a day, but I thank god,
for all the rest of my life. I say, I do thank god, for indeed I had abundance
of reason; for great Nymph, when I call into my memory the life I lived, as
long as this perfidious man seemed to love me, and compare it with that which I
do live now, I must needs confess, that I am more obliged unto him for
betraying me, then I am unto Pantesmon for obeying me For then, (I cannot call
it a life, but a slavery) my affection was not affection, but obedience; and
his love was not love, but tyranny. Now this disloyal man, being (as I
believe) envious at my happy life, or else not contented with once triumphing,
he must needs make a second attempt: And, as at the first, he surprised me by
submission, and great demonstrations of a violent affection, so he thinks now
to catch me with the same bait: And therefore, Oh great and wise Nymph, you see
him here on his knees before me, using such language and expressions, as they
do who are really in love. But he does not consider, that finding my self
weakest on that side, I have more strongly fortified it: I am fully resolved to
hold him out at armed end, let him attempt as long as he will; his
dissimulations, in lieu of love, have renewed such extreme disdain of him in my
soul, that I cannot endure the very sight of him: And if his design was to
displease me, I must needs confess, he has brought it to pass; but if that be
not his design, (as he swears, and would make me believe, it is not) but that,
as a just punishment from heaven, he has revived his flame, that he himself
was the only author of his own misfortune, and that he is prepared for
punishment; I must then confess, that in giving me this occasion of revenge
upon the wrong he has done me, he is a just man, but still no good Lover. But
yet, why does he tell me of his misfortunes and miseries? me, I say, who would
not so much as remember that he is in the world. Or why does he take up such
Arms, as thinking to hurt me with them, he wounds himself? He cannot ever
have any hopes to obtain any thing from me, whose soul smarts with the memory
of what is past, as often as I look upon him. Let him therefore let me alone, and
leave me, to enjoy that happiness which he conferred upon me by a contrary
design. If the heavens, as often they do, have converted that unto my
happiness, which he prepared for my misery, why is he sorry I should enjoy it?
I know better how to make use of these favors from heaven, then he has of
those, which I have done him heretofore. Let him acknowledge and confess, that
the heavens have most justly maintained my cause, and defended my innocent
affection against the most ungrateful and perfidious person, that ever
pretended to be a Lover. If, like a losing gamester, he ask any thing for his
last hand, this, great and wise Nymph, is all I can do for him; I will confess
my self satisfied for his ingratitude, and forgive it; I will pity him, upon
condition, he will never see me, nor trouble me any more; and this shall be all
the revenge I will take, for all his injuries.

Thus the shepherdess ended, with so much color in her face, as rendered her
fairer then she was wont to be. Then Leonida perceiving, she had no more to
say, she commanded Palemon to speak, what he had to say for himself. Then the
shepherd rising up, after an humble reverence unto the Nymph, he began thus.

The Answer of the Shepherd Palemon.
GReat Nymph, I acknowledge that to be most true, which I have often learned
from divinity, That gods and goddesses do never come into any place, without
doing some good. You, who in your merits and quality, are a representation of
them amongst us, were no sooner come into this place, but you may (...) me
undeceived, and convinced of that error wherein I have long lived, if I can
call that a life, which has brought me more torments then death it self. I do
most ingenuously confess, all that this fair shepherdess has related unto
you, is most true, and that I am infinitely more obliged unto her then either
she or I can express. But having heard her reproach me, for complaining, that
the heavens, as envious of my bliss, has kept me from it, I should think this
to be a greater occasion of sorrow, and to accuse it of injustice, did I not
know, that all men are in the like condition, and that there is no perfect
contentment here below. I cannot choose but beg leave to grieve, for the wrong
this fair shepherdess has done unto that affection, which she has promised
me, by misinterpreting mine, and taking that for an injury, which she ought to
take for the greatest assurance and demonstration of my affection. But, Oh
great god of Love! how dare I complain against her, since thou have commanded
me to think all well that she does? I will therefore use no complaints against
her, for my heart will not give me leave to contradict her in any thing. But,
Oh wise Nymph, I will endeavor to let you see, by telling the truth, that
Palemon does love, and that Doris has no reason to believe the contrary. And,
to be as brief as I can, she does confess, that I did love her, and that she
did love me; but why does she upbraid me with any infidelity? Her reason is,
because I was jealous, and I confess I was. But if she did love me as she
says she did, for loving her, why should my affection be pleasing to her, and
not the effects of my affection? If all that looked upon her, made me jealous,
if their conversation, their words, nay, their very looks, made me suspicious,
was not this a most certain testimony, that I did infinitely love her? She has
often told me, that to doubt of her, was to offend her, and to make a sinister
construction of her. Ah great Nymph, did this fair shepherdess know as well
how to love, as her eyes do to make her adored, she would say, that this was
rather extreme love, and the high opinion of her, which made me doubt her. Had
I not thought her most worthy to be served by every one, I should never have
thought, that every one had served her. And had I not been of that belief, how
could I have been jealous of every one? Jealousy therefore, Oh fair Doris, is
not a lesser sign of affection and violent love, then sighs and tears are;
for, it has its original from the knowledge one has of the perfections in
the person loved; but sighs and tears do often proceed from her cruelty only,
and from the torments which they resent by reason thereof. She therefore
knowing, (Oh great Nymph) that I was jealous, ought she not therefore to
increase her affection, in some sort to balance the weight which mine endured?
but on the contrary, she rewards me with cruelty, she her self unties the knot
of that amity, which so many services and demonstrations of a perfect
affection, ought to have made indissolvable. And to give some colorable
pretense for all this, she alleges faintness and coldness on my side, and
negligence and carelessenesse, which, alas, was only in her own opinion. She
alleges, that at that time, I absented my self from her. Indeed, when I
consider this allegation, I must confess, that all actions may be suspected,
when the effects produce contrary semblances, or are not known unto those, that
have interest in them. If I should ask you, fair Doris, what opinion you had of
me, when my fortune had brought me into your acquaintance, I am confident you
will say, that I loved served, honored, and adored you, with as much faithful
zeal of true affection, as ever any shepherd could. And let it not displease
you, if before this great Nymph and reverent Druide, I beseech and conjure you
to tell them, who that shepherdess is, that ever I adressed my self unto,
except you; or you ever heard of? If you do not know, nor ever heard of any,
but must needs confess, my affection was never placed any where else, why do
you complain of me? and why should you suspect, and put a misinterpretation
upon my actions? Methinks it is but very ill Logic, to conclude, that Palemon
did love me; but because he sees me not so often as he was wont, therefore he
does not love me. Were it not a better piece of sophistry in the Schools of
Love, to argue thus? Palemon does not see me so often as he was accustomed, but I
know there is some urgent occasions which keeps him away. Had you been thus
compassionate upon the torments I endured, in being absent from you, and judged
others by your self, you had never so cruelly offended him, who did never
offend against the affection which he promised. But perhaps you will ask me,
what I did mean by so many minute visits, whereas formerly whole days would
not content me? I shall tell you, Oh sage Nymph; and when you have heard me,
you will not make such a sinister construction of my actions, as this fair one
does of my fidelity; only I beseech you to consider, the kind of life which I
led at that time, and amongst what company I lived. I can, and truly, say, Oh
great Nymph, that never man lived a more salvage life then I; no, not such,
whose profession is to inhabit amongst Rocks and Deserts, excepting only, when
my affection constrained me once a day to see her; for, as soon as day began to
dawn, I went out of my Cabin, and shunning all manner of company, I did not
return until dark night, retiring my self, sometimes into the most close and
unfrequented Caves, and other times upon the tops of the highest Mountains, so
solitarily alone, as nothing but my own thoughts could find me out; but they
still kept me so good company, as they did often invite me unto some such
place, from whence I might see her habitation, thinking the very sight of the
happy walls where she dwelt, to be no small consolation unto me. Nothing could
withdraw me from this kind of solitary life; no, not the friendship of
Neighbors, nor duty to Parents, nor care of my Flocks, nor any thing in the
world else, but only my desire of seeing her every day once, and that in such
short visits, as, to my sorrow always when I returned, I thought I did but
only go thither, and not see her. Now my extreme affection unto her was the
cause, why I did not acquaint her with my reason for this kind of life.

Now, great and wise Nymph, it was ever my opinion, that he who loves as he
ought to do, ought to be more tender of her honor whom he loves, then of his
own contentment. The malice of ill disposed men is never so weak nor drousie,
but it may always find out some subject to asperse those that are most
virtuous: And at this time, our frequent visits were eyed, and gave occasion
unto those malignant spirits, to spit their venom, and talk very broadly; and
yet, so closely, that all the diligence I could use could never bring me to
know, who were the authors of these poisonous Impostures. What should I do in
such a case? To undertake a long voyage, I could not, because I was not a free
Master of my own actions; and to cease to love her, had been to cease to live.
Since our great familiarity was it, which gave a color for their calumny, what
could I better do, then stop the black mouths of scandal, by abridging my
self of my own contentment, in not being so frequently with her? For, I
thought my self obliged to preserve her honor and reputation, at any rate
whatsoever. If she complain, that I did not acquaint her with this until now,
she may as well complain against my extreme love of her; for, the reason why I
did not impart it unto her, was, because I was loath to make her a partner in
my sorrows; for I know, that she, who was ever so careful to keep her honor
free from all calumny, could not endure to hear of these, without extreme
vexation, and sad resentment.

Now, great Nymph, I beseech you to consider, by this most true relation,
whether such effects are usual amongst vulgar affections, and from thence you
may perceive the quality of mine; and being such, as gives a manifest proof of
its grandeur, why may I not, and with reason, ask as well some proofs of
hers, since love is never requited but with love again. As for the business of
Pantesmon, which she alleges as a great matter of complaint against me, I
conceive, my apprehensions of him did not proceed from an ill grounded
jealousy, as she terms it, but from abundance of reason; for this shepherd,
as she her self confesses, being such a one as he is, it was probable, she
would rather love him then scorn him. Moreover, the friendship betwixt her
Brother and him, was no small ground for my suspicions; but especially, the
favorable eye which she cast upon him, which indeed was such, as knowing of my
jealousy, she was more to be blamed, for behaving her self so, then I, for
thinking so: And indeed, their Marriage was openly spoken of, so as from hence
I had strong grounds for jealousy; and she, to clear her self, had good
reason to do as I requested. If friendship have a privilege above love, she
might well have denied my request; if it have not, why should she think it
strange, my love should desire a preheminency above that amity, which she had
unto her Brother?

From hence it was, great Nymph, that all our miseries had their original; for
when I was angry with her, for the countenance which she gave unto this
shepherd; she answered me, that her Brothers affection unto him was the cause
of it. But when I replied, that the report of her Marriage unto him was so
common, as it was impossible I could endure to hear it: What would your
fantastical suspicion (answered she, with an angry look) have me to do? You
may call it what you please, (said I unto her) but I shall never be at rest,
until I see him banished from you. Well, (said she, with a more angry eye) I
will give you satisfaction this time; but I wish this may be the last of your
odd humors. she expressed her self in such a manner, as made me more suspect
her, then if she had denied me with some handsome excuse. This made me resolve
to look more narrowly into the matter, and trust unto no eyes but my own. Oh
most unhappy diffidence! Oh what an abominable resolution was this, which has
cost so much sorrow, such extreme torment, and so many tears? In order
therefore unto this design, I spied out a time, when Pantesmon went unto her
Chamber; for, as fortune was, either for displeasure, or for some ill
disposednesse, she kept her bed that day: And going up a back pair of stairs,
which conducted to her Lodgings, I came through a Lobby into a little Closet,
which had a door over against her bed. Such was my misfortune, as I could,
through the keyhole, see all they did, but being at too far a distance, I
could not hear one word.

I saw, and too plainly for my contentment, this shepherd sit by her bedside;
I saw him take her hand, and kiss it several times; I saw him talk
bare-headed, and at last, kiss her lip, without any resistance; and for ought
I could observe, she answered him with no words of anger. Oh heavens! what a
dagger was this to my heart? I knew not what to do with my self; I knew not
how I should suffer this and live. But, such was my extraordinary affection
unto her, that though I had these bitter resentments, yet it made me constantly
to endure any thing, which I thought pleasing unto her. Pantesmon went away,
and I also; he, very ill satisfied with me; and I, absolutely mad at him. Thus
did Love drive us both away.

Now, I beseech you, great Nymph, tell me: Would you have thought I had loved
her, had not this gone to my very soul? Could my resentment be less, then to
retire my self? or, Could it be carried with more discretion, then never to
speak of it unto any? I do confess, I did endeavor to regain my liberty; and
when I found abundance of difficulty, in unloosing the cords wherewith she held
me, I said several times to my self, That I would cut those I could not
untie. And when I was thus striving with my self, it is true, she sent one of
her friends unto me. But what could I think of her message more, then that it
was a continuation of her delusions? Could I possibly give the lie unto such
dear witnesses, as my own Eyes? So, being full of anger, I made that answer
which she thus complains of, which was, That one Nail drives out another. Now,
since I had a belief, that she had thus ungratefully betrayed me, how could I
give her a milder check? I was obliged unto as much by the Laws of my
affection, which would not let me lie now, no more then before. If she took it
in any other sense then I intended it, her innocence was the cause of it, and
my error made me say so. She does not know of any other Love, that ever driv my
love of her out of my heart; and yet, my fears of displeasing her, has even
until this time, deprived me of my greatest contentment. When I at any time
resolved to upbraid her for all this, Love, which had ever a great prevalence
in my soul, restrained me, and gave me a check, telling me, that this would too
much offend her, whom I once loved so well; that it was not handsome to twit
her with her faults, and make her ashamed of them; but that I should be well
contented, with being loose from those perfidious obligations, in which I had
been so long entangled. Oh! this advice was most pernicious unto me; for
doubtless, had I at the first told her what I had seen, she would have related
unto me all that she had done; and so I should have received as much
satisfaction, happiness, and contentment, as I have since suffered torments
and miseries. But absenting my self wholly from her, it was long before I
knew, that Pantesmon had left her: And the worst was, I durst not so much as
enquire, lest I should hear something, which would increase my grief. At last,
my love being stronger then my resolution or my anger, I did by degrees go near
her, and at the very first sight, forgetting all the wrongs which, as I
thought, I had received, I applied my self more unto her then ever before. But
how did I find her? she had the same eyes, the same mouth, and the same
beauty; but she was not the same Doris, who, when I left her, loved none but
Palemon, esteemed none but Palemon, and carrassed none but Palemon. At this sad
return, I saw nothing but disdain, found nothing but hatred and resented
nothing but rigor and anger; so as until very now, it was impossible for me
to let her know, the cause of my retirement, because she would never let me
tell her, but still interrupted my speech.

Now, Oh great Nymph, if these things be not testimonies of a most faithful
and violent love, I will not desire her favor; though the favor which I ask,
is not a pardon of any fault committed against love, but only, for loving her
too much, perhaps more then she would have me, or more then she believes. If
Love would let me complain against her, as in reason I may, I should tell her,
that the has done abundance of wrong, both unto Love, unto Doris, and unto
Palemon: For, Love may complain, that she has extinguished that fire, which
blazed with so pure a flame, that Virtue it self could not be offended with
its heat; and in lieu of it, she has kindled flames of anger and spleen, so
smothered with black smoke, that in lieu of enlightening her soul, they fill it
full of darkness and confusion. But Doris has greater reason of compliant,
that so slight a ground should make her perjured, and break so many reiterated
Oaths, sworn unto that unfortunate shepherd, never to change her mind. And
what can she answer Palemon, if he should say unto her: Is it possible,
unthankful shepherdess, that so many years service, so many testimonies of
affection, so many assurances of my fidelity, should not make you have a better
conceit of me? It Is true, I was jealous; but was it not a fruit of Love? I
beseech you, why not jealous, if amorous? Who should I be jealous of, but of
her I love? But, admit it be a fault, and ought to be punished; is it not the
rigor of justice, to equal the punishment to the crime? But admit, that it
ought to equal it, and that an eye for an eye, and an arm for an arm, ought
to expiate the sin; yet, why should you punish me for being jealous of you? for
then, the same punishment ought to be inflicted upon you, since you were also
jealous of me. Is this an act glorious, and worthy of a Lover? But perhaps you
will say unto me, You cast me off, and quitted me, and has therefore rendered
your self unworthy of any favor. Well, suppose I did cast you off; you must
therefore cast me off also; and perhaps you have done it already. Suppose us to
be both upon equal terms, I have cast you off, and you have cast me off. But
now, when I return again, with abundance of repentance and sorrow for what is
past; are not you obliged by the Law of Like, to do the like? Here I am upon my
knees before you, with as many bitter tears of repentance, as ever Lover had;
and can your anger extend so far, as not to re-admit me into my former
happiness. Forgiveness is the greatest glory of the gods, and it has this
operation, that it converts the greatest offenders into the greatest lovers.

Thus Palemon ended, and Leonida and Chrisante prepared themselves to give
Judgment, when the other shepherd desired to be heard, what he could say for
himself.

The History of the Shepherd Adrastes.
I Beseech you, great and puissant Nymph, and you, venerable Chrisante, to stay
your judgment, until you have heard me, that you may have the better conusance
of our differences, and be able to put a just conclusion unto all our miseries
and inquietudes. I have loved this shepherdess, even from her very Cradle; I
have never since ceased loving her, but still increased in my desires to do her
service: I have endured all her disdaines, and patiently suffered her, to place
all her affection upon another, before my face. Length of time has not lessened
my love, nor diverted my design; her rigours could never afright me, and yet
hitherto, I could never make her leave the least of her cruelties. She equally
balanced her self with favors unto Palemon, and disfavours unto me, and ever
most cruelly scorned both my love and patience. But all was one, all her
affronts did but the better enure me, to endure the intolerable burden of
them; they were so far from diverting me from her service, that the more
difficulties and miseries I met with, the more did they confirm the violence
of my love. Oh heavens! can any man, infected with this disease, be wise? Can
he look for any cure, when his will cannot consent unto it? All such as give me
any counsel against Love, are my declared enemies; and though all manner of
hopes were blasted, yet my affection was unalterable, it was never in the least
degree startled or lessened. No, great Nymph, I had rather die, then diminish
the least spark of that flame, which burned me. She has seen me several times
swim in tears before her; she has seen me fall at her feet, out of my wits. But
neither my tears, nor danger of my life, could ever obtain any thing from her,
but scorn and mockery: A just resentment whereof had been revenged upon
Palemon, if my love could have consented unto any thing, that might displease
this cruel one. But this passion of revenge was so unable to make me undertake
such a design, as I am sure, she cannot task me with the least blemish in my
affection; and whatsoever she is pleased to say of me, I may truly, without any
ostentation, give my self the name of, A Lover without a fault; for jealousy
could never find any harbor in my soul, as it did in this too happy
shepherd; nor did I ever think any ill, or find any fault with any of her
actions. Love can be my witness, that even her very rigours were welcome to
me, when I considered, that they were pleasing unto this fair Doris. And though
I am not so far out of Fortunes favor, but any other shepherdess would
perhaps look upon me with a favorable eye; yet most certain I am, that I never
professed any fidelity to them, but abundance unto her. But Love, not to let so
much disdain go unpunished, and not to forsake a Love so pure as mine, has
suffered her to resent the bitterness of disdain, by the divorce betwixt her
and this shepherd. But before Palemon ever loved her, I did; yet, for all her
bitter treatment, she never saw the least alteration in me. I was the first
that served her, I am the only one that has continued constant, and shall be
for ever in the same mind. I do not set these things before her eyes by way of
reproach, but for truthes-sake only; yet such truths, as shall not put her unto
any sad remembrances, for so I must needs phrase my past services. And though
her cruelty has been such unto me, yet must I in some sort excuse her, since
being engaged unto Palemon, perhaps she had offended against her fidelity, in
doing otherwise. But now, when, thanks be to the Fates, she has quitted him,
what reason or color can she have for her cruelty, since she tells you, that
she loved Palemon, because she thought it reasonable, to love him who loved
her. Upon her own ground, reason, and judgment, I do appeal unto you, great
Nymph, swearing unto you by her fair self, for a greater oath cannot be, that
never did any Beauty cause a greater, more sincere, or more faithful love,
then that of Adrastes unto the fair Doris.

Thus Adrastes ended his Oration, with so many demonstrations of a perfect
love, as all that heard him were partners in his resentments. And the
shepherdess Doris, seeing he had said all he could, after an humble
reverence, answered thus.

Great Nymph, I am very sorry for this shepheard's sake, that all he has said
is true; for, since he loves me so well, it grieves me, that he should be ill
treated; yet, you may perceive by what has been said, that the fault is not in
me, but it is himself only, that pursues his ill fortune. The first time he
declared his mind unto me, we were both so young, that neither knew what Love
was; so as what he said unto me, moved me no more, then a person who was
nothing at all concerned. Afterward, he traveled, and when he returned, he
found me not mine own, for I had given my self unto Palemon: So that, as at the
first time, he might complain of my ignorance in love; so at this second, he
might much more complain of my too much knowledge in it. But he has no reason
at all to complain against me; for, shepherd, can you complain against me, who
was not capable of love, for not loving you? Lay the blame upon Nature; accuse
those Laws unto which she has submitted us all. Then, can you think it
strange, I will not love you, when my will was not my own? Alas, I have but
one heart, and one soul, and one will. You may with more reason complain, (and
that methinks is the only plea you have) that you did address your self unto
me too soon, and returned too late. You say that I never looked upon you, but
with scorn, but was ever very averse from showing any favor unto you. Truly,
Adrastes, if you rightly interpret my actions, you will find, that you are
more obliged unto me for that, then if I had done otherwise For, had you
received any satisfaction from me, unto what a strange extremity would your
love have been driven, that was so great, maugre all my rigours? Consider,
Adrastes, that favors from me, would rather have been aggravations, then any
consolations in your misery: Besides, I could not have showed them, without
much offense unto that sincere affection, which I had promised Palemon. I must
needs confess, that it is just to love one that loves us; but I do not say, it
is injustice, not to love all those, that have any affection unto us; for if it
were, there would be no fidelity nor assurance in love; if it were so, you your
self were obliged, to render a reciprocal love unto the shepherdess.
Bebliena, who is ready to die for you. But I mean, that a woman being free from
all other affection, may, without blame, love him that loves her, if there be
no other reason of hatred, but his love. Now this case is nothing resemblant
unto that betwixt you and me; for I being engaged another way, I cannot
contract any new affection with you, without a ruin of that which I have
contracted already. Had I dissembled with you, or held you in hopes with any
smooth language, you might with reason complain against me; but, if I did ever
tell you my mind plainly and freely, are you not obliged unto me for it? Have
I not a thousand times over entreated, conjured, nay, commanded, as far as I
had any power over you, that you should extinguish your affection to me? And
have you not always answered me, that you would, if you could do it and live?
And when you did continue on was it not for your own sake, and not mine? But,
great Nymph, see how that which, as I gather from his word^, he thinks to be
his advantage, does deceive him. Doubtless he thinks, that my affection unto
Palemon was the only cause, which kept me from giving entertainment unto his.
And indeed, he no sooner heard of the dissentions betwixt that shepherd and
me, but presently he was blown up with hopes to effectuate his desires; and,
to lose no occasions of promoting them, he has ever since that time so
importunately pressed me, that I may, and with reason, call him, rather my
enemy then my friend. But he is much deceived in these thoughts, and does not
consider, that if ever this affection of mine do cease, I shall with it so
cease from ever any other love, as I shall never resent any effects of it again.

Thus ended Doris. Adrastes would have replied, but Leonida commanded silence;
and taking Chrisante, Astrea, Diana, Phillis, Madonthe, and Laonice aside, she
asked them their opinions and advice. But being long in consultation, and the
shepherds, who were not called to counsel, being impatient, and could not be
idle, Hylas addressed himself unto Doris: I do admire said he unto her, that
you should be angry for being too rich. How do you mean, answered she? I mean,
said Hylas, that you ought to entertain, not only these two shepherds, who
love you; but also, as an evidence of your beauty, all those that would offer
themselves unto you: For, it is a woman's honor to be loved and courted by
many, besides the benefit she may get by it. I do believe, (answered Doris,
very carelessly) that this would be a good way for those, who would be esteemed
fair, and are not; or, for such as prefer that vanity, before tranquillity and
solid contentment. If it be a Good to be loved, replied he, the more that love
you, the more good you have. And if it be ill, replied Doris, the more I am
loved, the more ill it is. True, replied Hylas, but how can it be ill, to be
loved by many? They will hate us in the end, answered she. Yes, replied he, if
you do not content and entertain them. How should one satisfy and content many
replied Doris, when it is impossible to satisfy and content one? But, said
Hylas, is it not good to have many Servants? They will in the end become our
enemies, said she, and in loving me, they will more trouble then benefit me.
You must have a care, said he, to keep them your friends. The pains, replied
the shepherdess, is above the pleasure. The gods, said the shepherd, do
never think themselves troubled, that many should bring offerings unto their
Altars. Most true, answered she, but it is a peculiar privilege of the gods,
to do good unto many, without any trouble to them. Methinks, said Hylas, that
since love depends upon the will, and since the will does extend it self to
all it pleases, there should be no great pains in loving several persons. The
Lovers of this age, answered she, are not contented with matter of will, but
they would enjoy it in the effects; an I therefore I think it impossible, that
the will should be divided amongst several persons at one time. Every one of
them, replied he, must but have a part. This, answered the shepherdess, I do
think to be most impossible: But, suppose it might, since the love of one is so
painful, what would a great multitude be? Then it seems, said he, that you
will love but one. One, answered she, is too many, and therefore I will love
none at all. And you, shepherds, (said Hylas unto Palemon and Adrastes) what
do you say to this? We (said Palemon) do make it appear, that we think one to
be enough. How said Hylas, must one love but one? Nay, fewer, answered Palemon,
since we are two, and love but one. The discourse of Hylas had continued
longer, if the Nymph had not returned with all her company and stopped him: She
therefore, and every of them, taking their places again, she spoke thus.

The Judgment of the Nymph Leonida.
ALthough we do observe in this difference before us, several accidents which
seem contrary to one another, yet none of them are contrary unto Love; for, it
is not more natural for Fire to flame and burn, then for Love to produce such
dissentions amongst Lovers; and those who go about to take them away, do
attempt a thing, no less impossible, then to take away heat from fire, or keep
it from flaming. On the other side, considering, that he does not love, who
does not wholly and entirely dedicate himself unto her he loves, we conceive
it, to be a kind of treason, to let any other have a share in his affection.
And though we do express our selves only in the Masculine person, yet it does
hold as well in the Feminine. Therefore, all things being long and seriously
debated and considered, we do conclude, that it would be unjust, that love
should be extinguished by a thing, that is so natural unto it self; or to
divide it amongst many, upon any consideration whatsoever. And we do declare,
that these fallings out, and little quarrels, are only renewings of love, and
that to divide or change affection, is a crime of the highest nature that can
be committed against Love. Upon this ground, we do ordain, that Doris shall
love Palemon, and that Palemon being assured of her affection, shall for the
future give her some better testimonies of his love, then by those of
jealousy; though we do conclude, that jealousy be a sign of love, but it is
a sign of love, as sickness is a sign of life; for, as one cannot be sick,
unless he live, so one cannot be jealous, unless he love; but, as sickness
is a sign of an ill tempered life, so jealousy is an argument of an ill
tempered love. Doris shall pardon, and receive Palemon into her favor again,
and forget all former displeasures, considering, that Love is a most violent
passion; and makes one commit many things, which are not allowed of by him that
committed them, nor ever would be, had he not been infected with that disease.
And to avoid those displeasures which she has resented for the time past, we
do ordain, that as Doris shall treat Palemon as the person whom of all the
world she loves best, so likewise Palemon shall submit himself unto the will of
Doris; for, if he will be free, it will at last fall into tyranny. And as for
the patient and unfortunate Adrastes, we do ordain, that it shall be in his
choice, whether he will continue an example of a faithful and unfruitful
affection, by loving Doris still, without any hopes of being loved again; or
whether he will, by breaking the cords of his first love, by violence, by
anger, or by despair, satisfy the affection of her, who loves him, and is
ready to die for him.

This was the judgment of the Nymph, which produced three very different
effects in these three persons; in Palemon, an extreme contentment; in Doris,
so great an astonishment, as she stood speechless; but in Adrastes, such a
sudden stupification of spirits, that he fell down as dead. So as whilst
Palemon, in an ecstasy of joy, and with a thousand confused expressions,
endeavored to thank his Judge, for so favorable a judgment; Doris said not a
word, but fixed her eyes upon the ground, as not knowing whether she should be
glad or sad: and Adrastes, lying all along without any sense, did move all that
saw him unto so much grief, that Doris her self did pity him. All the
Company flocked about him, and lent him all possible assistance. When he came
unto himself again, Leonida, accompanied with Astrea and all her Companions,
left them all three together, but they continued so, not long; for presently
after, Palemon taking Doris under the arm, went toward Mount Verdun; and
Adrastes following them with his eye, and losing the sight of them amongst the
Trees: Farewell (said he) you happy and most perfect Lovers; go and enjoy, both
your happiness and mine, whilst I, by this most unjust Ordinance, do all my
life lament the loss of that felicity which you enjoy. These were the last
words he uttered out of a sound judgment, for a long time; for ever since, his
spirits were so troubled, that he lost his wits, and committed such absurd
follies, that even such as could not choose but laugh at him, could not choose
also but pity him.

Hylas, finding no justice in this Judgment which the Nymph had given, did
maintain his opinion against all those, who conceived, that this difference
could not be better determined. And because Leonida and Paris were not ignorant
of his humor, they were very desirous to pass away the time in talking with
him; and in order thereunto, Paris began thus: Methinks, Sister (said he) that
you have done poor Adrastes abundance of wrong, and might have well given a
milder sentence for him. Are not you of that opinion, Hylas? For my part,
(answered he) I believe, the heavens had a mind to punish the fool Adrastes;
for otherwise it was not likely, they would have suffered him to be thus
condemned; but I must needs confess, that his fond and foolish passion, does
not deserve a less punishment. You, Hylas, and I, (answered the Nymph) are of
very different opinions; for his love unto Doris, continued with so much
constancy and resolution, methinks, is so far from deserving any punishment
that I do much commend him for it; and therefore I gave him leave to continue
it still, if he would. A very fine leave indeed, said Hylas: Why? you might as
well give him leave to live all his life in misery; for my part, I think you
were very rigorous in it; and I am sure, that were it my case, I would revoke
your judgment. What judgment would you have given, (said the Nymph, and smiled)
if you had been in my room? I should have contented them all three, answered
he. I am sure (said Silvander, and interrupted them) that this Ordinance
proceeds from a solid and well disgested judgment. I am sure, (said Hylas) that
such as are of Silvander's melancholy temper, are not fit to be Judges of
Love; but if you will solidly and seriously consider the reasons why one should
love, you will say, that I am in the right, and that Doris, Adrastes, and
Palemon, might have been all three contented and satisfied. How could that
possibly be, said the Numph? By ordaining (replied Hylas) that Doris should
love them both, and that both of them should serve her; for by this means, they
would have had what they desired, which was, that she should love them, and she
would have been better served.

There was none in the Company that could refrain from laughing, when they
heard this judgment, especially Leonida. Which Hylas seeing: It seems, great
Nymph, said he, that I have made you all very merry, and that you mock me. Nay
rather, (answered she) it seems, Hylas, that you mock us. Excuse him, Madam,
said Silvander, for he speaks as he thinks. If your thoughts (said he unto
Silvander, almost angry) be different from mine, you think but very ill; and I
would gladly know what arguments you have, to blame my judgment in this.
Silvander answered very carelessly; Common sense tells us, that what many have a
share in is entirely possessed by none: If many have shares in the love of
Doris, Adrastes and Palemon can have but their parts; and he that has but a
part in love has nothing of it at all. But why (said Diana unto Silvander) do
you speak thus unto Hylas? do you not know, how he does not understand that
language? Truly (said Hylas) you do very well to put in your vie also; for
perhaps Silvander alone is not Babell enough, to confound all the World. Then
addressing himself unto Leonida: Did you ever Madam, hear such an absurd
opinion, (said he) as this of Silvander's, that if one have but a part of a
thing, he has nothing at all: Will any one think, that there is no water in a
River, because the Sea is not in it? I would gladly know what this Common Sense
is, which teaches such false Doctrines. Silvander answered: If Love could be
divided, and still remain Love, as Water may, and still be Water, I should
yield unto you. Water is of such a nature that the least drop is Water, as well
as the whole Sea; but Love, on the contrary, is no longer Love, if the least
part be wanting; and to prove this to be a truth, Love does consist principally
in an extreme affection, and perpetual fidelity; if you take either of these
parts from it, it is love no longer, and I believe, there is none in the
Company, except Hylas, but will confess it; for, if the extreme be wanting in
the affection, or if fidelity be wanting, it is treason, and not love; if
fidelity be in it, and not perpetual, it is not fidelity but perfidie: So as,
Hylas, I must conclude, that who so has only one part of Love, has nothing of
it at all. If it be so, that Love is a thing individual, it had been against
reason to enjoyne Doris, to divide her love, partly to Palemon, and partly to
Adrastes. Upon this Paris began to speak: Methinks, Hylas, said he, that we
have reason of our side, but Silvander has by his discourse gotten the
favorable opinion of all the Company; and let me tell you, that if you do not
answer him, I shall acknowledge what he says. Generous Paris, (said Hylas)
whatsoever Silvander says, or whatsoever you think, yet truth will never
change; and for my part, I am sure, experience is more certain then all manner
of words, for there is no arguing against it. Now Silvander has nothing, but a
few smooth handsome words, to prove what he says; but I have found what I say,
by so many effects, and familiar experience, that I will never seek any further
then my self for any arguments: For, I have loved many at once, and say what
he will or can, I am sure I did truly love them; and therefore may not Doris do
the same? Many (replied Silvander) do think, they do things, when they do them
not: All Artificers, but more especially those that do addict themselves unto
the Arts and Sciences, which are not Mechanical, have a very great opinion of
what they do, and very few, but think their own works much better and more
perfect then any others, when as it is apparent, they do but deceive
themselves, and very often, great imperfections are seen in them by others:
Self-love is ever blind, but always open to the eyes of others. Hylas thinks
he loves, and that he loves well, though he be but a very bad workman; and
therefore, whosoever would love aright, and not err, must never take him for a
pattern. Who, then (said Hylas) my self? If any, (answered Silvander) believe
it, Silvander is he? See (said Hylas) one of the greatest pieces of presumption
that ever self-love produced: Do you think, none but your self can love well?
I say, (answered Silvander) that my affection is pure and perfect, that you
cannot tax it with any fault; nay more, that you cannot name me another, that
excells me. So, so, (said Hylas) was ever any so over-weened and arrogant as
this shepherd? Is he the only one that knows how to love? Came he from
heaven? Is he the great pattern unto men, and gives them the Laws of Love, and
can measure the grandeur and perfection of our wills? Fair Nymph, if it would
not be too tedious unto you, I beseech you give me leave to show him his error.
Then cocking his Beaver with one arm a kembow, and the other accompanying by
its gesture the violence of his speech, he spoke thus: I observe two things,
Silvander, in your speech; the one, that your affection is pure, and perfect,
and unalterable; the other, that I cannot name another more accomplished. Can
any thing be added unto that which is perfect? I am confident, you will say,
No; for, if it would admit of any addition, then it wants something, and cannot
be perfect. That thing unto which nothing can be added, must be arrived at its
extremity, and therefore it must be confessed, that whatsoever is perfect is
extreme. Now, if your affection be perfect, then nothing can be added unto it,
nor can it be made greater then it is, nor more accomplished. Now tell me
presently, What is Love? Is it not a desire of beauty, and of a good which you
want? But your love is a desire of a good which you want: Therefore it must
consequently be confessed, that something may be added unto your Love, which it
has not. Moreover, you say, that your affection cannot be taxed with any
crime: If I should ask you, whom it is you do love, you would answer, that it
is Diana. If I should ask further, who this Diana is, you would reply, that
she is the most perfect shepherdess in the world. Then answer I, If this
shepherdess be so perfect as you esteem her, are you not very bold, in daring
to love one that is so full of perfection? For, there must always be some
proportion, betwixt the Lover and the Loved; and I cannot believe, that all
your presumption can persuade her, that you are so perfect as you think your
self. Perhaps you will charge me with the same fault, in loving Phillis, who,
you will say, has much more perfection then I. But I am of a contrary belief
unto you; for I do not hold her for such a one, as you do your Diana: I do
confess, she is owner both of beauty and merit; and am I without? She has wit,
so have I: She is wise, I am no fool: She is a shepherdess, I am a shepherd:
She is Phillis, and I am Hylas. Is there not an eeven conformity and equality
betwixt us? So as in answer unto all you can ask, I propose it as a more
perfect love then yours; so as if one desire to love aright, Hylas, and not
Silvander, must be the pattern. For, to what purpose is it to love, unless to
have contentment? But what contentment or pleasure can these drooping
melancholy Lovers have, who are perpetually musing and fretting at their
hearts, against this Bugbear and Chimaera of Constancy. Diana, does Silvander
say, does not love me; alas, she loves another, and scorns me; but for all
that, I will love, and serve, and adore her, lest I should be taxed with
inconstancy. Phillis, does Hylas say, does not love me, she loves another, and
scorns me; why should not I change this ungrateful woman for another, that
will love me, and scorn some other for my sake? Shall this Bugbear, of being
taxed with inconstancy, hinder me? Ah friends, I pray tell me, what kind of
Beast is this Inconstancy? Who did it ever devour? What disease did it ever
breed? Did any ever die of it? How many have you seen in mourning by reason of
it? No, no, it is a mere imagination, a fancy, a chimaera, or rather an
invention of some subtle Lover, who seeing her self grown ugly, or ready to
be changed for some other, that was fairer then her self, did broach this
opinion, and made it to be thought a mortal sin, to be Inconstant. Will any
man, in his wits, be thus deluded? Can he be so silly, as to consume all his
life without any comfort? Do you call this Love, forsooth, and Constancy? May
it not with much more reason be called madness and folly? What! languish in
the lap of an old, ugly, and ungrateful Mistress! Fie, fie, it is an error
far unworthy of a man, that pretends unto any wit or courage. Let not Silvander
therefore ask any more, wherein I can tax his Love, or where I can find one
that is more perfect; for I am confident, there is not one in the Company who
will not say, that Hylas loves, and Hylas alone loves, as a man of wit and
courage ought to do.

Thus ended this inconstant shepherd, so moved with his own arguments, that he
was as hot as any fire. Every one smiled, and looked upon Silvander, in
expectation of what he would say; and he, to give them satisfaction, very
slightly answered thus.

I thought, Madam, I should have encountered with a Shepherd, in the presence
of Ladies and Shepheardesses; but for ought I see, I shall find him an
Athenian Orator, so much is Hylas transported with his eloquence: Yet, I wish,
(so confident I am in the goodness of my cause) that he, of us two, who shall
be condemned, may be so severely chastised, for speaking so boldly before such
sacred Altars, as he shall either give his Oration the lie, or else be plunged
in the River Resne. That is not reasonable, said Hylas, unless I had been
advertised of it, before I began to speak, or might have such Judges, as I did
not suspect of partiality. Why, said the Nymph, do you suspectus? Because, said
Hylas, you believe all that Silvander says, to be an Oracle; and because he
has been a while at the Massilian Schools, you admire all he says, and think
him to be always in the right. No, no, Hylas, said Silvander, never refuse to
abide the judgment of this great Nymph, and the venerable Chrisante; never
fear, shepherd, I see they are not disposed unto rigor: and the worst will
be, but an acknowledgment of your error. And therefore I will begin.

You say, Hylas, that there is no perfect love, without an acquisition of some
desired good because Love is only a desire of some good which it wants. But,
Madam, I humbly beseech you, before I answer this shepherd, to pardon me, if,
for the discovery of his subtleties, I use some terms, which are not
frequently used amongst us. Therefore, answer me, shepherd: Does any desire
that, which they do possess? You will say, No; because desire is only of
something wanting: But if Love, as you say, is only a desire, do you not see,
that to possess what one desires, is to quench Love, since none does desire
that which they possess? Why, said Hylas, does not one love that which they
possess? If they do not, I had rather you should love; and that I should not
love, to the end, you may desire, and I may possess. I do not say so, (said
Silvander) but I say, that Love is not only a desire to possess, as you would
persuade; but on the contrary, possession and enjoyment does rather make it die
then live. If enjoyment do not make it live, replied Hylas, yet it is enjoyment
which gives it perfection. No, neither, said Silvander, for enjoyment is not at
all necessary, to make a perfect Love. A Diamond is as perfect a Diamond before
it be wrought, as after the Artist has polished it. For, if the perfection of
Love did depend upon this Enjoyment, it would not be in the power of him that
loves to love perfectly, since the enjoyment does not depend upon him, but upon
the consent of another: And yet, Love, being an act of the Will, which is
guided as the Understanding thinks good, and the Will being free in all that it
does, this act of his Will cannot depend upon any other then himself.

But admit, that Love be nothing but a desire, must it be concluded from
thence, that Love may be increased, by the enjoyment of that which one desires?
If you consider it well, you will say, that Love is rather less by it; for,
our souls do in this resemble a Bow, the more the string is stretched, with
more violence does it shoot its Arrows. So our souls do shoot out more
violent desires, when the thing desired is hard to be accomplished, than when
it is easy and in our power. If desires do lessen at things easily
accomplished, much more when it is glutted: And if Love be only a desire, how
can you think, that desires will be augmented by enjoyment, which do diminish
and glut them? Therefore, Hylas, do not say, that my Love being a desire,
cannot be perfect without enjoyment: And do not accuse of arrogance, because
there ought to be an equal proportion betwixt Diana and me; unless you will
deny, that men may love the gods, for then I shall yield unto you: But if you
confess, that to love the gods be the greatest commandment upon us; then I ask
you, shepherd, whether there be a greater disproportion betwixt Diana and me,
then betwixt Thautates and Hylas. And to convince you of your error, it is
requisite, I explain this secret mystery of Love unto you. We cannot love,
unless we do know the thing which we do love. Oh, said Hylas, how false is
that position? For, I do love above a hundred Ladies and Shepheardesses, and
yet I never knew one of them well; for, as soon as I found them to be peevish
and disdainful, I left them, and was angry with my self, for thinking
otherwise of them then I found them. This reason, (answered Silvander) ought to
make you confess what I do say: For, you did love that which you knew not;
that is, having an opinion, that they were full of perfections, you judged them
amiable, you loved them; but finding out the truth, you left loving them; and
by this you see, that the knowledge of the persons, was the original and
source of your love; and truly, if the will from whence love begins, be never
moved unto any thing, but what the judgment thinks good, there being no
likelihood, that the understanding can judge upon a thing, of which it has no
knowledge; I do wonder how you can imagine, one should love that which he does
not know. I do confess, that as the eye may sometimes be deceived, so may the
understanding, and may judge that amiable which is not: But yet, Love must come
from knowledge, be it true or false. Now this being so, have you not learned in
the Massilian Schools, that understanding, and the thing understood, are but
one and the same thing? What! still harping upon the same string, said Hylas,
are you Diana, Silvander, as you were the other day? Truly, Diana, (said he,
and turned toward her) you are a very pretty Boy: And you, Silvander, (said
he, and turned toward him) you are a very handsome Wench. Believe me,
shepherd, you are excellent good company, and will ere long be as pleasant a
Fool, as ever was in Forests. Every one began to laugh at this, Silvander
himself could not hold, hearing how he interpreted what he had said, and his
way of speaking; and therefore he continued thus: You may very well, shepherd,
said he, make your self merry with me, since I had no more wit then to
profane these mysteries, by communicating them unto you; nor should I have
done it, had we been alone, but I was constrained unto it, because I would not
leave those that hear us, in an error. But, though you will not allow what I
say for Orth^dox, yet perhaps you will hearken unto what your self said,
concerning Phillis: I mean, that you did allege the good opinion which you had
of your own merits, and the merits of Phillis, as a good argument, and that you
did not esteem he^s such, but that yours might equal them. Now if you had this
belief of your self, why will you not allow me to take the same advantage of
self conceit; for I do think, that the same proportion that is betwixt the
fire, and the wood which the fire burns, is betwixt Diana and me. Now if you
deny this to me good friend, why do you take more privilege to your self? But
I dare with assurance affirm, that Hylas does not love Phillis; I shall
maintain it to be absolutely impossible: For the chief Ordinance of Love, is,
That a Lover do think all things most perfect in the person Loved. And truly,
it is a Law most just, and grounded upon great reason; for, if a Lover ought to
love his Mistress above all things in the whole Universe, ought he not to
esteem her above all things, since his will directs him always unto that,
which his understanding tells him is best? But it does plainly appear, that it
is Hylas you love, and not Phillis, by saying, that none loves, but for their
own contentment. Now the pains which Lovers do voluntarily take, only in doing
service unto those they love, does plainly make the contrary appear. And have
you not heard say that we live more where we love, then where we breathe? I
shall never believe that, answered Hylas; this is nothing but talk, that comes
from such idle imaginations as yours. Had you said (replied Silvander) that the
talk came from such a wounded imagination as mine, you had said right for the
imagination of a Lover is so: We see some ready to die upon the wound of one
little word, upon the cast of an eye; nay, sometimes upon very suspicion:
Sometimes you shall see a Lover deny unto himself all manner of rest and
contentment, only to enjoy the sight of the party loved, for one minute. But,
Hylas, did you know what a felicity it is, to be a fool in such occasions, you
would confess, that all the wisdom of the world is not comparable to this
pleasing folly: Were you able to comprehend it, you would never ask, what
pleasure and contentment those faithful Lovers, whom you phrase melancholy
and pensive, do receive; for you then would know, that they are so ravished in
contemplation of the party whom they love and adore, as, scorning all that is
in the whole Universe, they do not repent of any thing more, than the loss of
that time which they spend any where else; and their souls not being well able
to contain the grandeur of their contentment, they stand astonished at so much
treasure, and so many felicities, which transcends their knowledge. Know, that
the happiness which Love does recompense unto faithful Lovers, is the same
that he may give unto the gods: And these Lovers, raising themselves above the
nature of men, do almost make themselves gods; for all other pleasures which
you do so highly prise, are such only, as a bastard-Love does afford, unto such
Animals as are without reason; and such men as are only taken with them, they
do degenerate from the nature of Men, and become almost Animals, deprived of
all reason. Into such a Monster, Hylas, do you degenerate, when you do love
otherwise then as you ought; such a Monstrositie, I say does appear in you,
since there is no proportion in it, and, like Monsters, it cannot produce its
like; and, to be brief, like a Monster it cannot live long. On the contrary,
my love is every way so perfect, as nothing can be added or diminished, without
an offense to reason; for, both in grandeur and quality, I can, without any
vanity, say, that it is arrived at perfection. In saying, that my affection
could not be blamed or taxed, I had great reason to say so; for she, from
whence it does proceed, did never produce any thing, but what was most perfect.
And I know, that the gods would chastise me, if I should dare to offer unto a
soul so perfect as hers, an affection that could any ways be blamed.

Silvander would have continued, when Hylas, not being able to be patient any
longer, interrupted him in this manner: Silvander, how long do you intend to
abuse the patience of those who hear you? How long will you fill their ears
with your vanities and fond imaginations? And how long, do you think, I can
endure the impertinences of your language. All the Company were surprised to
hear Hylas come out with his expressions in so loud a voice, as every one began
to laugh so loud, that he was forced to be silent. And because the day was
almost spent, and Leonida was to return unto Adamas, to relate unto him all
these passages; as Hylas was beginning to speak, she said thus unto him: No,
no, you have disputed long enough, Hylas, for one time; the reverend Chrisante
is not accustomed to be so long from the Temple of the good goddess: Let it
suffice, shepherd, that we know, you have very good arguments against
Silvander, but we entreat you to refer them until another time; in the mean
time, we will go away in this belief, that if you had had time to express your
self, you would have gotten the better of him, as yet he has got the better of
you. See, (said Hylas, half angry) how there will be still some imperfections
or other in our natures. What do you say, replied the Nymph? I say, answered
Hylas, that though you be a Nymph, yet you make it appear, you are but a woman,
and has not patience to hear out the truth, but is pleased with the tickling
flatteries of this shepherd, who does but deceive you. You do not at all
offend me, (said Leonida, and smiled) in calling me a woman; for truly I am so,
and would be so, and would not change sexes with the most accomplished man in
the Country: But I know not why you should accuse me with the fault that
Silvander has committed, in alleging very good reasons; and with the fault
which Hylas has committed, in answering him so very ill.

Questionless Hylas had replied, if he had heard the Nymph; but he being gone
away in a chase, he did not hear these last words. And Leonida seeing it was
very late, she went with Chrisante and the Druides Daughters, unto the Temple
of the good goddess, and afterward went to Adamas, Paris not following her;
for his affection unto Diana was such, as he enjoyed no felicity but in her
presence. Thus the Nymph went unto her Uncles, and Paris taking the contrary
way, went unto the fair shepheardesses, and stayed with them a long time.

Leonida desired very much to relate unto her Uncle, all that had been done for
Celadon; and by fortune she met him, walking upon a Tarrasse, which was
shadowed with Sicamours, before the house. He wondered to see her return so
soon, and she telling him the cause, he could not choose but laugh, that every
one should be so deceived. I think, said Leonida, that it will be a good
inducement unto him, to leave this kind of life which he lives; for, if he
should be acquainted, that his shepherdess loves him, and laments his loss,
doubtless he would take a resolution to see her; but I do not conceive it so
fit for me to tell him, as for you, assuring my self, that the amity and
respect he bears unto you, will have better operation upon him, then all the
Rhetoric I can use, for your words have more weight and solidity in them, then
mine have. I shall tell Celadon, (said the Druide) but I know not what effects
my speaking will produce; for I know he loves me, and bears much respect unto
me in all things, but concerning his affection: And I must confess, that I had
long since acquainted the shepherdess Astrea where he was, knowing that she
loved him, had I not feared it would have been a means, to make him go unto
some other salvage and retired place, where I could not find him again; but my
fears of losing him did restrain me. It is now two days since we saw him, and
therefore it will not be amiss, if tomorrow we give him a visit, and do the
best we can to prevail with him.

In this resolution therefore, they went to bed, and in the morning, day did no
sooner appear, but Leonida got up, and Adamas also, so that as soon as they
were dressed, they set forward. That morning, the shepherd was not gone out of
his Cave, but was beyond measure pensive at the passages of the preceding day;
yet very glad, and well pleased with his fortune, that had given him leave to
see the fair Astrea once more before he dyed: And considering, that he had
never received such a favor from her, as at that encounter, except when he was
a young Child, when he saw her in the Temple of Venus; he cried out: Oh most
happy misfortune, that has been more favorable unto me, then my best fortune!
Oh the goodness of Love, which in his greatest torments gives the greatest
contentments! Who would ever retire himself from thy obedience, since thou
haste so great a care of all that are thine? Whilst this shepherd was thus
entertaining himself, Adamas and Leonida came to him. And because Celadon's
face did testify the contentment which he received, the Druide and the Nymph,
after common salutations, told him, that they much rejoiced to see him look
better then he did, and hoped, that he had received some kind of comfortable
courage. The comforts which you do find in my countenance, answered Celadon,
are like unto Suns in Winter, which rise late and set early, and which indeed
do give some light; but it is through so many muddy clouds, that neither the
light nor the heat do much warm. Then he related to them his encounter with
Silvander; how he had put a Letter into his hand; how he saw Astrea with all
the shepheardesses, and had put a Letter into her breast. But alas, Father,
(said he) this happiness was too great for me, and I am afraid, that it was
only to make me more sensible of my sorrows; and that heaven, to make me more
sad in my miserable condition, did only let me see her, whose I ought to be, if
there were any justice in Love.

No, Child, answered the Druide, Love having care of you, and intending to
make you more happy then you are, has given you this small contentment, lest
you should be driven out of one extremity into another knowing very well, that
such sudden changes are very dangerous. And in confirmation of what I say,
Leonida will tell you what she has seen, and what declarations of amity she
has seen the fair Astrea make. Then the Nymph acquainted him with the empty
Tomb, that was erected for him, with the ceremonies, the tears, and discourse
of every one, and particularly of Astrea; and that you may give credit unto
what I say, (said the Nymph) let us go and see Celadon's Tomb, for it is so
near this place, that perhaps you heard the voices of the Druides Daughters,
and the Priest. You tell me such stories, (said Celadon) that I should hardly
believe them, had they come from the mouth of any other. I would not have you,
replied the Nymph, give more credit unto me, then to the veryest stranger in
the world; but come, and believe your own eyes. Upon this, the Druide and
Leonida got him out of his Cave, and conducted him into the Wood, where his
empty Tomb was erected: Oh! how astonished he was, and how presently he began
to read that Inscription which Silvander had set upon it? and having read it
three or four times over: I must needs confess, (said he) that you told me
truth. But having received so great a contentment, would it not be want of
love, if I should have any desire, since I must not see her? Doubtless (said
Adamas) if you should live a Recluse, and never see her, it would argue want of
courage and love in you. Want of Love! (answered the shepherd presently) Ah
no: I confess, it might argue want of courage, which upon this occasion might
fail me, because I have such abundance of Love. I should believe, (answered
Adamas) that you do not love Astrea, if knowing that she loves you, and you may
see her, you absent your self from her presence.

Love, answered the shepherd commands me to obey her, and since she has
commanded me not to see her, do you call it want of love, if I observe her
commandment? When she laid that command upon you, (said the Druide) she did
hate you; but now she loves you, and grieves for you, not only as absent, but
as dead* Be it as it will, answered Celadon, she Commanded me; and be it as it
will, I will Obey her. Yet, replied Adamas, as perfect an observer as you are
of her commands, you have already disobeyed, since you have seen her, and were
present before her eyes. She did not forbid me (said Celadon) from seeing her,
but only not to come in her sight; and how could she see me, when she was
asleep? Since it is so, said the Druide, I will find out a way, that you shall
see her every day, if you please, and she shall not see you. I conceive that,
(said Celadon) to be very difficult, for she must either be asleep, or else I
must be close hid in some place. No, replied the Druide; for more then that,
you may speak to her also if you please. This cannot be, (replied the
shepherd) unless I be in a very dark place. You shall (said Adamas) be in the
open light, and see her, if you have but courage, or if Love have the power to
make you attempt it. Do not think, Father, (answered Celadon) that there shall
be either want of love or courage in me, provided I do not disobey her
commands. Now see (said the Druide) how I do intend to contrive it. It is the
goodness of the great Tautates, to give me a Daughter, whom I deerly love
above my own life: This Daughter, according to the rigor of our Laws, is
educated amongst the Druides Daughters, in the Monosteries of Carnutes; it will
be above the expiration of eight long years, before I can have any hopes of her
coming out. Perhaps you may remember, how I told you, how there is a great
resemblance betwixt you and her, both in age and face. Now I do intend to give
it out, that she has been sick, and upon such an occasion, the ancient Druides
will allow her to retire, until such time as she be able to officiate in the
necessary Exercises: A few days after, you shall assume her habit, and I will
receive you into my house, under the notion and name of my Daughter Alexis: And
it is very requisite to give out that she is sick; for, your way of living
these last two Months, has so altered your face, and taken away that fresh
color which was wont to be in your cheeks, as any that sees you would be
deceived. And though the resemblance which is betwixt you be not so great, but
that when you are both together, a great difference may be found, it is no
matter; for it is so long since any in this Country saw her, that though the
resemblance were less, yet when they hear me call you Daughter, they will
certainly take you for her. I see nothing in all this, but one inconvenience,
which is, that every year we all use to assemble our selves at Dreux, a place
so near the Carnutan-Monastery, that the Druides and Priests may come to
discover, that my Daughter is not gone from thence: But this shall be no stop;
for it will be two months before these Druides do assemble, and they must stay
there two months more, and god knows, whether before that time you may not
have changed your habit and life. Now, Celadon, consider, whether all this be
not very feasible. Ah! Father, (said Celadon, after he had a while thought upon
it) do you think, that Astrea by this means will not see me? Do you think,
andswered the Druide, that she can see you, when she does not know you: How can
she know you, when you are in such a habit? But, Father, (replied Celadon) let
me be habited as you will, I shall be still Celadon in reality; so as I shall
thereby disobey her. That you are still Celadon, is true, answered Adamas but
still you do not by this disobey her command: For, she has not forbidden you to
be Celadon, but only, that she shall not see this Celadon. Now when she sees
you, she does not see Celadon, but Alexis. And, for a conclusion of all, if she
do not know you, you do not offend her; and though she should know you, and be
angry, and command you to die; yet, were not such an end better, then to
languish to death in this manner? This, Father, said the shepherd, is a good
reason, and I will ground upon it; therefore, Father, I will put my self, my
life, and my contentment, all into your hands; dispose of me therefore as you
please.

Thus did Adamas work upon the obstinacy of Celadon; and to the end he should
not change his mind, he returned that very hour to take order for what was
necessary, and especially to spread abroad a report, that his Daughter was
sick, and was to return home. For it was the custom of Druides Daughters, when
they were sick, to come out of their Monasteries; and if their Parents were
negligent, the Ancients of the Monastery would send unto them, for they held it
as a great misfortune, if any dyed there. Therefore he gave out, that the
Ancients had sent unto him, that his Daughter was to come home, and that he
expected her every day. Adamas and Leonida were very busy, in providing all
things necessary for Celadon, who, in the mean time, had leisure to bid adieu
unto Lignon, and to take his leave of his Woods, and of his Cell, but
especially of the Temple of the goddess Astrea. And when he was tricked up in
the habit of a Nymph, (for so the Druides Daughters of that Country were
dressed, when they returned from their Monasteries) and was ready to depart,
they thought it expedient to stay till night, to the end, none might see him
come alone; and in the mean time, Adamas iustructed him, what to answer unto
each, who enquired how the Druides Daughters lived, or of their Ceremonies,
Sacrifices, Schools, or Sciences; but, said he, the best way is, to speak as
little as possibly you can, especially before such, as are knowing in the
affairs of the world; as for others, it matters not, for they will believe any
thing you tell them. Now the day being almost done, they went from that place
at the entrance, into which Celadon had engraved these Lines with the point of
his knife upon a Rock, with much pains and time, having begun them that very
day, he resolved first to leave the place, for an eternal memory of his being
there. The Lines were these.

Within this hollow, dark, and rocky Cell.
Disdain and Love a long time both did dwell.
Before you enter, if their wounds you fear,
Turn back and fly, there is no abiding here.
For, as a Coal is hot, though it seem dead,
After the flame is quite extinguished:
Even so, Disdain and Love, though absent be,
Yet relics of their fire may leave for thee.
This business was carried on by Adamas with so much prudence, that Paris
himself could not discover any thing, resolving to deceive him if he could,
sooner then any other, to the end, that he might the better deceive others: He
therefore took this supposed Alexis for his Sister, whom afterward we will no
longer call Celadon. As good luck was, when Adamas came home, Paris was not
there, and therefore he could not see how she came alone. As soon as she came
there, Adamas got her to bed, giving out, that she was weary, by reason of
travel and her sickness; so as Paris saw her not until the next morning; and
Adamas and Leonida would not suffer her to come out of her Chamber, whose
windows were so shut; that the little light hindered him from discovery, what
they desired to keep close, and they continued thus several days: Though this
Artifice was superfluous, because she knew so well how to carry her self, so
that none could suspect her; yet, this did give her better confidence, because
in this condition, she received the visits of neighbors, who went all away in
a full belief of her being Alexis.

Some days passed on, in this manner; at the last, she began to walk up and
down the house, and to go abroad, pretending, that the fresh air would conduce
to her health. the seituation of the place was very pleasing and delectable,
having a view both of the Mountains and Plains, and the pleasant River of
Lignon, from Boen as far as Feures. This was the reason, why Pelion, the Father
of Adamas, did choose that place to build in. And since that, Adamas had caused
a very sumptuous Tomb to be built, in memory of his Brother Belizar, and
planted a pleasant Grove, which almost joined to the house, and extended it
self toward the Mountains. In this place, Alexis and Leonida went often to
walk, because of the pleasant walks and prospect; and because they were to walk
up a rising Hill in the Woods, Alexis would sometimes take Leonida under the
arm, when they were not seen. And one time amongst others, when they were up
betimes in the morning, and Alexis did offer her that service: This (said the
Nymph, and smiled) is a piece of service, which you had rather do unto another,
who perhaps wishes you not so well as I do. Oh Nymph, (said Alexis, and sighed)
I beseech you for gods-sake, not to renew the remembrance of my miseries; do
you think I can forget them, having such a deep resentment of them as I have?
Thus they discoursed till they were in the Grove, which being higher then the
House, did better discover all the plain, so as there was not a turn of the
River Lignon, from Boen, where it fell from the Mountains, unto Fcurs where it
fell into Loire, which they did not easily discover. This prospect had such an
operation upon the supposed Alexis, that she could not choose but say aloud: Oh
my sad eyes! how can you live, and endure the sight of this happy River, where
you have left all your contentment. Leonida desiring to interrupt her I
believe, said she, of all that ever loved, you are the only one, who does not
delight to see the place, where you have had so much pleasure: The memory of
past miseries is pleasing to the thoughts, much more should the memory of
happiness received. The sad Alexis answered; That which renders the memory of
miseries past, to be pleasing, is it, which makes the memory of happiness to
be full of intolerable wormwood; for the consideration of having past the
miseries, does rejoice; and the consideration of having no more happiness,
does make one sad. But my greatest grief is, that I do not know the occasion of
my misery; this consideration, I swear unto you, Leonida, does wound me to my
very soul: I have made a most exact examination of all my life, but I cannot
find one act which I can condemn. To think, that a light humor, or any
design of changing her affection, were in her, is too great an offense, and
would give the lie unto those convincing testimonies which I have to the
contrary. To believe, that she treats me thus without any reason, that would
argue in me too little knowledge of her, of whose least actions I have had full
experience. What then can be the cause of my misery? Oh ye gods! I think, that
the tongue not being able to express the misery, nor the thoughts able to
comprehend the grandeur of it, you will not let the understanding have a
knowledge of it. Then continuing in these sad thoughts: Do you see, great
Nymph, said she, a little Isle which Lignon makes, close by yonder Town, which
is beyond the River, a little nearer Mount Verdun, and a little distant from
Julicu? There it was we passed over, by throwing great stones into the water,
to step upon, because at that time we sought out for the most secret places, to
avoid the sight of our Parents, especially my Father; who finding no remedy
against this affection, which he saw increase before his face, he intended to
send me out of Gaul over the Alps, to see the great Cities, thinking, that
distance and absence would have that operation upon me, which all his
forbiddings and charges to the contrary could not effect: And because we were
advertised of it, we sought out for the most obscure and unfrequented places
that we could find, there to spend that short time we had to be together, in
free discourse; sometimes because of the convenience of the place, we went into
yonder Rock which you may see is something nearer us, which is hollow, and left
Lycidas or Phillis as Centinells, to advertise us when any passengers came by
because being near a high way, we might be heard. At one time above the rest,
we passed over by great stones into this little Isle of Lignon: And though we
had already taken leave of one another several times, lest we should be
surprised (for my Father concealed from me the day of my departure) yet still
we were taking leaves and bidding adieus to the last. When we were there, and
could perceive no body, she sat down upon the ground under a Tree: I kneeling
before her, took her hand; kissed it, washed it with my tears; and as soon
as I could speak, I said thus unto her.

Now my fairest Astrea, I must be at a fatal distance from you, and will not
die, because you bid me live: but how shall I be able to do it since the very
thought of this distance is so intolerable, that it is ready to take away my
life, as often as I think upon you: To this she answered nothing, but pulled me
by the arm and made me sit besides her, purposely because I should not see
those tears which stood in her eyes, and afterward gushed out. And because I
expected she should say something, I was a while mute: she in the mean time
wiped her eyes, and me thought I heard some imprisoned sighs which she
restrained and would not let have a vent, lest I should hear them. I all this
while, considering in silence my future fatal misery, at last spoke thus unto
her. Alas, my Astrea, will you not, will you not pity a poor shepherd, whose
cruel Father and fate will banish him from you? She answered me with a deep
sigh: Can you have any memory, Son, of my past life, and make any doubt, but
that I shall most sadly resent any thing that shall displease you? Believe it
Celadon, I will make it apparent that I do love you, and shall give cleerer
testimonies of it. I raised my self up, to see what testimony this would be
that she would give me of her affection; but she turned her head the other way,
and with her fair hand pushed me into the place where I sat before, to the end
I should not see her tears, of which she was in point of honor, ashamed.
Perhaps, said Leonide, it was her lofty spirit, which would not let any know,
that Love could conquer her.

Whatsoever it was, said Alexis, she made it evident unto me, that she did love
me. But why, my Fairest Astrea, (said I unto her) do you not command me to stay
with you, if my absence be displeasing unto you? Can you think that the Command
of a Father, or any thing upon earth can make me disobey what you ordain?
Son, said she then unto me; I had rather die, then divert you from your
voyage; It would be too great an offense both against your duty and my own
honor. Do not think I make any doubt of that absolute power which I have over
you: I judge of you by my self whom I am sure, neither the power of Father,
authority of Mother, desire of Kindred, or salutation of Friends, shall ever
make me do any thing against that affection which my heart has unto you. And to
the end you may depart from me with some contentment, carry this assurance with
you, I do vow and promise in the presence of all the gods whom I call to
witness, and by this soul which you love so well (said she and laid her hand
upon her Breast) that neither heaven nor earth shall ever make me love any but
Celadon, nor keep me from loving him eternally. Oh most strange Language? (said
Alexis then and sighed) strange indeed they should be spoken unto him who since
was so out of favor.

A few days after, I departed, and passed over the affrighting Precipices of
the Sebucians, Caturgians, Bravomecians and Carrocleans as far as the
Seguisians, where the very horror of death did often appear unto me, yet all
these were not able to divert me from my thoughts. And having passed these, I
desired to avoid the dangerous Mountain of Caturiges; therefore taking into the
Rosne, I resolved to go down that Lake, whose waves do beat against the ragged
Rocks of this hideous Mountain; but alas I found no more comfort by water
then by Land; but on the contrary was in much greater danger of death by
blustering winds and waves, dashing us against the Rocks: but all this while,
my thoughts were still the same.

At the going out of this Lake, I crossed through the great wood of Caturiges:
And after I was past Iseres, a River which comes from Centrons, I crossed the
straight vallyes of Carroclees and Bramovices which conducted me as far as
the Cotian Hills* Leonide being very desirous to divert him from his sad
thoughts: I beseech you, said she unto him, Relate what you have seen rare in
your voyage: That, (answered Alexis) would be too long: for Italy is the very
wonder of the world: But I shall relate unto you, one very pleasant adventure
which I met withal. And I believe we shall have time enough for it.

The History of Ursaces and Olimbres.
BE pleased to know therefore Madam, that Alcippes intending to send me far
enough from Astrea, he commanded me to lay aside the habit of a shepherd, that
I might be more fit to keep good company; for in those Countries persons of
any quality do all live in great Towns which they call Cittyes, where their
Palaces of Marble, and magnificence of furniture is able to amaze beholders:
And none but vile persons and Peasants do live in the Country. Yet every one of
the Province was extremely affrighted at the coming of a Barbarian by Sea into
Italy, who plundered almost all the Province, especially Rome. I was so
extremely desirous to render my self amiable, as hoping thereby to make Astrea
love me the better, as I was strangely swelled with curiosity to learn and
enquire of every thing. Coming therefore near the Appennine Hills, I heard
that there was some Mountains which burned continually: And that I might be
the better able to give an account of them at my return, I would needs see
them But in my way thither, I met with an encounter which gave a stop to my
design: For I had not gone up the hills above two thousand paces, or two miles
as they call them there, but I heard a voice which pitifully lamented, and
because I had a conceit that happy it might be some who stood in need of
help, I turned that way as my ear guided me. And I had not gone a hundred
paces but I spyed a man lying all along upon the ground, who not seeing me,
broke out into these expressions. Should I live, or should I die, amidst so
many fatal misfortunes? If I live, how can I endure so many torments: And if I
dye, alas I shall never see her again? Into what a miserable condition has my
fate hurryed me? Since I cannot be happy either in life nor death? Oh most
miserable Ursaces, (said he) how long will thou suffer thy self to be thus
flattered by vain hopes? Why should they let thee pass away thy days in such
cruel torments? And how can thou preserve a life that is so unworthy of thy
actions and thy corrage? Thou that have a heart so daring as to lift thy eyes
so high as Caesar's wife, thou that had so much corrage as to revenge thy
love, and embrue thy hands in the blood of both, art thou now grown so faintly
timorous as to live and see the dear Eudoxe in the hands of a Vandall, who has
carried her into the heart of Africa and perhaps has a design upon her
chastity? Oh heavens, how can thou suffer such a beauty, who deserves all
adoration, to be so unworthily used and made the prey of a cruel Barbarian?
Can thou endure that so divine a beauty, should run the most miserable
fortune that ever humane did? Thou have seen it, Ursaces; thou have seen it
with thy own eyes, and yet thou art alive: Thou art still the same Roman
Ursaces who loved this divine Eudoxe: And thou have revenged and delivered the
Empire and the fair one from the Tyranny of Maximus? Oh Die, Die for shame,
man; Let thy sword do that which grief will not, and by that Signal act, wash
away the dishonor of surviving the liberty of Eudoxe.

Thus passionately did this stranger express himself; and being transported
with fury he drew a short sword which hung by his side, and doubtless had run
himself to the heart, if a companion of his had not run in and taken hold of
his arm, just as he was ready to give the mortal thrust; but in saving the
life of his friend his hand was very dangerously cut: For Ursaces perceiving
himself seized upon, and his mind being prepossessed with the thought of death
he made his thrust, and gave his friend a very great wound: So as this friend
not being able to hold him with that hand, and fearing he should execute his
cruel design, he fell upon him, saying, Ursaces shall never die as long as
Olimbres lives: A brave resolution of a friend: At the name of Olimbres, I saw
the other man who was before so passionatly transported, presently come to
himself, and as if he had got a fall from the top of a high precipice was
astonished at the coming of the other. Friend (said he) what Demon did conduct
you to this unfrequented place to hinder me from following my adored Eudoxe:
For follow her I will, either with Ursaces, or with his Ghost? Ursaces, said he
unto him, the Gods who are preservers of friendship, and no ill Demon have
prompted me to seek you this three days, not to hinder you from following
Eudoxe, if it be your contentment, but to accompany you: for my friendship
would not allow me to let you make that voyage alone: And therefore, if you
will needs execute your design, first thrust that sword in thy hand into the
heart of thy friend, and afterward, when it is red, and reeking with my blood,
execute thy design, or do what thou will. Ah Olimbres, said he, this request
is incompatible with our friendship: Can you think, my hand has any power to
hurt Ursaces's friend? Think me not so cruel, as ever to consent unto the
death of him, whose life was ever deerer to me then my own. But, if you have
any compassion upon my misery, I conjure you by our pure friendship, to let me
go out of this miserable life. Can you think, said Olimbres, that I will not
immediately follow you? Have I not courage enough, to take away my life, that I
may follow yours well as you follow Eudoxe? Do you think Death to be good or
bad? If it be bad why will you give it unto him, whom Olimbres, your friend,
loves deerer then himself? If it be good, why will you not let Olimbres, whom
you love, be a partaker with you? Oh, no, answered Ursaces, Olimbres shall live
to eternity, before he die by the hand of Ursaces: ^bl^, it will be a great
testimony of friendship, to let me execute my design, which only can wipe off
my shame, in surviving my happiness. In saying these words, he endeavored to
draw out his arm, which his friend had engaged under his body: Which I
perceiving, and fearing, that he who was wounded had not strength to hinder
him, I went gently up to them, and taking the hand of Ursaces, I forced open
his fingers, and seized upon his sword. And Olimbres's striving, had caused him
to lose much blood. He presently perceived himself to faint; and apprehending,
that the loss of his blood was the cause, he arose from off his Companion, and
showed him his hand: Friend, said he unto him, I am ready to wait upon you to
Eudoxe; and if you will die, I shall think my self happy to follow you. Then
presently he fainted, and fell into his friends bosom. Ursaces fearing the
loss of him, he left off all thoughts of killing himself, to help his friend,
and running unto a Fountain which was close by, he brought some water in his
hat, to throw in his face. In the mean time, I knowing that his disease
proceeded from loss of blood, I took a little moss, for want of a better
remedy, and applying it to the wound, I tied it up with my handkerchiefe, and
had not done, when Ursaces returned, who sprinkling the face of his friend with
told water, and calling upon him with a loud voice by his name, he brought him
to himself again. When he opened his eyes: Alas friend, (said he) why did you
call me? Let my soul go contentedly out of the world, and let it attend you
wheresoever you go: Have this belief, I beseech you, that she cannot close up
her days more happily, then by your hand, and in doing you service. Olimbres,
said Ursaces, if you do depart to follow me, I must go before you; and
therefore never think, that my hand shall make any passage for your soul,
until it has with the same sword sent mine out of this miserable habitation.
Upon this, he looked about for the sword which I had taken away; Which I
perceiving: Do not think, Ursaces, (said I unto him) to execute your cruel
determination with this sword; heaven has sent me hither to tell you, that
there is nothing in this world so desperate, which it cannot remit unto its
former condition, when it pleases; and has also sent me to hinder you, from
making any attempts upon the life, either of your self or your friend, for
your life is his, not yours: But if you do attempt any thing against your life,
I tell you from the great god, that in lieu of following this Eudoxe, which you
do so passionately desire, he will lead your soul into infernal obscurity, and
quite take away your very memory. I shall now, Nymph, (said Alexis) relate unto
you a most strange effect. Olimbres hearing these words, was so ravished with
joy, that he would needs rise, and fall upon his knees before me; but his
weakness hindered him, only he turned toward me, and held up his hands: But
Ursaces did prostrate himself at my feet: Oh thou welcome messenger from
heaven, (said he unto me) I know thou art so, both by thy voice and
countenance; here I am, most ready to obey, whatsoever thou command. Perhaps
(said Leonida) they took you for Mercury, because they use to represent him
young and fair, as you are It Is true, answered Alexis, they did take me, either
for Mercury, or some Celestial Messenger. I know not why, but to keep them in
that opinion, I gave this answer unto Ursaces: god, O Ursaces, does command
thee, and Olimbres also, to live and hope. Upon this, taking out of my pocket a
little leather Bottle of strong-Water, after the fashion of the Visigots, I
caused Olimbres to drink a little, and giving him my hand, I said unto him:
Stand up, Olimbres, the heavens will quickly cure thee of this wound, and
therefore let us go unto the next Town. It was very strange, to see what
effects this conceit did produce in this man; for, thinking that I was sent
from heaven, and thinking, that the hot Water which I gave him, was something
that was divine, he took such heart and strength, that he followed me almost as
well, as if he had received no hurt; yet I fearing lest he should faint again,
I turned toward Vrsaces, and said unto him: Although the heavens are able to
give such strength to your friend as is necessary, yet it would not be amiss,
that you took him by the arm, and holped him to walk; for god is pleased to
see men help one another, through the effects of his goodness. Upon this,
Vrsaces went to his friend, and desired him to lean upon him; so as we came to
the next Town, where by fortune we found a Surgeon, who dressed the hand of
Olimbres, and appointed him to keep his bed for a certain time.

As for me, I retired my self into another Lodging, very glad that I had done
this good office, although it was a hinderance unto my design; for the day was
so far spent, that I had not time enough to go and see those burning Mountains.
Ursaces was very sorry when he saw me depart, for he had a great desire to
accompany me; but the Laws of friendship would not let him leave his friend in
that condition. I did plainly perceive his desire, and to take him off it, I
told him; That he must needs stay with his friend, and not to stand upon the
circumstance of complement; for, as for me, the gods would reward me, for the
assistance I had brought them. If I would have suffered it, I think he would
have thrown himself at my feet, by way of thanks; but I forbad him, and
presently retired my self into another Lodging. But Ursaces following me, he
observed the place where I entered, and hearing me ask for Lodging, he returned
to his friend, to tell him, that though I was gone out of their Lodging, yet I
was not gone out of the Town, therefore hoped I would see them again: For,
great Nymph, they had such an assured confidence in me and my assistance, as
they assured themselves, that by my help, they should ere long see Eudoxe. But
Ursaces finding his friend asleep, he presently returned to the place where I
was; and seeing me at my repast he stood a little amazed; but when the cloth
was taken away, and we two alone together, I bad him shut the Chamber door:
Afterward, though with much ado, I caused him to sit down, and to put him out
of his error, I said thus unto him: I perceive, noble Cavalier; that the
assistance which you have received from me, has made you think me something
above a man; and I am not sorry that you have this opinion, to the end I might
divert you from your horrid intention. But now, since I see you reduced unto
former reason again, I will no longer keep you in your error. Know therefore,
that I am a Celt, whom you do call a Gaul, born in a Country, the Inhabitants
whereof are called Segusians and Forrestians: Certain occasions, which would be
too long, and useless to you, to relate, have brought me out of my
native-Country, and invited me to remain here in Italy for a certain time. Yet,
I do take it for a particular providence from heaven, that I was so happily
conducted to the place where you were, since such good effects ensue upon it: I
give heaven most humble and hearty thanks for it, and you are obliged to the
like; for, you may be most certainly assured, that god would not have rescued
you so strangely from the very brink of death, if he had not reserved you for
something, either to his glory, or your own honor and contentment. I saw, that
Ursaces grew pale at these words, and changed color two or three times, seeing
himself mistaken in his hopes, that it had been some divine assistance. I must
confess, said he unto me, that I was deceived; for, seeing you in a habit
different from ours, your face so fair, hearing your voice so sweet, and your
speech so grave; moreover, you coming invisibly upon us, and in such a nick of
time, I must needs confess, I took you for some messenger from the great god:
But, since I understand from your own mouth, that you are but a man, mortal as
we are, I do believe it; yet believe withal, that you were sent by that great
god, only to preserve the life of two most faithful friends. And though in my
first opinion, I hoped for some extraordinary assistance from heaven; yet now,
in this opinion wherein I am, I will not be quite out of hopes in you, since it
cannot be denied, but that there was some extraordinary and particular care of
us and our lives, which comes from some great god, or great angel, who has
made you the Instrument of it. Do not doubt, said I unto him, but that you are
reserved for some better fortune, since you are in so strange a manner
preserved from eminent danger; for, the gods never do any thing, but for our
good. And because I am a stranger to you, and altogether ignorant of that
fortune, which you did so much condole, I should be very glad to hear it from
your own mouth, that I may know who it is whom the gods have sent me to
preserve. Then with a a deep sigh, he answered me thus: The heavens had reason
to punish me, as the most ungrateful person that ever breathed, if I should
deny the relation of my whole life unto him that has preserved it. I shall
therefore most willingly satisfy your curiosity, upon a promise of secrecy;
for being discovered, it may cost the loss of that life, which you have
preserved. And upon assurance of secrecy, he continued thus.

Alexis would have continued her discourse, and related all that Vrsaces told
her, but the coming of Adamas gave a stop unto her; for both Leonida and she
were constrained to rise, and render that honor unto him which was due. The
sage Druide, taking one in one hand, and the other in another, he began to walk
in a Laund, which though shaded from the Sun, yet had a most delicious prospect
toward the Wood of Issoures: And whilst they were discoursing upon several
subjects, one came to acquaint them that Silvia was arrived, and already entered
into the house. Alexis was very shie, and would not be seen, lest she should be
known; but considering, how willing that Nymph was to help her out of the
Palace of Issoures, she hoped she was not changed: Yet Adamas had no mind that
Silvia should see her, fearing, lest the young years of that Nymph, and the
favors which she lately received from Galathea, should make her speak more
then she should; he would have kept the matter so close, that if he could, he
would have kept it from his very self. Therefore he commanded Leonida to go
unto her Companion, but be sure, that if she desired to see Alexis, to tell
her, that they were busy together concerning their Offices, and that she being
to return very shortly unto Carnutes, and finish out her term, she would not
be seen, but as little as possibly she could. So Leonida thus instructed, went
to Silvia, who when they met, kissed and embraced each other, as if they had
not met of seven years before. After these first complements, Silvia told her
Companion, that the Country had not a jot blasted the fresh complexion of her
cheek. And Leonida, in requital, told her, The Court Beauties were always
above the Country Complexions, as plainly appeared, by comparing theirs
together. Afterward, Silvia said thus unto her.

The sequel of the History of Lindamor.
THough, Sister, I had no business to invite me unto a visit; yet, my desires
of seeing you are invitations sufficient. But I must tell you, that at this
time, that desire was not only my conductor, but also some business I would
impart unto you, and, if you think good, unto Adamas also; a business which I
thought fit to let you know, because Galathea and we may receive much
contentment, or much displeasure by the result of it. Know therefore, Sister,
that Flurial is returned from the place whither you sent him, and has brought
Letters from Lindamor; and wondered much, not to find you at Marcelles, and
would have come hither; but Galathea took notice, that he talked unto me, and
suspecting that you sent him to me, for she knew of the journey which you had
commanded him to make, she called him to her, asked him, from whence he came,
and what was his business to me. He, thinking he had don well, without
concealing any thing, answered her, that he came from Lindamor; and presently
showed her some Letters which he had. She asking, who sent him that voyage: He
answered, that it was you, since we were at the Palace of Issoures. Galathea
then turning toward me, and shaking her head: Do you see, said she, what
humor your Companion is of? And, refusing the Letters, she commanded him to
give them unto me, to send unto you. Afterward she went into her Chamber, and
commanded me to follow her. This was the reason, that I could not say any thing
unto Fluriall, but only taking his Letters, I bad him stay there, till I had
done talking with the Nymph. What do you think of your Companion, said she unto
me? is she not fully resolved to do me all the mischief she can? Madam, said I
unto her, I cannot tell what to say unto it, she must be talked with, to know
what her business and design was. I know it (replied she) better then she
will tell you, for she will not confess unto you the truth; she has acquainted
Lindamor with my love unto Celadon. Can it be possible, Madam, answered I, that
she should take so much pains, as to write that news so far, and by such a
dangerous way? See what is in Lindamors Letters, (said she unto me) and I
believe you will find, that I do not lie. Then taking the Letters out of my
hand, she broke open the Seals and read them: The first was directed unto you,
and having brought them, you may read them. Then putting her hand into her
pocket, she pulled them out, and gave Leonida that Letter which was directed
unto her, which was in these term

Lindamor's Letter unto Leonida.
IT seems, you conceive my presence to be requisite, and I think the like, but
in a different manner then as you expect. Doubtless it is requisite two ways:
The one, to bring me out of this miserable life wherein I am, it being
impossible for me to live, and see such an alteration in my Lady. And the
other, in taking revenge upon him, that is the cause of my misery: I vow by all
the gods, that the blood of this perfidious Rival is the only satisfaction I
can take for so great an offense, I shall, to these ends, come to you, within
the compass of that time, which the bearer hereof will tell you. In the
interim, if you think it convenient, let my Lady see the Letter which I have
writ unto her, importing, that the end of my life, and the death of that
Villain, shall testify unto her, that I cannot live, without a fulfilling of
her promise; nor die, till I have taken revenge.


See, said Galathea unto me, (continued Silvia) what I always most feared: The
imprudence of Leonida, or rather, her malice, is so great, that she has told
Lindamor of my affection unto Celadon; and this report is the cause, that he
will come and kill him. I had rather die, then that shepherd should receive
the least harm for my sake. Alas, how easily may he do it, since the poor
shepherd never thinks upon it, nor has any Arms, but his sheephook? Can there
be a more pernicious malice then hers, in procuring his death, who never
displeased her? I believe rather, it is rage; for she loves him, and because he
sleights her, she will be revenged. Madam, answered I, I cannot believe, that
my Companion has committed this fault, though perhaps she may as great; for,
upon reading of Lindamor's Letter, I cannot think he speaks of Celadon, but
Polemas; for why should he phrase Celadon perfidious? And why not Celadon,
(replied she presently) as well as Polemas? Because, Madam, said I unto her,
she has acquainted Lindamor with the Artifice, which Polemas practiced with the
false and counterfeit Druide. And why, Silvia, (said she unto me) do you yet
believe, that Leonida told you or Lindamor truly, concerning that Druide? Do
you not know, that it was merely a device of her own pernicious invention, to
make me cast off Celadon, that she her self might solely enjoy him? Now let me
tell you, if you do not know it already, that she is so extremely in love with
him, that she cannot endure I should look upon him: And had she as much power
over me, as I have over her, she would never have suffered me to come into the
place where she was. Did you never observe Silvia, how she feeds upon him with
her eyes, if I may so express my self, and to look off him, is a death unto
her? To see me near him, struck her to the heart, and swelled every vein with
jealousy. I have many a time observed, the variety of passions that are in
her; I have seen her sometimes, no fire hotter, and immediately upon a sudden,
as pale as death; sometimes she would be all talk, and afterward as mute as if
she had not tongue. I have often seen her so fix her eyes upon him, as if she
would have looked him through, and I have laughed at her in those ecstasies and
ravishments. And she, desiring to engrosse him wholly to her self, and take me
off, has invented this tale she has told you, which is as false, as the gods
are just and true. Upon this, she took another of Lindamor's Letters, which was
directed to her self, which you may read, (said Silvia): Which Leonida took,
and found in it these words.

Lindamor's Letter unto Galathea.
SInce my fatal absence does not only deprive me of your presence, but also
ravish from me the honor an^ happiness of your favor, I do vow, that I will
live only to render a testimony, that I do better deserve that happiness which
you have promised unto me, than that perfidious man, who is the cause of my
disgrace. This wicked Villain shall never aspire unto that honor, either by
Love, or by Arms, or by Artifice, as long as I do live: He shall ere long
confess what I do say, or else that sword, which he has already felt the
sharpness of, shall cut his throat, who lives now too happily, for the
miserable and unfortunate Lindamor to endure.


When Leonida had read this Letter: I assure my self, Sister, said she, that
Galathea did find, that her so deerly beloved Celadon was not in any danger of
his life, by any means of mine: but rather that Traitor Polemas, who is the
cause of all our misery. May Hesius punish him by arms, and Tamaris by
Thunderbolt, that my Lady may know, I did not lie when I related unto her the
wickedness of Climanthe and the cosening Lover For every syllable I said unto
her is true: If I did lie let the Sacred Misleto never be Salubrious unto me.
To be brief, Sister, I swear by all that's Sacred that this is true: And though
I do not care for returning unto Marcelles as long as she continues in this
humor, yet I shall be very glad you would take all occasions and use your best
endeavors to let her see her error. Not for any other end, but because I
would vindicate my honor, and live within the compass of my own quality
without reproach. Sister, said Silvia, you need not use so many oaths to assure
me of the subtility of Polemas, For I did ever believe it, both from what you
told me, and from my own observation of his actions. And you may believe, I
will take all occasions, use my best Arguments, and not leave one stone
unturned to persuade the Nymph of the truth. But I must not flatter you in
this; For I cannot hope either any words or persuasions will work with her,
until her mind be better settled, which perhaps will be too late, unless God
send some unlookt for means: For I see that Polemas has a bad design, which
he would not hide, but for his fears that he has of Clideman and Lindamor,
whom he knows to be armed, and so much in favor with King Childerick who is
successor unto the great Meroveus and who has a very great particular love unto
Clideman and Lindamor, especially unto Guyemant, so as he cannot be without
them. Polemas being subtle and crafty, does fear that if she should attempt
any novelty in the State, these Frankes would by force ruin all his designs.
But to let Matters of State alone which should be meddled with by more able
persons then we are: Let me tell you, Sister, that when Galathea read Lindamors
Letter, she plainly found that Celadon was not in danger: therefore half of
her anger was over. Did I not tell you Madam (said I unto her) That Lindamor
did mean Polemas? It Is very true, (said she unto me) and I confess that I
accused Leonida wrongfully: but it was my compassion unto that poor shepherd
which moved me unto that language. Madam said I, I beseech you believe, that
Leonide would willingly never do you that displeasure; but she knowing very
well that you did not love Polemas, she had good reason to desire that Lindamor
might obtain the happiness of your favor; because there is a near relation
of Kindered betwixt her and him. For be pleased to know Madam, that Lindamor is
of the illustrious blood of Lavieu, and she of Fieur, which have bin so long
linked together by alliances that those two families seem but one. On the
contrary, there was ever emnity betwixt the house of Surieu and that, so as she
may well be excused, if she did desire and endeavor to defeat Polemas from the
happiness which he pretended unto. I do know (answered Galathea) that there
has been great emnity between the house of Lavieu and Surieu: and since the
combat betwixt Lindamor and Polemas, there has been no amity betwixt them:
And I must needs confess, Leonida has reason for what she did, for it is
Natural to desire that the Family from whence any do derive themselves, may
flourish and be advanced. And had I known it sooner, I should not have taken
her protection of Lindamor so ill, whether it was against Polemas or against
Celadon: Also when I consider upon what you tell me, I am apt to beleve that it
was Adamas who helped Celadon to escape, to the end that Lindamor being as you
say his cosen might arrive at his desire, and I do think Leonida to be innocent
in the matter. Therefore in that consideration, and because she did not send
unto Lindamor any of our passages in the Palace of Issoures, I will pardon
her: yet, said she, we must make further use of her in a business, which by
her means may be effected. Here Silvia stopped; and leaving her discourse upon
that subject, said thus unto Leonide: You see Sister, that I do hide nothing
from you, because our friendship bids me be open unto you, but if you should
discover me, I am utterly ruined: And therefore I beseech you be as secret in
it as possible you can: I had rather I were eternally dumb, (said Leonida) then
I should commit such a fault. Know then (continued Silvia) that Galathea after
she had well bethought herself, said thus unto me; you see, Silvia, how
extremely I am troubled with these two men, I mean Lindamor and Polemas; and I
must confess that whosoever would rid me of them, would infinitely oblige me.
For I am sure they will never let me be in any quietness, nor suffer Celadon to
be near me: And therefore I would try if I could be shut of one by means of
the other, which may be effected by the mediation of Leonide, whom I would have
you counsel, to acquaint Lindamour with all that Climanthe said concerning
him: but to take especial care that she do not think I have any thoughts of
Celadon. And to the end she may think, if I have not quite forgotten that
shepherd you may tell her that the presence of Lindamor who is a man of so much
Merit will make me forget him: by this means Lindamor will either destroy
Polemas, or Polemas him. So shall I be rid of one, at the least, and both if
good fortune's favor be so much, as that one kill theother. I do not desire
this should be by death, but rather be rid of them some other way. But I am so
extremely pestered with them, and do love Celadon so well, that if there be
none other remedy, I consent unto it, so it be not by my hand, or known that
it proceeds from me.

I must confess Sister, that when I heard these words, I was astonished, and
resolved to acquaint you, not to incite you unto what she desires, but rather
to divert you. I answered the Nymph, that it was first requisite to know of
Flurial what time Lindamor said he would come; which she thought to be
expedient, and therefore commanded me to call him: which I did: but before he
spoke unto her, I charged him not to tell Galathea the time of his coming nor
the place where he would be: and that if she asked him, he should say, that he
would come much latter then the time he told him. Though the fellow had no
great matter of wit, yet he had some apprehensions which made him stagger at my
persuasions; yet at last he harkened unto them: then I brought him to her, and
he lied so confidently, that she believed him. And because she thought it
expedient that I should come unto you, to get you to write unto Lindamor, or at
least to let him know what Polemas had done against him; I thought good to
bring Flurial with me, that he might tell you more then perhaps he would me but
he fears that you are angry with him for so simply giving your Letters unto
Galathea, that he dare not come in your sight. Now me thinks that though he did
very simply in it, yet he ought not to be so chid for it as to lose him. True
(said Leonide) and perhaps he has not done so much hurt as he thinks, since
by his means Galathea has read Lindamors Letter which I should not have dared
to present unto her, least she should have banished me as she has already.
Assure him therefore, that I am not at all angry with him but rather pleased,
Silvia upon this, went out and called for Flurial whom she told what she had
done; and afterward brought him unto Leonida who looked upon him very kindly,
and assured him that she was nothing displeased with him: Then asking him every
particular of his voyage, he began to answer thus.

I was afraid, Madam, that I had committed a fault, and therefore beseeched
Silvia to make my excuse but since, thanks be to Cod, it proves otherwise, I
am most heartily glad of it, and think it to be the greatest happiness that
could come unto me: For I have vowed my self so much unto the service of
Lindamor that though he may perhaps find me failing in my wit and discretion,
yet never in my fidelity and affection. Therefore as soon as I had your
commands upon me to go unto him, I went with as much haste as possibly I could
and came unto a City called Paris, where Meroveus then was, being returned from
the Neustrian Country: This City is seated in an Isle, so as the walls about it
are washed with a River which runs round on all sides of it: And so as there is
no coming to it but by bridges. As soon as he saw me, I observed a great
alteration in his countenance but he being in bed then, and having many persons
about him, he could not speak unto me, nor ask me the occasion of my voyage:
But when he was alone, he called for me: and asking what business brought me
thither, I told him, that he would be best informed by your Letter. Is there
none (says he presently) from my Lady? You will know all (answered I) by that
Letter. He changed color when I said so unto him: thinking that certainly
there was some great alteration or other in the wind, but when he had read your
Letter I never saw a man so amazed I cannot tell what was in that paper, but it
was like to have cost him his life. I do remember, said Leomda, the very words:
they were but short, and therefore Sister, I would have you hear them, that
you may acquaint Galathea with them, if you think it requisite.

Leonida's Letter unto Lindamor.
AS I have heretofore told you, that you might trust in me; so I must tell you
now that you must trust to your self: not that the least thought of my
affection to your service is diminished: but because the subtility of Polemas
is such, as that it has taken away all my power to serve you. Your business
goes so very badly on, as you must not expect any good successunless you
speedily return. I cannot say any more unto you unless it were by word of
mouth, it not being fit any but your self should know of that, which none but
your self can remedy.


You gave him, said Silvia, a very hot alarm, and I do not wonder he should
blush when he redd it; for, such news might very well cause the like effects.
How could I write any less, said Leonida, is it not true? For my part, I
cannot tell a lie, especially to my friends, and such as trust in me. Your
words replied Flurial, were very effectual. By fortune, there was none with
him, unless a young man who waited upon him in his Chamber. He had such a
command over his sorrows, as he restrained his complaints, till he had
commanded this young man and my self to retire, and wait in his Wardrobe,
until he called for us: Then causing the Curtains to be drawn, he began to
sigh so loud, that though the door was shut, yet we could hear him. Then I
enquired, what was the cause of keeping his bed, and I understood, that it was
by reason of some wounds he had received in a skirmish, wherein the Neustrians
were defeated by the valor of Clidaman and Lindamor; and because I was very
inquisitive after news, and desired to know all passages, the young man made
this relation to me.

I believe, Fluriall, (said he unto me, for he knew my name, having often seen
me in the Gardens of Mount-Brison, and in his Masters Chamber, when you sent me
to him) that you have heard of the Battles that have been wone from the
Neustrians by the King; yet, with the assistance of Clidaman and my Master. I
assure my self also, that you have heard talk of a Lady, (he did name her (said
he unto Leonida) but I have forgot it) who putting her self into the habit of
a man, did follow beyond the Sea a Neustrian, whom she loved, and who resembled
Ligdamon so much, who was taken for him, and dyed, because he would not marry a
woman, for whom that man fought, and killed a man, for which Murder being
banished, he fled into a Country beyond Sea, I cannot hit upon the name of it;
and afterward upon his return, was Prisoner, by a kinsman of him that was
killed: And had it not been for this Lady of whom I mean, he had been put into
the hands of Justice; but she fought for him, and stayed in Prison her self to
release him.

This intricate tale of Flurial's, made the Nymphs to laugh; though Silvia, in
memory of Ligdamon, and Leonida also, had a good mind to help him out: Thou
do mean, Flurial, said Silvia, the fair Melander. True, true, said he, that is
her name. And Lydias, continued the Nymph, who was kept in Calice by Lypandas,
because of Arontes his death. The very same, (said Fluriall, and clapped his
hands together) but I shall never remember their names, and therefore I shall
finish my relation, upon condition, that you will help me out. Now, this Lady
(continued he) was the cause of Calice being taken by the Francks, and Lypandas
(I cannot tell whether I name him right) was made a Prisoner. As for Melander,
who was in Prison, as soon as ever she was released, she would go unto Lydias,
thinking that Ligdamon, who was in the hands of his enemies, had been Lydias,
as every one reported him to be. As soon as Lydias heard of this Ladies
departure, he followed after her, not fearing any severity of enemies, nor
rigor of justice. But Lypandas, who was in Prison, knowing that he had kept a
Woman Prisoner, and that he had fought with her, he fell so in love with her,
that he never left soliciting, till he obtained his liberty, and then went as
fast as he could to the Town whither she was gone; I have quite forgot the name
of it, for it was a very hard word. Was it not Rhothomages, said Leonida? The
very same, said Flurial. Oh god, what fine stories could I tell you, if I had a
good memory. But so it was, that the King's Son fell upon some of the Enemies,
and defeated them, after a long Combat, in which Lindamor was so wounded, that
he was forced to keep his bed. Truly, said Leonida, you are an excellent
storyteller, and therefore I pray proceed. My memory, said he, is not so as I
wish it; but I had rather not tell many things, then lie.

Now whilst this young man told me these things, Lindamor sighed, and sometimes
spoke; but I could not possibly hear what he said, because the door was shut:
At the last, I heard him call me, and not drawing the Curtains, he said unto
me: Fluriall, I would have thee return to morrow, and I would be before thee,
if I could endure a Horseback, but I will presently follow thee; tell Leonida,
that I will come to the house of Adamas, and it shall be within this twenty
nights at the least, if my wounds will give me leave. Upon this, he commanded
me to take my rest. But I was much astonished, when they told me that very same
night, that they thought him dead two or three times, and that his wounds were
so much changed upon a sudden, that he was in great danger of his life. I do
believe, that the Letter which you writ, was the cause: He continued long in
this condition, so as I could not be dispatched of a month after, within which
time, he grew better, and not in so much danger. Besides his wounds, he had
such a Feavour, as caused him very often to talk lightly, and ordinarily name
Galathea, Leonida, and Polemas; Love, revenge death. At the last he recovered,
but not so well, as to go out of his bed; and the Physicians told him, that he
must not stir out of his Chamber, at the least of fifteen nights: And therefore
he dispatched me, saying, that before the sixteenth of the next Month, he would
be here, and gave me the Letters which you have seen; commanding me to tell you
many fine words, which did only signify thanks, and which, in good faith,
Madam, I have quite forgotten.

The Nymphs could not choose but laugh at Fluria's discourse, and good memory:
And because they would talk together, they commanded him to go out, and stay
till Silvia returned, especially to have a great care he told none, when
Lindamor would be back. Then being alone together, they resolved to tell
Galathea plainly, the truth of that voyage, hoping, that perhaps the merits of
Lindamor would make her more considerate; but by all means to conceal from her
the time of his coming, lest if she should know it, she should advertise
Polemas; not out of any good will unto him, but only that he might stand upon
his guard, and that Lindamor intending to kill him, they might be both in a
possibility of dying; or that so acquainting him with the design of Lindamor,
he might challenge him the field, and there die. This then being the design,
Silvia thought it expedient, to communicate the matter unto the sage Adamas;
and to know his opinion: But Leonida told her, that she would acquaint him with
it at leisure; but now, he was very busy with his Daughter. And shall not I
see her, said Silvia? It will not be convenient at this time, said Leonida; for
they are both exceedingly busy, because it is not much above a month, before
the Druides assemble at Dreux: And I do believe, that for this year, my Uncle
will be exempted, because of his Daughter, whom he will be constrained to bring
back, whose presence he would enjoy as long as possible he can: Yet, if you
please I shall acquaint them, for I know they will be extremely glad to see
you. No, no, said Silvia, I am very glad, that Adamas resolves to stay at home
this year; for I believe, his presence will be more necessary unto us then we
imagine: I will not by any means disturb them; it suffices me to know, that
they are well. Then, after some other discourse, Silvia took her leave, and
returned unto Marcelles, where Galathea was, in a longing expectation for her,
desiring to know what discourse Leonida and she had; but, above all, to know
what news of Celadon, assuring her self, that Leonida could tell. But when
she understood, that the shepherd was not in his Town, and that none knew
where he was, she was not a little perplexed, but knew not how to accuse
Leonida; for she imagined, that if this shepherd had escaped by her
contrivance, she would never have suffered him to go out of the Country. After
she had considered with her self, she said, That perhaps Leonida is not
accessory to Celadon's departure, because he went away out of the Country in
that manner. Truly (answered Silvia) I believe, she never so much as thought of
any such thing, and I dare answer for her, almost as much as for my self. But,
if she were not (replied Galathea) why should she not come again, when you sent
unto her from me? Madam, (said Silvia) I beseech you, give me leave to tell you
plainly, what answer she gave unto me. I do not only give you leave, said the
Nymph, but I command you, to tell me. Be pleased to know then, Madam, said
Silvia, that after she had read my Letter, she answered: That she knew very
well what honor it was, to do you any service, especially to be about your
person, not being ignorant, that we are all obliged, both by nature and your
merits, to devote both our services and lives unto you: But when she considered
the strange opinions you have entertained of her; and the bad treatment, those
opinions have caused her to receive from you, she had rather lose the
happiness of your presence, then to be in danger, of farther incurring your
disfavour, and become the talk of all the Court: That a Maid has nothing more
deer unto her, then her honor and reputation, and your suspicious of her, have
caused many disadvantagious reports to go of her: That she always courts
occasions, to obtain the honor of your favor, by all possible services she is
able to do; yet, most humbly beseeches you, not to take it ill, that she does
not return again. At this time when I spoke unto her, she gave me the same
answer; adding many vows and protestations, that what she had told you
concerning Polemas and Climanthes, was true; so as I must needs ingenuously
confess, that I do believe her. Do you think, said Galathea, that this can be?
Madam, answered Silvia, I see no impossibilities in it; for it is most certain,
Polemas does love you, and has subtlety enough to invent this trick: Now I am
the more apt to believe it, because the very same day you found Celadon,
Polemas was seen alone in the same place, walking there very long, manifesting
thereby, that he had some design in it. How do you know this, said the Nymph?
I have learned it, said Silvia, from several persons, being very inquisitive
to discover the truth; so as enquiring where Polemas was that day, I understood
at the first, that he was not at Marcelles: Afterward, searching more narrowly
into the truth, I discovered, he went out of Fours, having only one man in his
company, whom none did know, of whom he made very extraordinary much of. At
last, I understood from many, that those who searched for Celadon along the
River Lignon, found him alone, walking in the same place where you found the
shepherd. Truly, (said Galathea) this tale does not a little trouble me; so as
if it be true, I must needs say, I have wronged Leonida, in treating her as I
have; for, till now, I thought this to be a mere trick. Madam, (answered
Silvia) I assure you, that Polemas was long in that place at that time, as well
as many days ensuing, without any company: Now, judge you, what could his
business be there. I must now confess, said Galathea, that Polemas is a
knave; and could I discover the truth, I would make him repent of his knavery.
Mean time, I would have you get Leonida to return unto me, assuring her, that
she shall have my love, so she will live with me and you, as she ought to do.

On the other side, Leonida, as soon as her Companion was gone, returned to
Adamas, relating part of the news which she heard, and handsomely concealing
what she thought he might take ill. Now, because it was dinner time, the
Druide, Alexis, and she, retired unto their Lodgings.

Twelve or fifteen days being past, since Alexis left her sad habitation and
most of the Neighbors had paid all their civil visits unto Adamas, a Servant
came and told him, a certain number of shepherds came to speak with him,
amongst the rest, one, whose name was Lycidas. At the name of Lycidas, Alexis
started: Which Adamas observing, lest Paris should do the same, he sent him to
see who they were. Paris undertook this Commission with a very good heart,
because he was in fear of his dear Diana's welfare* In the interim, Adamas
looked upon Alexis, saying: I am afraid Daughter, lest your hatred unto this
Brother should discover, what we desire so much to conceal. It is impossible
replied she, but I should be surprised at this unexpected news; therefore, if
you please, I will withdraw into the next Chamber, till these shepherds be
gone. No, said Adamas, for doubtless they come hither to see you: Besides, it
is not good to put Paris himself in any doubt. Alexis did not reply, because
she heard the voice of Lycidas at the stairs foot. Presently after, all the
Company came into the Hall, where the Druide received them with extraordinary
demonstrations of love. The most eminent amongst them was Diamis, Diana's
Uncle; Phoceon, Uncle to Astrea; Lycidas, Silvander, Coridus, Amidor: And
though Tircis and Hylas were not of that Country; yet, having sojourned four
or five months in their Town, they came with them for loves-sake, and good
company. Phoceon, the mouth of all the rest, presented their good affections to
the Druide, together with their cordial desires to do him service: Afterward
told him, that two occasions had principally invited them thither: The one, to
congratulate with him in his joys, of seeing his Daughter Alexis: The other,
to acquaint him, that it had pleased the great Tautates, to send some Misleto
into the Grove belonging to their Town; therefore they came to beseech him, he
would be pleased, according to their custom, to take so much pains, as to
come and make a sacrifice of thanks. Then the Priest addressed himself: Sir,
said he, what I shall relate unto you, is very strange: As I was searching out
Misleto for the new year, I found things, that are no less then wonders, in
the sacred Grove of Hesius, Taramis, Belinus, our great god Theutates. First a
Temple of Hazells and young Oaks, so twisted and plaited to a great Oak in
the midest, as there is an arched Vault, so spacious, as to contain many
people: In the midst, is a bank of Grass, in form of an Altar, upon which
stands a Picture, representing reciprocal Amity, together with the twelve
Statutes of the Laws of Love. Within this, we found another Temple, dedicated
unto the goddess Astrea. Oh Sir! I cannot choose but admire the mystery. There
are in this, two Altars, the chief of which is Triangular, under the most
wonderful Oak that ever was; for, having but one stock, it divides it self
into three branches, then rejoynes themselves into one bark again at the top,
in such an admirable manner, as that they make but one Tree, and spreads it
self above all the Trees in the Grove. There we found the falubrious Misleto,
so fresh, and well grown, as by the report of all the Priests, none in all the
Country is comparable unto it. There the sacred name of the great Tautates is
engraven, with the names of Hesius, Tharamis, and Belinus, upon the three
branches, which does evidence unto us, that god loves the place, and would be
there adored.

Thus the Priest related these things unto the Druide, who knew them better
then himself, being the Inventor of them. It was a custom amongst the Gauls,
that a Month before the sixteenth of July, they searched throughout all the
Country for an Oak that had the finest Misleto; then to make a report of it
unto the grand Druide, to the end it might be ceremoniously gathered: To that
end, all the Priests assembled, seeking for it in all the groves; then when
they found it, they gave it a mark. Now thinking it to be a sign of gods love,
that it should be found in the Grove next their own Town, the People of it were
wont to offer a particular sacrifice of thanks, where the grand Druide used to
officiate, if he was pleased to favor them so much. Now, forasmuch as Adamas
did very much love these men, besides his design upon Alexis, upon whose
contentment, he thought, his own depended, according to the Oracle; therefore
he promised to go with them, whenever the Priest would advertise him. The
Shepherds returned their thanks in the best expressions that possibly they
could. Although (said Adamas, and smiled) I have some reason to be sorry, that
the shepheardesses of your Town are the only neighbors, who have not favored
me with a visit, in congratulation of my Daughters return; yet, I must needs
let them know, that I do esteem them above any in the Country. Paris desiring
to excuse his Mistress with the rest, did humbly make address unto him:
Father (answered he) I beseech you excuse them, for I have heard them resolve,
to come and see my Sister; but Astrea being so sick, as forced to keep her bed,
has a little deferred it, because they desire to have her company. Since it is
so, said Adamas, I am satisfied with the excuse; otherwise, I should take it a
little unkindly. Phoceon then addressing himself: It is most true said he,
that my Niece has of late been very sickly; so as I conceive her best Physic
will be to marry. You may do very well (said Adamas) to let it be your
indulgent care, for she is now of a fit age for it.

Whilst Adamas was thus talking with these shepherds, Leonida and Alexis
entertained others. But as soon as Lycidas fixed his eye upon his Brother, it
was long before he could draw it off; for, he thought he saw the very face of
Celadon: then considering it a little more precisely, he admired, that two
persons should resemble one another so much; yet, the settled opinion of his
death, the authority of the Druide, who said, she was his Daughter; the habit
of a Nymph, together with a little alteration in the face of Alexis, did make
Lycidas give the lie unto his own eyes. After a little longer looking upon her,
he could not choose but say thus: Madam, If I did as much resemble him, whom you
love most, as you do the person whom I love and honor most, I should hope ere
long to engratiate my self into your favor. Kind Shepherd, (answered
Alexis) I am glad I have any resemblance of the person whom you love; for,
knowing from my Father how he esteems you, I shall take any occasion to
continue that amity you bear unto him. The obligations we do owe unto the
Father, (answered Lycidas) together with the merits of the Daughter, commands
us to do you all service; but me above all others, who does see him live again
in your face, whose life was deerer to me then my own. These were the first
complements which passed between the two Brothers.

Though Leonida constrained her self as much as possibly she could, yet she
could not choose but smile, to see how Lycidas was deceived; but fearing, lest
Alexis should not at the first, act a woman's part very well, she interposed,
seeming to be very zealous in enquiring, how all the shepheardesses her friends
did: Therefore, good Lycidas, (said she) leave off your fine complements, and
tell me, how all my dear friends do. Some (answered Lycidas) are merry, others
sad, and some neither merry nor sad, but do glide away time smoothly, without
extremes Who is it, (said Leonida) that is so insensible either of mirth or
sorrow, as she resents neither? It is the shepherdess Diana, answered
Lycidas; for, she loving none, is neither merry nor sad since if these do not
proceed from love, they do not deserve the name. I do believe, said Leonida,
that you do think as you speak; but every one is not of your opinion. Those
that think otherwise (said he) are like unto those Ancients, who thought Water
and Akehornes to be the finest food, when they knew not what Wine and Wheat
was; but now, we think that to be food only for Beasts: So those who have tried
the sweets and bitters of Love, will confess, that all others are nothing in
comparison. Do you think (said Leonida) that Diana never did love any, nor does
love any yet? For what is past (said Lycidas) I will not answer; but for the
present, I believe she lets all matters of love alone; you tell me ill news
for Paris (replied Leonida). This, said the shepherd is the folly of our
Town, for I verily believe that Diana is not sensible of the honor which
Paris does her: yet if I be deceived, I am not the first that is mistaken in
Women Well: said Leonida, let us leave Diana for this time, and tell me who is
she that is the sad one? It is Astrea (answered Lycidas) for Phoceon a covetous
Uncle, who, as most old men do, thinks there is no happiness but in marrying
his Niece richly, will needs bestow her upon a Boyen shepherd called Calydon,
whom she never saw above one minute at the most, and whom she does not love,
yet for my part I believe the old fellow will bring the match about.

Is not this Calydon, (said the Nymph) Nephew unto Tamares? The very same
(answered he). But (replied Leonida) has he forgot his love unto Celidea? Oh
Madam, (said he) Celidea is not the same she was: the accident of her loss was
indeed very strange. Why, said the Nymph, is Celidea lost? she may be termed so
(answered he) and the heart of Tamire is now wholly upon marrying Calydon.
Though Alexis was talking with Corilas, Hylas, and Amidor, yet she lent an ear
unto Lycidas, whose words went so to her heart, that every one took notice of
her, because at the first she blushed, then presently after grew as pale as
ashes: This caused Leonida to ask her how she did, and to say that this was a
relic of her old disease, therefore desired her to sit down. Hylas who from
the first sight of her had a good mind to her, so as Phillis was almost quite
out, and this in his heart, he took her by the arm and made her sit down as
it were by force; then sitting by her, his eyes were never off her face. In the
mean time Leonida and Lycidas went unto the window, there continued on their
discourse: but Lycidas still eying Alexis, he first said; I cannot choose but
look upon the fair Daughter of Adamas; for she has such a resemblance of my
poor Brother, both in her features and Air, as I can find no difference
between them, but in habit. Is it long (said Leonida) since he dyed? It is
(answered he) about four months since. I have heard so many good reports of
him (said Leonida) that I am sorry I never saw him. As for his Interior parts,
I cannot describe him unto you (said Lycidas). But as for his face and actions,
look upon Alexis who is the just picture of him: The very same eyes, the same
mouth, the same symmetrie of every part. Alexis all this while did suffer all
that Hylas said, but it was with much ado: Oh heavens? (said Lycidas) the very
same smile! the same turn of his head! Was there ever such a resemblance as
this? Leonida fearing that his consideration of her resemblance unto Celadon,
might discover that she was Celadon indeed, she said thus unto him. But Lycidas
to return unto our former discourse; when Paris erected his Tomb I heard that
Astrea did infinitely love him, and could not choose but break out into many
expressions of it: I would it had pleased the gods (answered Lycidas with a
deep sigh) that she had never loved him, for then my brother had bin now alive.
Why, said Leonida, do you accuse her for his death? I have heard that she has
so grieved his loss, as she herself has been in danger. The story (said
Lycidas very faintly) would be too long and tedious to relate now; but if she
be unhappy in marrying Calydon, who loves her not, It is the just revenge of
love upon her for the death of Celadon who adored her, of which she is too
guilty: Is it long since Celadon was lost (said Leonida). It is about twelve or
fifeene days since, (answered he). Then (said the Nymph) it was presently
after she received our judgment: Ten or twelve days after, said the
shepherd, I assure you all that knew her, laments her loss, For my part, said
the Nymph, I never heard of it until now, yet believe me I do deeply resent
it: but pray Lycidas tell me, how it came to pass.

The Sequel of the History of Celidea.
I Had thought Madam (answered Lycidas) that you had heard of this pitiful
story, because it was an accident so strange, as every one reported it, as a
great wonder. But since I perceive you have not, Be pleased to know, that poor
Calidon being by your sentence condemned, he grieved beyond thought: Yet after
a long condoling of his sad fate, reason began to take place. He setting before
his eyes his duty unto Thamire, the disdain of Celidea, and his oath to obey
your doom, he rooted that domineering passion out of his soul, and set his
heart at rest.

In the mean time Thamires acquainting Cleontine with his design and
especially Celideas Mother, within a fortnight all things were in that
forwardness, as there wanted nothing to consummate the marriage but going to
bed together. That night being come, the house was all joy in hopes of that
support which all Celideas friends expected by her marriage with this rich man.
Until just now, Calidon obeyed your doom; But when he began to think that
this very night Celidea was to be in the arms of another, and not his, all his
resolutions failed: his eyes saw that, they never saw before, and his heart
began to have other thoughts. He retired himself to a corner of the chamber,
and there drooped in his own thoughts whilst every one was dancing. Thamires
who loved him as his own Son did doubt from whence this sadness proceeded,
so as out of pity he went gently to him, and heard him uttering these words.

A Lover cannot live and see,
His mistress any other's be,
For he that loves can never yield,
Another master of the Field.
But though I dye, I shall retain
A memory of mourning pain,
So when I have resigned my breath,
Sorrows will follow after death.
So whether I do live or dye,
My fate is only misery
And sadder Fate sure none can have,
As not to rest within a grave.
Thamires hearing this, did exceedingly pity him, and more, when after these
words he saw him lift up his hands and eyes, and so swelled with tears, that he
was not able to speak, he withdrew gently to tell Celidea in what condition she
found him, desiring her to give him some consolation. The shepherdess was
very willing to obey Thamires, nor was she desirous to lose Calidons favor,
since she was to live with his Uncle, therefore she went unto him, whom
finding in that condition, How now shepherd, said she unto him, what all alone
when we are in dancing? Ah shepherdess, answered he, you may well allow me
that liberty, since all your mirth is at my cost; but I wish it were without
offense to god or you, that I might end my sad days, before this night came to
put me out of all hopes of any contentment. What do you mean? (said the
shepherdess) my meaning is, replied he, that did I not offend the great
Tautates in putting my self to death, and you, in making you to lose a most
faithful servant, this very hand should dispatch my life, before that night
come in which I shall see Thamires enjoy her whom my affection only can merit.
Celidea seeming to take no notice of any such things; I thought said she, that
you had forgotten all those follies, and I do wonder they should be still in
your memory. How? (replied Calidon with a deep sigh) can Calidon ever forget
Celidea? are you not afraid Thamires will punish you for an offense so great
against my love? Take heed your offense be not greater (answered she) when you
call to mind the promise made unto Leonida to observe the sentence she should
pronounce: have you so soon forgot it? or do you think the gods ever will? How
can you ever hope that the Misleto of the new year, should ever be salubrious
unto you, since you swore by it to obey your doom? Ah shepherdess (replied
Celadon) Do not think I have forgot the unjust judgment of that pitiless
Nymph (pardon me Madam for repeating his words) The memory of it is too sadly
fresh, to be so soon forgotten; nor do not think I am of opinion that the
gods forget my oath; no nor that I care whether the Misleto of the new year,
be Salubrious or no, since in loving you, there is nothing in this world that I
do care for. Yet, Do you not stand in fear (said she) of the justice of the
gods after your death? The gods, said she, can inflict no more pain then I
suffer in my life: For there are not more cruel torments then those I endure.
Yet not withstanding do not think me so ill an observer of what I have
promised: you may remember my vow was, to observe the Nymphs judgment, as long
as I lived: well (said she) do you not disobey it by these expressions unto me?
No, answered he, for do you not perceive that I have been dying ever since that
doom was pronounced? For life is not to live, but to live well. Now ever since
that fatal moment, I have been so far from living well, as I have not only
lost my happiness, but all my hopes of it. If you call languishing a life, I
say again, let the Sacred Misleto be never Salubrious unto me. When no hopes
are left, let life go whither it will, for nothing can do me good since you are
gone. If the gods will but hear the prayers of a most desolate man, I shall
soon die. What advantage can you hope for (said she) in dying? From it (said
he) I expect all my felicity: for none is to be hoped for here, since I cannot
love you unless I offend the gods, or you whom I do fear. But, most cruel
shepherdess, what was your design in coming unto me? Was it to triumph once
more over poor Calidon? or are you like those merry minded people, who when
they have killed a poor miserable Innocent that never did them harm, they come
to see how great the wounds are which they gave him. That, sad shepherd, said
she, was not the cause which invited me hither: but it was to try if I could
divert you from your sad thoughts: so as if I could without offense to the will
of the gods, I would give you some consolation. How? (said he presently) does
it not suffice you, that I dy^ by the cruel hand of fate and by the injustice
of men, which has taken from me all that I can call life, but you must also add
a vain compassion, which you seem to have of me, only to make me die with
more grief? Would you have me think you pity me? Nay nay, never talk to me
of any pity, or health, or remedy, or any hope, for I am as incapable of any
good, as you are of will to do it.

It was now late; so as the Ball being ended, Celidea according to Nuptial
customs was conducted to bed, and afterward Thamires unto her; Calidon he
went both out of the chamber and the house; and by fortune did lie down under
some great Elmes by the way side near unto the house. Where after he had a
while considered the happiness of Thamires, and then his own sad fate, his
heart so failed him, as he fell into a swound, and continued in it, till
Cleontine and her company coming out of the house, found him lying all along as
if he were asleep. But offering to wake him, and seeing he did not stir,
Cleontine herself took his hand; which finding to be very cold, because all
the natural heat of the outward parts was retired to the heart, she cried out,
Oh, Calidon is dead. Many that heard her voice did run unto her: So as when
they saw him in that condition, the cry was so loud as it caused all the
neighborhood to resort thither: many ran into the house still, crying out aloud
Calidon was dead, Calidon was dead: In so much as Thamires heard the noise; and
hearing nothing named but Calidon and Death, he doubted some disastrous
accident: Therefore leaping out of bed, he run to the door to call some of the
house, and at last was told that Calidon was dead. Thamires loved him as
dearly as if he had been his own Son: So as at this sad news he fell down
the stairs to the bottom: his servants took him him up, and carried him to
his bed: his pulse failed and he by degrees grew so cold, as if he had not been
well looked unto he had been in as bad a condition as Calidon: but the
application of good remedies together with Celidea's care, did do him much
good. Whosoever had seen this fair and young Bride thus all undrest washing
the face of her brid-groome with her tears, and had not been moved unto
pity, doubtless his heart was made of Marble. The looseness of her garments
together with the negligent care of herself, added much unto her beauty: She
having recovered him unto his senses did bathe her kisses in a flood of tears.
But the poor shepherd being unsensible of any passion, but sorrow of his
friends loss, did faintly receive her kisses, and pushed her away with his
hand, as if he did not care for them: he would hardly look upon her, only
still asked what news of Calidon: but hearing none that was good, I see, said
he, that as he dyed for the contentment which I have, so I must dye for the
grief which he had. Then rising up in a fury, half naked, he run to the place
where poor Calidon lay along as if he were absolutely dead. Every one gave
place unto him, as well out of respect, as compassion at his grief which
doubtless was very great, since he had left Celedea, and disdained that
happiness which he had so long and so zealously desired. When he saw Calidon,
thinking him to be dead, he fell upon him but so unfortunately, as he hit his
forehead against a sharp stone, on which they had laid the head of Calidon; his
face was immediately all blood and there he remained in a swound. Those that
were about them, did hear the blow which Thamires had, and had an opinion,
that he was hurt. But did not think he was hurt so much as he was. Had they not
observed him so long without either motion or speech, they had taken notice of
it too late. Now, cries began again a fresh, and the clamours of all those who
beheld this lamentable spectacle, grew very loud. Judge what horror this was
unto Colidea, when she saw her Husband and his Nephew lie together like dead
men. By fortune, as they carried Calidon in a chair into his Chamber, he
revived. Then seeing so many people about him, and all smeered with the blood
of Thamires he knew not what to think, but that he was in a dream. When he saw
them carrying his Uncle, who was yet senseless, with a great wound in his head,
he imagined, that some body had wounded him; therefore transported with rage,
he rose up and asked, who was the murderer: He took up a stone, and held up his
arm, as ready to throw it at him, who had done the the homicide: But, when he
heard how it was; How, said he, am I my self the murderer? Is not revenge as
well due to me as to another; nay, more, since there was more obligations upon
me. Upon this, he lifted up his arm, intending to knock himself in the head
with the stone; but he was prevented by friends, who held his arm, took away
the stone, and never let him go, till he was better settled in his reason.

In the mean time, Thamires, by reason of the loud clamours, and the good
remedies which were applied unto him, he was no sooner dressed and put into
bed, but he came out of his swound: When his eyes were open, and he could
speak, the first word was, the name of Calidon, asking where his body was.
Calidon (answered one) is much better then you are. How, said he, is not
Calidon dead? Oh my friends, I pray do not mock me. He is alive, said another;
and if you will not fall into a swound again when you see him, we will bring
him hither very well recovered. Oh god! said Thamires, if this be so, use all
your best remedies to cure me also. Upon this, he offered to rise, but the
Chirurgions would not suffer him. Now because Calidon was as impatient to see
Thamires, it was thought requisite for the setlement of their spirits, to let
them see each other, though they feared, it would cause the wound of Thamires
to bleed afresh; but conceiving, this inconveniency would be less, then that
which might arise by restraining them, they brought Calidon to the Chamber, who
seeing Thamires in that condition, and having heard all the passages, he
kneeled down before him, and asked him pardon, for the grief and pain which he
had put him unto: Excuse, good Father, said he unto him, the little power that
I had to command my self; I come to ask you pardon upon my knees, and beseech
you to believe, that I will never rest, till I have given satisfaction for my
fault. Son, (said Thamires) rise up, and let me embrace thee Had I thought,
that Celidea would have ever been thine, she should never have been mine: My
greatest grief is now, that heretofore there was one impediment unto thy
desires, and now there is two: The first is, her will, which was ever so averse
unto thee, that she would never consent to be thine: The other is, the Marriage
of her and me. Could her will change as well, as I could remedy the last of
these impediments, believe it, Calidon, my death should be welcome to me, so I
could thereby render thee contentment. Calidon would have answered, but he
could not, because Thamires at the same time, addressed his speech unto
Celidea; And you; Celidea, said he, who sees how extremely Calidon does love
you; is it possible, you should not change your will, and affect him? Cannot
his affection, his merits, and my prayers, obtain so much from you? Was Celidea
born to kill both Calidon and Thamires, both with love and sorrow? Celidea, all
in tears, would have answered, but Calidon prevented her: Father, said he, the
ordinance of heaven, and the will of this fair One, must be as it is; Tautates
knows what is fit, better then we our selves: There is no reason, that two
persons, who merit all manner of good fortune, as Thamires and Celidea do,
should change their fortune for my most miserable sake. For my part, I do vow,
and call heaven and earth to witness, that I will never whilst I breathe
contradict the judgment, which the heavens have given by the mouth of the
Nymph. What then, said Thamires, do all these tears, these complaints, and
these swoonings signify? They are testimonies, answered Calidon, that I am but
a man. As good Chirurgions will not take their hand from the wound, though the
Patient complain and cry; so you ought not to cease from that good work, which
it has pleased Tautates to ordain. I desire no other favor, but leave to
complain, and to cry out when the pain torments me. Nay, nay, (said Celidea, in
a very violent and passionate manner) let neither of you put your selves unto
that trouble; the great god Tharamis, will secretly inspire me with a means,
how to set both your hearts at rest: It is not reasonable, that all your
prayers and demonstrations, should any longer be without producing some
effects; but withal, the will of Tautates must be done, nor must the good
opinion I had of you from my very cradle, show out no sparks of will toward
you. And you, Calidon, it is not fit you should consume away your life in this
manner: No, no, live both of you contentedly; give me only leave to think upon
it four or five days, and you shall see, how heaven will direct me unto
means, to ease you both of your sorrows. Upon this, she entreated Thamires, he
would be pleased to excuse her from lying with him for four or five nights, to
the end, she might the better contrive the way, how to accomplish her design.
Thamires, who begun to be sensible of the smart which his wounds caused, who
would have consented unto his own death; to save the life of Calidon, he did
freely grant her request. Then after some other discourse upon this subject,
the Chirurgions seeing, that the hopes which Celidea had put them into, would
conduce unto their rest, and consequently unto their recovery, they advised all
the company to withdraw. Calidon caused a bed to be brought into the Chamber of
Thamires, because he would not leave him. On the other side, Thamires was so
pleased with the expressions of his Nephew's affection to him, as he much
desired to have him always with him. Celidea was the most perplexed of any,
for she would not impart her determination unto any one, lest she should be
prevented in her design, though she did not yet know how to effect it: Her
design was much different from the humors of all women whatsoever; for
knowing, that it was the beauty of her face, which was the cause of the
passionate love, both in Thamires and his Nephew; also considering, that it
only was the cause of the divorce betwixt them, she resolved to make it so ugly
for the future, as that they should hereafter grow as cold at her deformity, as
heretofore they were enflamed at her beauty; hoping by this means, to bring
Calidon to his senses again and to give satisfaction unto the world, that she
never consented unto these follies. After she had long thought upon the way,
and not liking the way of a knife, by reason of the blood and cruelty, unto
which her courage could not consent; at last she addressed her self unto her
Nurses Mother, whom taking aside, she let her understand, that she had a most
deadly hatred unto a shepherdess her neighbor, who had infinitely wronged
her; that she was fully resolved upon revenge; that her hatred went not so far
as death, but only desired a revenge upon her face, as upon the thing which she
most valued. In order to this, she desired her, to acquaint her with some Plant
or other Receipt, which would so mar the face of this Maid, as it should never
recover its beauty again. The good woman, who loved Celidea very well, did very
discreetly answer: That any such cruel desires of revenge was unhandsome, and
did not become her: That if the other had wronged her, the best way was, to
refer revenge unto Hesius, who had power to do it: That if she did her self
take revenge, it was to be feared, that she unto whom it was done, would pay
her back double in her own coin. To be brief, she used all possible
arguments and persuasions, to divert her from this design. But Celidea, whose
design was different from what she made appear, did still resolutely persist
in her request, telling the woman, that she upon whom she would be revenged,
was not a person that could revenge again; besides, it should be carried so
secretly, as she should never know from whence it proceeded; therefore conjured
her in all love, to satisfy her request; protesting that if she did not, she
would cause her to attempt something that was much worse. The good woman
answered, that she should be very sorry, to be a cause of any worse accident,
therefore within two or three days she would give her an answer. Do not fail
me then, said Celidea; for if you do, you will be the cause of a far greater
mischief. The term being expired which this good woman took, only to pass on
time, she desired a longer. But Celidea, who knew that this was only delay, yet
she seemed to believe her, whilst in the interim, she would take the best way
she could to accomplish her design; setting a face of belief in the good old
woman upon it, lest she should discover her intention unto Cleontine. Celidea
then seeking out for any way to dissigure her self, as ill luck was, she came
in the morning unto Cleontine's Chamber, when she was in bed; and because
Cleontine was accustomed to wear a pointed Diamond upon her finger, as a token,
that she was dedicated unto Theutates, as you know, Madam, it is the custom of
all our Druides, she used every night, when she went into bed, to put it off,
and to take it again in the morning. So it happened, that Celidea taking up this
Ring, she put it upon her finger, and from one to another, trying which it
would best fit, perhaps not thinking what she did; which Cleontine perceiving
Daughter, said she, are you willing to wear that Ring, upon the same conditions
that I do? If I were able, answered Celidea, there is nothing in the world I
should more desire. How then can you think, said Cleontine, to satisfy both
Thamires and Calidon, as you have promised? That answered she, would be the
best remedy of all others; for, they are so religiously disposed, as if I were
once dedicated unto Theutates, neither of them would offer to have me out
again. Love, said Cleontine, is above either duty of religion: But pray,
Daughter, tell me, which way do you think to give them both satisfaction; for
truly, I cannot understand, which way you can do it? For in the first place,
you are Wife unto Thamires; therefore if you would, you cannot dedicate your
self unto Theutates, without his leave: But, suppose you were a Druide, do you
think that would content them both? No surely, but rather discontent them both,
since, then, both are deprived of you. Mother, (answered Celidea) the great
gods will doubtless inspire me with some way or other, and by their aid, I do
not doubt but I shall effect it; for in them I put my whole trust. Daughter,
(said Cleontine) the gods do never fail those that trust in them, and therefore
since you make them your confidence, I shall believe you may bring it to pass.
Cleontine would have continued on her discourse; but Celidea by accident, did
give her hand such a scratch with the Diamond, that she cried out; at which
Cleontine starting: What have you done, said she, have you cut your self with
the Diamond? A small scratch, answered Celidea, though the pain of it did make
me cry out. You think it small, said Cleontine, but you are deceived; for the
mark will never out, and the cut is very hard to be healed. Then looking into
her hand, and seeing it much scratched: Believe it, Celidea, said she, you have
a mark as long as you live, and had it been upon your face, it had been quite
spoiled. How, said Celidea, is a Diamond so venomous? The mark of it, said
Cleontine, will never out; and that is the reason, why I leave it off every
night, when I go to bed. Oh! how glad was this young shepherdess, when she
heard of this secret? she thought that the gods had purposely taught it her, to
accomplish her design. I shall now acquaint you Madam, with the strange
resolution of this young woman. It was already five or six days since Thamires
received his hurt; and his wound not being dangerous, he recovered so fast,
that he began to go out of his Chamber. Calidon and Thamires both did summon
Celidea to the performance of her promise. She, with a smiling brow, told them,
That tomorrow she would give them both content. At night, when her Aunt was in
bed she stole her Ring; and when she came into her Chamber, she caused all to
go to bed, and shut the door: Then she set her self down by a Table, upon
which stood a Glass, in which, against all Festivalls, she was wont to dress
her self: As soon as ever she saw her fair face in it; Oh Mirror (said she)
with whom I was wont to consult with so much care and circumspection, how to
adorn this face? How different is the occasion now, that makes me take thy
counsel? I was wont by thy advice, to make my self more fair; but now I come
to know, how I shall blast this beauty, which was formerly so deer unto me.
Upon this, opening the Glass, and seeing her face all swelled with tears: Oh
eyes! said she, you were not human, did you not lament the loss of that
beauty, which heretofore did swell you with so much delight. Afterward being
silent a while, and considering particularly her beauty, her grace, the just
proportion of her parts, the lively and sweet luster of her eyes, the
freshness of her rosy complexion, the composure of her mouth, and briefly,
all the pleasing parts of her face: I know very well, said she, Oh my most
precious and dearly loved treasures, how valuable you are; but alas, what are
you worth unto me, if I cannot enjoy any contentment in preserving you? I have
formerly esteemed this beauty as my highest and richest jewel, I know how much
I have been courted for your sake; but when I shall charge you before the
Throne of Reason, to have been the cause of all the torments I have endured:
when I blame you, for the dissension that is betwixt the Uncle and the Nephew;
nay, when I charge you, as guilty of their blood and ruin; nay more, perhaps
of their death, what can you say in your own defense? what reasons can you
allege, why I should still retain and preserve you? Perhaps you will say, that
it is a very sweet thing to be fair; but tell me, how bitter are those effects,
which that sweet does produce, and how I should avoid them, by preserving you?
Perhaps you will reply, that love is the effect and consequent of beauty, and
nothing in the world is more pleasing, then to be loved and carrassed. Perhaps
again you will say, that whilst I am fair, every one will adore me, and when I
am foul, every one will disdain me. But for all that, let me tell thee by way
of answer, that in doing so strange an act, every one will admire me, and be
apt to believe, that there is some hidden perfection in me, which does
transcend this outward beauty. Also in defacing thy luster, I shall but
anticipate time of a few minutes: For, this beauty which we so much prize, for
all our careful preservation, will quickly fade, a few years more will ravish
it from me: Is it not therefore better to part from it voluntarily, having so
good an occasion, and to sacrifice it unto the tranquillity of Calidon, who
has born me so much affection? What will the worst consequence be of it? Why,
when I am ugly, fewer persons will love me; I cannot hope to find any
affection, but from Thamires: Now if the affection of Thamires be grounded only
upon my beauty, it will quickly fall off when my beauty decays; but, if he
have (...) any other basis for his love, certainly he will love me the more,
because I have made my self wholly his, since none else will yet look upon me.
To be brief, it is this beauty, which has caused all the miseries, both of
Calidon, Thamires, and my self. I will ease them therefore and my self too,
by parting from that, which would of it self ere long part from me: I will set
them both at liberty, and my self at rest. Now, Madam, I shall relate unto you
a most strange and generous act: Celidea, as soon as she had said so, took the
Diamond, and with a resolute hand, did cut the skin of her fair face in
several places; though the pain of it was extreme, yet she cut on, still
gnashing her teeth, till she had made five or six long and d^^^ gashes in her
cheeks and forehead, so as all her beauty was quite defaced. Imagine, Madam,
how sadly she must needs resent this act; but she did not at all seem to be
sorry for it, only put a cloth about her head, put out the Candle, went into
her Aunts Chamber, laid the Ring in its place, and went to bed; you may easily
imagine, she took no greatrest that night. But when morning was come, and every
one awake and up, Cleontine wondered she did not see her Niece; and fearing she
had not been well, she went softly to her bedside; but when she saw her all
bloody, she cried out, thinking she had been dead: All the house ran up to her,
and found her kissing Celidea, though her face was nothing but wounds, and
congealed blood: Oh heavens! Daughter, (said the good old woman) who has thus
inhumanly used you? What barbarous hand could find a heart to spoil this fair
face? Celidea, in a low voice, beseeched her, to let her rest, and she should
know who had done it, as soon as Thamires and Calidon were come. Surgeons
were immediately sent for, and Thamires, hearing in what condition Celidea was,
he ran presently to her Chamber; but when he saw her, he stood immovable, and
gave no signs of life, but only by tears in his eyes. At the last, after a
little recollecting of himself: Is this Celidea, whom I see in this sad
plight, said he? Could the gods ever permit such a piece of cruelty? What
Tiger, in the shape of a Man, could have a heart to do it? Was ever so much
inhumanity executed? Celidea turning gently toward him: Thamires, said she,
though you have lost the face of Celidea, yet she has preserved all the rest
of her self; if you will permit me to take revenge, I will tell you who has
done this unto me. Calidon upon this came into the Chamber, which hindered
Thamires from returning answer; and Calidon hearing of this accident, he had
run himself so out of breath, that he could not speak, yet one might hear him
utter vows, that the villain who had thus injured Celidea, should not live
till night. Oh Calidon, said she, do not swear, lest you should be perjured;
perhaps it may be such a one, as you had rather die then keep your oath. I do
swear still by Hesius, replied Calidon, and by my own soul, who ere he be,
except Thamires, he shall die. Upon this, he kneeled down by her bed side, and
offering to kiss her hand, she pushed him back: Calidon; said she, why should
you offer to kiss my hand? Look upon my face, and take notice, that I am not
now the same Celidea, whose beauty you so much esteemed. The shepherd was so
transported with fury, that he had not yet looked upon her; but when he fixed
his eyes upon her, and saw her so ghastly transformed, he stood more astonished
then Thamires: Then laying his hand upon his eyes, and turning his head the
other way, it was impossible for him to endure the sight, and stared like a man
that had been frighted. She all the while was not at all angry, but with
incredible courage endured it. Then holding out her hand unto Thamires: Friend,
said she unto him, I hope this will be contentment unto you, to see, that I am
all yours, and that none now can or will ever pretend unto me: This face thus
disfigured, was only done, to make me only yours. I cannot believe, Thamires,
but that your affection unto me was built upon a better foundation, then a
fading face. Now because I see you desirous to know, who it was that made me
thus; know, Thamires, that it was Calidon: And you, Calidon, know, that it was
Thamires. Did you put her into this condition, cried they both out? Yes, said
she, it is Calidon, and Thamires, that have thus wronged Celidea: But have a
little patience, and you shall hear, how. Every one did wonder at these words,
but especially the two shepherds. And when Calidon offered to speak, she
interrupted him thus: Calidon, do not go about to excuse your self; for,
though Thamires and you both be the cause, yet you are more to blame then he.
There is none that knows me is ignorant, how Thamires has loved me from my
infancy, and has ever since continued his affection to me; this affection
became reciprocal, as soon as ever I was capable of Love; and as his addresses
unto me did invite me to love him, so the good entertainment that he found from
me, invited him to continue it: And indeed how happily had we lived unto this
very day, if Calidon had not cast his eye upon me; so as I may say, and
Thamires knows it, that never two loved each other better, than Thamires and
Celidea: But as soon as Calidon came, all our happiness and contentment was
blasted; first, by his sickness; afterward, by the gift which Thamires made
of me unto him, which I could never consent unto. Truth is, after I had long
endured the faintness of Thamires, I and the fiery affection of Calidon, I
rejected them both, as in reason I might, since Calidon had made me lose
Thamires, and Thamires without cause, had resigned me to Calidon. Afterward,
when I was wholly adjudged unto Thamires, by the Sentence of the Nymph Leonida,
yet still was I tormented by him; when he was in all reason obliged to decline
me, both out of duty of a friend, and the Nymphs command; yet still he
persisted, and would needs die. On the other side, the kind nature of
Thamires, seeing his Nephew in that condition, did leave me in bed, and made it
appear, that his affection unto Calidon was greater, then his love to me, whom
he had courted with so much earnestness and passion. I was extremely
astonished at this accident, when I was told, that both my Husband and his
Nephew were brought in chaires as dead. I must confess, that when I saw them,
and heard how all was, I knew not what to resolve upon. But afterward,
considering the whole state of the matter, I lifted up my heart unto Tharamis,
beseeching him to advise me what course to take, to compose this business.
Doubtless he did inspire me with the means. This therefore, Oh shepherds, was
the holy inspiration: Consider (said that god unto me) the violent affection of
Calidon, and be assured of this, that he will never leave you, as long as you
are fair; never think, that either religion to the gods, or any duty to men,
will restrain him: Nor can you imagine, that Thamires, though he be your
Husband, and love you above his life, can ever enjoy any contentment, as long
as he sees his Nephew so tormented. As for your part, What kind of life can
you hope to live, as long as you are the cause of both their miseries? To give
your self unto Calidon, your own will cannot consent unto it; besides, you are
already devoted unto Thamires, that nothing can separate you, but death. The
violent passion of Calidon will not suffer you to be quiet with Thamires; nor
can the kind nature of Thamires, endure the continual displeasures of his
Nephew. What then, Celidea, caust thou do? Put on a generous resolution, and
deprive thy self of that, which is the root of all this dissension. Caust thou
think it any thing else, but the beauty of thy face? It Is true, answered I; but
in losing that beauty, I shall also lose the love of Thamires as well as
Calidon; and if so, I had better die. You are deceived, answered he, the love
of these two shepherds is different; Thamires loves Celidea, and Calidon
adores the beauty of Celidea. If your fears should prove true, you had better
die presently, then live long; and be assured, that when age has made you
unhandsome, Thamires will cease to love you. But, let that be the least of your
fears, Thamires loves Celidea, and let Celidea become what she will, still
Thamires will love her.

This, Shepherds was the sacred counsel, which the gods did inspire into me,
unto which I durst not be disobedient, and therefore sought out for means to
put it in execution; so as having heard my Aunt say, that the wounds which were
made by a Diamond, would never heal, I intended to sacrifice that beauty which
was in my face, unto your tranquillity and union. But, Oh my Thamires! I hope
you will not cease loving Celidea, though she has not the same face she had;
for, what she has done, was only to satisfy the desires of Calidon, that she
might be entirely yours. Thus ended Celidea, leaving all that heard her full of
admiration at her generous act. It would be too long and tedious to relate
Calidon's reproching her, the displeasure of Thamires, the sorrows of
Cleontine and Celidea's Mother, with all those that considered her condition.
But so it was, that when the Chirurgions had dressed her pitiful sacrificed
face, they all concluded, that she would never recover her beauty again; for
the cuts were so deep, and in such places, that they had for ever spoiled all
her delicate features and proportion. So it falls out, that Calidon seeing her
so deformed, his fiery flaming passion did quite extinguish; and Thamires, as
she hoped, continues his love; so as she has ever since lived in abundance of
satisfaction and quietness, and so much esteemed and honored by every one, as
she has vowed, that she never in all her life received half that contentment
from her beauty, as she has since from her deformity.

You have related (said Leonida) the most generous and commendable act, that
ever was done by a woman; and I am extremely glad to hear, that such a virtuous
resolution should proceed from one, so nearly allied unto me, as Celidea is; I
beseech the gods, to make her as happy in Thamires, as Thamires has reason to
love her, and esteem her virtue. Now (continued Lycidas) Thamires thinking he
shall never have any Children, he would gladly make a match between Calidon and
Astrea; and to invite Phocion unto it, he offers to give him all his Lands and
Flocks. Astrea, who grieves so for the loss of Celadon, and resolves never to
love any again, she will not upon any terms hear of it; and when her Uncle
made the motion unto her, she did nothing but weep; insomuch as when he pressed
her unto it, she answered, That she would spend all the rest of her days
amongst the Vestalls and Druides: so as in order unto that, she desired me to
speak unto the venerable Chrisante about it. Do you think, said Leonida, that
Chrisante will receive her, without the consent of her Parents? I asked her the
very same question, answered Lycidas, but she answered me, that Astrea having
neither Father nor Mother living, she might dispose of her self; and that if
she could not dispose of her self this way, she would then enter into her
grave. I perceive, said Leonida, that she is excessively afflicted: But I pray
tell me, who is contented? Would I durst tell you, answered the shepherd. Why
should you make more difficuly in telling me that, replied the Nymph, then in
telling me the rest? There are many reasons for it, replied he, but, since I
have gone so far, I will venture to go a little farther, therefore, Madam, be
pleased to know, that it is Phillis whom I mean: But, I most humbly beseech
you, to ask me no farther. I cannot choose, said she, but swell with a strange
curiosity at your request, and do wonder, why you should so conceal that, which
I do so extremely desire to know: For, loving Phillis as I do, why would you
not have me enquire of her contentment? But I perceive, you do strictly observe
the Laws of Love, the chief of which is, to Conceal and be silent. And
because he would needs seem, as if it did not concern him: Nay, nay, said she,
never think to hide your self from me; for, shepherd, I do know more of you,
then you imagine: Can you think, I could frequent the company of all your
shepherds and shepheardesses, and not hear, how you are a servant unto
Phillis; and how, after a long continued service, you are at the last grown
jealous of Silvander? Certainly I should have been of a very dull composition,
if seeing so complete a shepherd as Lycidas, and loving Phillis as I do, I had
not enquired of your life. If I did seem, shepherd, as if I were ignorant, it
was only out of discretion, for I do know as much of your affairs, as you do
almost your self; and if you will, I will tell you such particulars, as shall
make you confess it. Lycidas hearing her say so, he was extremely confused,
and thought, that all her knowledge came from Astrea and Phillis. I perceive,
said he, that you are acquainted with my follies, and that things are not so
secretly carried, as I wish they were: But to make it appear, that I am as much
your servant, as your Informers can be, I will tell you more then they could,
since they are passages which happened, since they had the honor to see you;
still beseeching you to be secret. I have so great an esteem, answered the
Nymph, both of the versue of Phillis, and of your merits, as you may be most
certain, I shall be secret in any thing that concerns either of you: And you
may see, I can be silent, since I was so long before I imparted unto you what I
did know. But when you told me, that Phillis was contented, I wondered, because
I knew her to be much troubled at your faintness and jealousy. Oh great
Nymph, (said Lycidas, and smiled) great alterations have been, since I had the
honor to see you: Oh how often have I been upon my knees? Believe it, Madam,
Phillis knows how to bring me into my senses, and can make me know my duty:
Had I but time to tell you the whole series of the story, you should see what
abundance of difference there is, betwixt a Lover and a Wiseman. I do not know
any thing, replied the Nymph, which I more desire to know; and as for leisure,
you may have time enough, since Adamas, Phocion, and Diamis are entered into
discourse; for old men will never have an end of their old stories. The Nymphs
chief end in holding him thus in discourse, was, in consideration of Alexis,
lest he should take too much observance of her; and conceiving the first time
to be the most dangerous, because when the opinion was once fixed, it would
better pass afterward for current, therefore she desired him to proceed.
Lycidas thinking it would be pleasing unto the Nymph, began thus.

The History of the jealous Lycidas.
YOu know Madam that the familiar conversation which was between Phillis and
Silvander by reason of their striving which should make Diana love them best,
was the cause of my jealousy. A jealousy, which I may well say, was within a
small degree of madness. Insomuch as I have often wondered, how it was
possible I should live in that torment: The pains of death could not be
greater: Every hour, some accident or other added fresh tortures: my eye could
not turn itself without findingout some new aggravation of misery: And worst
of all, when I had greatest curiosity to find out the causes of my
displeasures: Nay my imagination would fancy things so beyond all manner of
reason; as I wonder how it was possible my judgment should be perverted. When
she spoke any thing freely unto Silvander, Oh how every accent pierced me to
the heart. When she was silent, and did not speak at all, I concluded she
dissembled; when she carrassed me, I thought she had a design to deceive me;
when she slighted me, I said this was a sign of a change in her affection:
when she shunned Silvander, I thought she did so, lest I should see her; if she
applied her self unto him, then I thought she was desirous to vex me, and
show how well she was contented in her new affection. If she was not at any
time sad, then I said there was some amorous quarrel fallen out betwixt them.
To be brief, every thing she did offended me: And when there was nothing to
ground my displeasure upon, I should accuse my judgment for being so simple,
as not to see their dissimulations. How often have I wished my self no eyes, that
I could not see neither Silvander nor Phillis. But to what purpose would that
be (said I presently after) for though I were blind, yet they would love? But,
said I, it were much better to lose my love, since the thought of it does thus
torment me, and ever will, till I be in my grave. See unto what extremity I was
driven, since in lieu of loving Phillis, I did hate her. I could have wished
her ugly, and yet I should have been very sorry if she had lost the least part
of her beauty and handsomnesse. And this I found presently at the same time:
for she having had three or four fits of an ague, which had caused a little
alteration in her face, I was so displeased at it, that she herself observed
me. Living therefore, or rather languishing in this manner, and almost reduced
unto an absolute despair, the gods had pity upon me. One Night Silvander
chanced to fall asleep in the wood, near unto the Temple of the good goddess:
when he awaked he found a Letter in his hand; not knowing how it came. Upon his
return he showed it unto Diana, and the shepherdess Astrea: they thought it
to be writ by the hand of Celadon: and they hoping to hear more of him in the
place where this Letter was found, they entreated Silvander to conduct them
thither. When they were there, night so surprised them, that they were forced
to stay there, until it was day. During this short time, Astrea fell asleep,
and had such dreams and visions as caused her to think that Celadon was in
pain, and that his Ghost walked, because he had not received the last office of
a burial: she therefore resolved to erect an empty Tomb for him, but thought
it more expedient to be done in the name of Paris then her own; these
ceremonies were so long and the shepheardesses so weary, that at their return
they went into their own cabins to rest themselves. For my part I left them
betimes, and after I had dined retired my self into a thick covert near the
way which conducts to our Town: It is so thick with underwood, as, though it
join upon the high way, yet it was impossible I should be seen. And yet I
could plainy see all passengers going or coming. After a long entertainment of
my own thoughts, sleep did so surprise me, that I did not waken until the
Sun was almost set. And intending to retire, I would first see whether any were
in the meadow, that I might avoid meeting with Philis. By fortune I espied
Astrea and her, who having rested themselves in their Cabins, came to walk in
the fresh Air of that place. On the other side, I saw Silvander following
them, thinking, (as I believe) that Diana would come unto them, I hid my self
again in the covert, desireous to see what they did, and believing they would
give me some fresh knowledge of their affection. But it happened, that
Silvander seeing them sit down under the covert where I was, he came to sit
amongst them. Phillis she quitted her place and went some twenty paces from
them. Then I heard Astrea call her, and Silvander beseech her to come unto
them. Oh what smarting wounds did these words make in my heart? Yet Phillis
came not: but showed herself to be very much discontented at the Shepherd.
But whereas this might well have contented me, it did the more offend me,
conceiving that there are always such pretty quarrels amongst lovers, as do
but renew love. Phillis was some twenty paces from them, as I told you, and
would not come near them, but still walked alone by herself: At which
Silvander began to smile, and at last he could not hold but laugh very loud.
Phillis hearing him and being much enflamed with anger against him; Silvander
(said she unto him) your behavior toward me, does make me hate you even to
death: and believe it, if ever any occasion of revenge offer it self unto me,
I will lay hold upon it. The shepherd hearing her utter these words with so
much passion, he burst out into such a violent fit of laughter, that he could
not give any answer. Well well (said Phillis) laugh on, uncivil shepherd, do
your worst to offend me, perhaps I shall one day find an opportunity of
revenge, and if I do not take it, never trust Phillis again. When Astrea saw
this, she took part with Phillis: I did not think (said she) that Silvander
whom I ever found discret and full of civility, would offer to offend Phillis
without any cause. Phillis hearing Astrea say so, she was more animated against
the shepherd: He cares not a straw (said she) for offending me; but he has
good reason for it, for he knows I never cared for him, nor can he well
incense me more against him, then I was before. Oh how this dissension did
please me? and yet I could not choose but be angry he should so slight her.
Silvander, he adressed himself unto Astrea. Are you, fair shepherdess (said
he) so angry against me? I thought that you would have taken my part. I can
never take part against reason (answered Astrea) but me thinks you might do
much better then to give my companion so much occasion to hate you. Truly (said
he in serious earnest) although you are partially biassed on Phillis side, yet
I am contented you should be the judge of our difference. Provided she will
before you, declare the occasion of her anger against me; and when you have
heard us both, I will presently submit unto what punishment you shall please to
sentence: Who I, said Phillis, should I reason any business with you? No no, I
had rather I were dumb as long as I lived then to have any thing to do with h
you. For all this, replied he, I would tell you something which perhaps would
make it appear that Silvander is more your servant then you imagine. Then
turning toward Astrea, he beseeched her to entreat Phillis to sit down, which
she did: not, said she, that I have any desire to hear you, but only because I
will do whatsoever Astrea commands me. Silvander without any reply unto her,
began thus. I believe Phillis you do not think me so ignorant in the affairs
of the world, as that I should never hear of that affection which is betwixt
you and Lycidas. Nay perhaps you will wonder I should know so much and seem so
ignorant. So as you will not judge this Silvander whom you wish so ill, was so
little your servant as you think him. But so it is shepherdess that I did know
all particulars, from such as are inquisitive into the businesses of others,
and afterward I knew both from your self and Lycidas. Do you not remember how
one day when you retired your self from much company, you commanded Hylas to
relate the story of his life and the adventures of his several Loves? Do you
remember when you went away, you desired Astrea to go along with you? Have you
forgotten how you went into the wood to speak with Lycidas who waited there for
you? and how Astrea told you that you should take heed lest he took it not
ill? also how you answered her, that he was so importunate that you could not
deny him, but therefore you took Astrea with you? Now, shepherdess, think
well upon the discourse which you had with him: you need not tell it unto me,
for I know it all as well as if I had heard it.

At this, they both blushed, and stood so amazed that they could not speak but
looked upon each other. Nay, never be troubled (said Silvander) that I do know
all these things, for I am discreet enough to conceal any thing: but if you
please, fair Astrea, I will tell you how angry Lycidas was against you, and
what pains you took to qualfie him; you may see, I do almost know as much of
your businesses as you your selves do: Know Phillis that I was not ignorant
either of the jealousy of Lycidas, or the cause of his jealousy. I am sure
(replied my shepherdess and looking him in the face) that you have so behaved
your self toward me, as has extremely troubled both Lycidas, and me, and
your self also. Oh, shepherdess (answered he) you are more obliged unto me,
then you imagine; for what would you have me to do? Since you knew (said she)
that Lycidas was jealous of you, you should have absented your self from me.
You bid me do things impossible, (replied he) and such as had been infinitely
prejudicall unto you, if I had done them Impossible, because I having
undertaken to serve Diana and you being continually with her, it was impossible
for me to be absent from you unless I had been absent, from both. Had you been
so good a friend to me as you might (said Phillis) you would rather have
absented your self from Diana, and hazard the loss of your wager, then have
made Lycidas so jealous, and me so sad: for that shepherd was much your
friend, and I had never given you any occasion to be mine enemy. I perceive
shepherdess, (answered Silvander) that you never considered the hurt which
you would have done me: nor how impossible it was for me to do it. If I did do
you any hurt, said Phillis, it was out of ignorance, for I did not intend it:
However, replied he, you did do me hurt, and I was very sensible of it. I
beseech you which way (said Phillis) are not you the cause of my undertaking to
serve Diana? (answered he) What then (said Phillis) why do you accuse me? I do
accuse you (said Silvander) of all the miseries that ever I resented. For in
lieu of counterfeiting love, I do love in good earnest. Upon this, the
shepherd made a stop, as if he were sorry he had said so much: which Astrea
perceiving. Never vex, said she, nor blush at the confession of a truth;
perhaps these words are not the first that gave us knowledge of it. I am not
ashamed, answered he, that I should say, I am Diana's servant, but much ashamed
of mine own immerits of that honor. If Diana (answered Astrea) were to be
wone by merits, I know none that may better pretend unto her then Silvander.

I wish with all my soul, Fair shepherdess, replied he, that every one were
of the same opinion. Oh Madam, said Lycidas, how pleasing were these words unto
my soul? How, said Leonida, is it possible Silvander should love Diana in
earnest? Doubtless he does, said he, and I shall tell you more another time;
but for the present, I shall only tell you how I was delivered from my
tormenting jealousy. I heard therefore how Silvander continued his discourse
thus: Now not being able to be absent from you, because of your continual
presence with Diana, what would you have had me done? be you your self the
Judge. You ought not, answered Phillis, to have given Lycidas any occasion of
jealousy, at the first: and afterward, when you saw how jealous he was, though
you could not be absent from me by reason of Diana, yet you might very well
have behaved your self more modestly and coldly to me, when Lycidas was
present: Oh what a Novist in love you are, said he, did you take notice of the
minute when Lycidas grew first jealous? No said she, and do you think, said
Silvander, that I should perceive it better then you? Diseases in love, do
begin like other diseases, insensibly, and none can have knowledge of them:
So as I could not give a stop unto the original of his jealousy no more then
you could: As for the progress, I think that I have infinitely obliged you by
it: because had I then declined you, or spoke less affectionately to you, what
might he have thought? only that the cause of my declining you and behaving my
self otherwise then usually, I did intend to delude him, and held a private
corespondency with you? would he not have bin more enflamed with jealousy.
Believe it Phillis, it was very requisite I should continue my carriage toward
you as I begun it; otherwise, he would certainly have suspected it
dissimulation, and concluded Dissimulation to be a co-incident unto Love.

I being now put out of all my long and tormenting doubts, and plainly finding
that there was no love betwixt them, I cried out, Oh Phillis, Silvander is in
the right: Then I ran and fell down upon my knees before them, at which they
were both so astonished as they looked upon one another and could not speak.
For my part I was so over joyed at my fortune, as I knew not what words to
choose whereby I might thank love for the favor. At the last I addressed my self
unto her in this manner, my fairest Shepherdess, I must needs confess my
fault deserves punishment no pardon: I am here upon my knees at your mercy:
Doom me to what punishment you please, so you will but forget my crime. Such
expressions as these I used unto her. At which without any return of answer,
she turned toward me, and looked upon the ground. Both she and I standing
mute, Silvander would needs be a cause of my contentment as he had been of my
sorrows. Therefore, shepherdess (said he) as I have been a witness, that
Lycidas has been jealous without cause, so shall I witness that you are
fuller of revenge then love, if you do not accept of this satisfaction which he
offers. Never study any longer what you have to do, pardon him as you ought;
His affection deserves it, and yours commands it. Sister, said Astrea,
Silvander says very truly: and you may be certain of this, that it was rather
excess then any defect of love which has caused Lycidas to commit this
error: and if it be a fault, he repents and has done sufficient penance.
Then Phillis looking upon me: Lycidas (said she) you have so extremely offended
me, that it is very hard to pass it over: but since Astrea will have it so, I
pardon you, but with a vow, that if ever you relapse into the like fault, you
shall lose all hopes of ever recovering my affection again. Fie, fie, Lycidas,
continued she, could you be so weak, and think me so light, as to love every
one I looked upon: Were the assurances which I had given you of my affection,
so small, as that you should so easily doubt them? Doubtless she had continued
on, (for I was not able to speak) if Astrea had not interrupted her: Sister,
said she unto her, you have said enough, Lycidas is all penitence and
submission, and you will sin against the goodness of your own nature, if you
insult too much upon him. Phillis, after a little consideration, addressed her
self unto her Companion, in this language: Sister, I will not only pardon the
offense, but also forget it, provided, that for the future, he never give me
any occasion to remember it. Thus, Madam, was I cured, thus was my crime
pardoned; and Silvander and I, have lived since in so kind a familiarity,
that, next my poor Brother, I never loved any man better. And are you not
afraid, (said Leonida) that Silvander and Phillis being so much together,
should make you jealous again? For, he that loves is naturally subject unto
suspicion. No, said Lycidas; for first, I have full assurance in the affection
of Phillis; and secondly, Silvander's love of Diana, who I know cannot admit of
a Companion.

Thus Lycidas and Leonida discoursed, whilst Hylas entertaining Alexis, began
by little and little to be in love with her. And she having an opinion, that
this would be a means to make it more believed, that she was a woman, she
endeavored to kindle his flame as much as she could; and though she had never
seen him before, yet Leonida and Paris had acquainted her with his pleasant
humor. Hylas, according to his free humor, cried out upon a sudden: Phillis,
I have thought upon it, I must now fairly bid you Adieu; all that I can do, is,
to give you the same liberty, that I take my self. Silvander and Corilas
hearing this sudden resolution, and seeing that Alexis could not speak for
laughing, they could not choose but take the part of Phillis, purposely to begin
occasion of some pleasant discourse. Why, shepherd, (said Corilas,) do you
cast off the fair Phillis in this manner? She has reason to observe this, as
one of her black and fatal days. What can I help it, said Hylas? Why is she
not as fair as Alexis? Oh heavens, (replied Corilas) who can hereafter have any
assurance in your affection? That may this most lovely Nymph, answered he, who
is fairer then Phillis. But, said Corilas, is not this a most manifest sign of
your levity and fickleness? Not at all, answered he, but rather an argument of
the great beauty in Alexis. If beauty be the matter, said Corilas, Phillis is
not defective in it. She has less then Alexis, said Hylas, for she is not
able to hold me, now I have seen the other; and therefore I must fairly take my
leave of her. Silvander, who had been long silent, seeing Corilas did not
reply, he undertook the discourse for him: It is not any defect in the beauty
of Phillis, said he, which moves this shepherd to make his retreat, but it is
his own natural inconstancy. Very well, (said Hylas) do you call it
inconstancy, when one goes on step by step, unto the place where they intend to
arrive? No, said Silvander. And yet, said Hylas, such a one does set his foot,
sometimes upon the ground, sometimes in the air, sometimes before, sometimes
behind: And is not this inconstancy as well as that which you lay in my dish?
For, intending to arrive at a perfect beauty, I do set one foot before another,
and never leave changing, till I arrive at my intended place. Even so have I
done, by all I have hitherto loved, until I found Alexis, who I find to be
the most perfect beauty of all. This might hold good, answered Silvander, if
you could demonstrate to us, that you do merit to love Alexis: For, as you have
gotten the name of Inconstant, by loving so many; so now, you will get the name
Presumptuous, in loving Alexis. Alexis was long silent, taking great delight in
the discourse of these shepherds; but when she heard her self so highly
commended, she thought it fit to speak: Did I as much merit the affection of
Hylas, said she, as I am willing to entertain it, certainly he should have no
small reason to love me. Then tuming her self in a smiling manner toward
Hylas: Servant, said she unto him, take heed, lest the language of this
shepherd should divert you; for, you would wrong both your self and me, if it
should: It would be a shame for you, to attempt an enterprise, and so soon give
it over; and it would be too evident an argument of my little merit, if you
should so soon quit me. But, Hylas, said Silvander, do you not dread the
displeasure of Teupates, in addressing your self unto one, who is consecrated
unto him? Ignorant Silvander, said Hylas, the gods do command us to love
themselves; and how can they be angry with us, for loving that which is theirs?
You see, said Alexis, that this shepherd has some design upon us, he would
cunningly turn you from me by artifice; for he knows well enough, that if I
will, I can leave off that profession, which I have taken upon me.

Whilst these shepherds were thus talking, Adamas was entertaining Phocion,
Diaonis, and Tircis; and because he esteemed them very much, both for their
age, their virtues, and for his design, in making a Match between Celadon and
Astrea, he did all that possibly he could to bid them welcome: And because
Tircis was a stranger, and had never seen the raritles of his House, he asked
him, if he would take so much pains as to walk, and see it: And hearing him
answer, that he did infinitely desire it, he took him by the hand, and willed
Paris to do the like unto Hylas and the rest of the shepherds, if they had a
mind. Alexis, with the help of Hylas, who led her by the arm, followed
Adamas, with the rest of the Company. The House was very fine, and furnished
with many excellent singularities; but because the discourse of it would be too
long, we will speak no more of it, then what is pertinent to our purpose. They
entered then into a large Gallery, which had a prospect of Plains on the one
side, and Mountains on the other, which made it very delectable and pleasant.
The sides was Wanscot fretted, and, betwixt the windows, hung with Maps of the
several Provinces of Gaul: At the higher end, hung Pictures of several
Countries, Kings, and Emperors, and amongst them, the Portractures of several
very beautiful Women. The top was adorned with Gold and Azure, very richly
imbossed, with many several devices. Every one fixed their eyes upon that,
which was most agreeable unto their fancies: But Hylas, whose heart was all for
beauty, looking upon a Picture which contained two Ladies: See, (said he) two
very delicate faces; Which of these two should one judge to be the fairer?
Adamas, who heard him: That (said he) on the right hand, is the Picture of the
Mother in Law; and the other on the left, the Daughter in Law: Both of them
were two Princesses, as fair and as wise as ever any, and as much tossed and
turmoiled by the storms of Fortune, as any in our Times. This, which seems
the more aged, is the wise Placidia, Daughter unto the great Theodosius, Sister
unto Arcudius and Honorius, Wife unto Constantius, and Mother unto
Valentiniaen, all five Emperors, whose Pictures are a little farther off. The
other is the Picture of Eudoxe, Daughter unto Theodosius the Second, and Wife
unto Valentinian, whom Genserio carried into Africa. They were two Princesses
(said Tircis) of great beauties, and as great extractions: But wherein was
their Fortunes so averse? I shall briefly tell you, (replied Adamas) and shall
thereby acquaint you with some of these Pieces which you see here. Then, after
a while of silence, he began thus.

The History of Placidia.
THEODOSIUS, the first of that name, Emperor of the East, one of the greatest
Princes the World had, since Augustus; he had three Children: One, Arcadius,
who after him, was Emperor of the East: Another, was Honorius, who was
Emperor of the West: And the third, was the wise Placidia, whose fortune was
so various, that we see in her, how Virtue is ordinarily crossed: For, she
being at the dispose of her Brother Honorius, and he under the government of
Stilicon, unto whose Guardianship the great Theodosius had committed him,
during his nonage, she was so variously tossed and tormented by several
accidents, as if Fortune had made choice of her, to show the power it has in
all human things, of which Stilicon was the greatest cause, who having great
power over the person of Honorius and the whole Empire, his ambition aspired at
more absolute authority, and aimed to make himself sole Emperor, as when his
designs were discovered it did plainly appear. He being a man of a deep reach,
and managing his matters so, as might most condure to his desired end and
grandeur, he thought it expedient for him to make use of policy and subtlety,
where it was impossible for him to compass it by force. His way was therefore
at the first, to stretch his authority to the highest pitch before he made his
intentions known, and afterward, to fortify himself, by marrying his
Daughter unto young Honorius; for the very name of Father in Law to an Emperor
looked big, and procured him a great honor and fear. Afterward, he held
secret intelligence and correspondency with all such, as he thought fit
instruments for the advancement of his design: And lastly, resolved to weaken
the Forces of the Emperor as much as possibly he could, that when opportunity
served, he might the more easily seize upon him.

At that time, all the world looked at Rome with an envious eye, and made it
the butt of their Arms: The Goths, the Fruncks, and Burgundians, in Gaul; the
Vandats and Almaines in Spain; the Anglois and the Picts in Britany; the Hunnes
and the Gipides in Pannonia; To be brief, every part of the whole Empire was
so divided, as no part was entire but Italy. It fortuned, that Alarick King of
the Goths, would not suffer it to enjoy more tranquillity, then Its neighbors
of the West; and therefore fell into it with such a vast number of People, as
it was impossible for Honorius to resist him; insomuch as to get him out again,
he was advised to make a Peace with him, upon what terms soever he could get;
unto which, he being of ho Warlick disposition, but above all things loving
tranquillity, he lent a willing ear. Peace then being propounded, it was so
prudently managed, that Alarick consented to retire beyond the Alps, into some
Provinces which were assigned him by the Emperor. At which, Stilicon, being
malecontent, as thinking this agreement prejudicial to his designs, he so
tampered with an Officer, then in pay under the Emperor, that he procured him
to charge some of Alarick's Forces, as they were marching away without any
mistrust: At which, Alarick was so incensed against Honorius, that he returned
to Rome, besieged it, and, at the end of two years, took it, and entirely
sacked it: Although Honorius, to make it appear, that he never consented unto
this perfidie, did put the Traitor Stilicon to death, as soon as ever he heard,
that he was the author of it. Thus this ambitious man came to a miserable end,
but not before he had put all Italy into a most miserable flame: For Alarick,
after he had plundered and burned this great City, and not yet loadned with
spil, he pillaged all the Country about it, and laid it so sadly waste, as
would have moved any Barbarian unto pity. But that which was most deplorable,
besides the ruin of so many Temples, and the loss of so many rarities, with
which the Emperors had erected and adorned this City, was the miserable
fortune which befell this wise Princess, who through the carelessenesse of a
Brother, was destitute of all succor. She, who by extraction was Daughter unto
the Cesars, and Sister unto two Emperors, was, through the fault of another, a
Captive in the hands of these Barbarians, her Country burned, the Temples
profaned, and she in danger to lose her life, or, that which was more deer
unto her; had not Ataulfus, a Prince of Alarick's blood, been taken with her
beauty and virtue, and thought her worthy to be his Wife. But this Prince,
seeing her so fair and so wise, and knowing her to be Daughter to the great
Theodosius, he fell so passionately in love with her, that he courted her in
Marriage; and presently after, by Alaricks consent, did marry her. You may
imagine, what force this wise Princess did use upon her self, before she
consented unto this Marriage and Alliance, and how prudent she had need to be,
in behaving her self amongst such a rude and barbarous people, so wisely as
she did; god did in this make it appear, that he had pity upon miserable Rome;
for, had it not been for this Alliance, it had been utterly ruined for ever.
For it so fell out, that Alarick dyed at Corsienses, and the Prince Ataulfus was
by the common voice of the Army chosen King. If you look upon that Piece next
unto Placidias, you will imagine him to be a stern and salvage person, more
delighted in blood and war, then peace; and he had no sooner gotten the
absolute power, but he went to Rome, with a design to burn and utterly
demolish it, thinking, that as long as the Walls of this Town stood, there
would be still a Roman Emperor; which name was so odious unto him, that he
would absolutely destroy the very memory of it. When this prudent Princess
understood his intention, she was resolved to do all that possibly she could to
prevent him, the utter ruin of her Country wounding her to the very soul. At
the first, she showed her self swelled with abundance of grief and sorrow,
tears did abundantly flow from her fair eyes, she refused her rest and meat,
and never ceased tormenting her self, but when Ataulfus was by her, and then
she constrained her self to put as good a face upon it as she could. This
Prince, who loved her so well as to marry her, could not long endure to see her
live thus, but he must needs ask her the cause of her discontents; unto which
she made this answer; I have done all that I possibly could O great King, to
hide my excessive sorrows from you, fearing I should but the more vex and
trouble you with them: but, since nature will not permit me to conceal the
sadness of my soul any longer, and since the goodness of Ataulfus unto the
wretched Placidia is such, as to ask me; I do most humbly beseech you, take it
not ill, if I shed my tears in lieu of my blood, for my Country's sad
desolation; and if, to stop the ruin of it, I could effect it, I would much
more willingly shed my blood then my tears. My Country, Oh great Sir, my native
Country that gave me breath, it bleeds, and it is ready to bleed to death; and
can you think, I would not most willingly part with my life to stop the wounds'
Alas, it would be better employed that way, then in your service. Since you are
pleased to do me so great a favor, as to ask me the cause of my sorrows, I
beseech you give me leave in all humility to ask you, What advantage will the
ruin of Rome and all Italy be unto you? Does the riches and the treasures of
it, invite you to it? Surely those are things too low, and unworthy of your
high courage; besides, those are things that cannot be expected out of an
already ruined and plundered Country, or a demolished and half burned Town,
which has been already ravaged by a vast Army: Is it any glory that you expect
to get by it? I cannot believe it; for, what glory can be added unto that,
which you have already; or, what hopes is there to get, in ruining those Walls,
which are already demolished; in massacring a naked and disarmed people, who
cannot be brought into greater submission then they are? If it be a shame to
wound a dying man, what honor can you expect, in giving fresh wounds unto a
dying people? If you think to strengthen your Dominion by it, be pleased, Oh
great Sir, to let me tell you, that it would be most horrid cruelty to do it,
by exterminating all the people of Italy. Should you put them all to the sword,
you would be in less security then you are; for, you would thereby incense and
raise against you, the Arms of all Asia, of all Africa, and of all the rest
of Europe, whereof Italy is but a poor pittance. Judge, great King, what
likelihood there is, that you, or any human upon earth, should withstand so
many Provinces, conquer so many Kings, and get to himself so many Worlds, for
so may the Kingdoms and vast extent of the Roman Empire be called; so as the
ruin of Italy will bring upon you the hatred of god and man: Men will revenge
the wrong, done unto the capital City upon earth; the gods will be offended at
the ruin of that Town, which is the miracle of the world, and which they have
raised to that height, to please themselves, and astonish men.

If you will but be pleased, to take all these things into your wise, and
serious consideration, you will find it much better, to make your self
friends, and to oblige my two Brothers and their Empires, confirming, by a good
correspondency with them, that alliance which is already betwixt you. Why, Sir,
did you honor me, to make me your Wife? Was it, to make my two Brothers your
enemies? was it, to ruin my Country? was it, to see my friends and kindred
carried away Captive into a strange Country? Oh! What a sad and fatal marriage
was this unto me? Had it not been much better for me, that the first day the
Town was taken, had been the last of my life? Upon this, that wise and prudent
Princess fell down all tears at the feet of Ataulfus, and kissed them, with so
many sighs and groans, as the Kings pity did surmount the cruelty of his
nature, so as he took her up, kissed her, and said unto her: Cease cease, all
your tears and sighs, my dearest Placidia, I do freely give unto you, your
City and Country; and to make it appear, how much I do desire your contentment,
I do vow and swear by the soul of my dead Father, that I will never turn my
arms against any of your Brothers, whose friendship and amity, for your sake,
I will by all ways court.

The King of the Goths thus mollified and vanquished, he concluded a Peace
with Honorius, and went out of Italy into those Provinces, which were agreed by
Alarick his Predecessor, he should have. But his people, who were of a martial
temper, and had lived many years in Arms, they could not endure to hear upon
any terms of Peace; and therefore by a public sedition, did put him to death.

Now was Placidia in no less danger, then at the taking of Rome; for a popular
tumult is like a torrent, that carries away all that will stop its fury; Yet,
this wise Princess, who foresaw such a danger long beforehand, she obliged the
prime Officers in the Army, by all the good offices that possibly she could
imagine; and indeed, as long as she was amongst them, she was honored and
loved more then ever any Queen was.

This generous spirit did not shrink from her zeal and love unto her Country
and her Brothers, in the least manner, by the death of her Husband; but, after
she had a while lamented her sad mishap, she transacted the matter so, that a
Grandee Prince amongst the Goths, of whose amity she was well affored, was
chosen King, his name was Segerick. This new King acknowledging his obligations
unto Placidia, and thinking the amity of the Roman Emperors very necessary,
for the establishment of his Crown, he showed himself so affectionate unto it
and her, as he procured unto himself the odium of the Army, who presently
after did murder him, as they had done before Ataulfus. But this generous
Queen, who could never be daunted by any misfortue, nor weary with any pains
for the good and security of the Empire, she brought it so to pass that Vulius
was chosen King. This Vulius was a great and a wise Commander, who having
before his eyes the example of two Kings his Predecessors, he resolved by
prudence to avoid the like end* At his first coming to his Crown, therefore,
he made a show as if he were a professed enemy unto the Empire, made great
preparations against it, and faining to be far out with the wise Placidia, he
sent to denounce war against her Brother. Who being advertised underhand by
his Sister, he spread abroad reports of a puissant Army, which he would raise
against the Goths, and so frighted these Barbarians by the aid of Vulius, that
in conclusion the people demanded peace; which was concluded to the great
contentment of Placidia. Who now seeing the Empire settled, and secured on that
side, desired to be out of their hands, and went into Italy. Where she was
received by her Brother, and the people, as if she had been a great General,
unto whom the triumph belonged. It seems now fortune was weary of tormenting
this wise Princess: And she was so beloved and honored by every one especially
Honorius himself, as remembering the cares and pains she had taken in
delivering the Empire from the Tyrannique Arms of the Goths; and how much both
he and all Europe was beholding to her: They resolved seeing he had no
Children, to marry her unto one whom he would allie unto the Empire, to the end
she might after him, be Mistress of those Dominions, which she had so long and
so prudently preserved.

In order unto this design he looked upon one of the greatest Captains in all
the Army, whose valor, and wise conduct did render him most worthy of a great
command: his name was Constantius; a man of a very antlent Familiy, and high
virtue: His Picture is next unto that of Placidia, in whose aspect you may
observe such a grandeur of spirit and corrage as is not commone. And indeed he
was one of the greatest Personages, that the Empire had a long time before.
This was he, unto whom Honorius gave his Sister: And at the same time sent him
into Spain with a great Army against the Almaines, the Swedes, and the
Vandals. The good King Vulius, hearing that Constantius was husband unto the
wise Placidia, he assisted him with all his forces, and followed himself in
person. This was the reason why Constantius at his return gave Aquitaine unto
the said Vulius, where he lived quietly and in good corespondency with the
Romans.

This great Constantius got the better of the Almanes, killed their King called
Acatius and afterward vanquished the Swedes. And doubtless the Vandals had
been driven out but for the revolt which Attalus had caused in Rome, intending
to declare himself Emperor, because Honorius had no Children, nor had named
any successor For Constantius leaving his Enterprise in Spain unperfect, he
came to Rome, and seizing upon the rebel he confined himself unto the
Hippodrome: At which Honorius was so well pleased that he made him his
associate, and declared him Augustus. Fortune who commonly seconds one favor
with another; did so by Constantius: So as now behold him a conqueror in
Spain, Tryumphant at Rome, and an Associate in the Empire. One great favor
more she added unto all these which was not inferior to any of the precedent:
And gave him two children by his dearest and so highly beloved Placidia, the
one called Valentinian, and the other Honoriques of whom I have been very
curious in getting their pictures. This piece is Valentian's next unto Eudoxe,
his wise; Daughter unto the Emperor Arcadius: And that piece is Honoriques
next Attilia, who, after she married him, followed him into Pannonia.

Now behold Placidia and Constantius at the highest step of their felicity. But
it seems fortune had only made truce with this wise Princess, not a lasting
peace. For when her husband had prepared a formidable army, to reduce Spain
entirely unto the Empire, he fell sick of a violent disease, and a few days
after dyed. All the comforts that this wise Princess now had, was in the
lamentations and love of the whole Empire: And also in the two Children, which
her husband had left her, whom she educated with all possible care.

There was at that time a very wise and valiant Captain in the army whose name
was Aetius, Son unto the great Gaudentius who was slain in Gaul. I must
needs confess that I am very partial toward him: for having made long war
in the neighbor Provinces, we never received any harm by him, or his Army. But
on the contrary, I have known him, so careful for our preservation, that indeed
all the Gauls are obliged unto him I was therefore very careful in getting
his Picture which I have placed next that of Attilia, because it was he who
held this scourge of god from the Gauls. Observe in his Aquiline nose his
Generosity: in his large forehead full of wrinkles, his Prudence: and his quick
and sparkling eyes, his Vigilance and Celerity. Indeed he was one of the most
prudent, and most valiant men of his time: he could foresee things, before
there was any shadow of appearance unto others; he was infinitely courteous: and
so liberal, as in imitation of Alexander he reserved nothing to himself but
Hope. This was he who was made choice of, by Honorius to prosecute the
Enterprise in Spain, in whom the advice of Placidia had a great stroke. But
how miserable is the man that lives by the opinion of others! for if he have no
reputation, he is scorned: and if he have reputation, and do not presently
answer that opinion which men have of him, he is suspected too light in the
balance. And the worst is when he meets with such as have no experience. It
was the misfortune of this great person, who thinking to go into Spain without
any stay in Gaul, he was much deceived: For finding the Burgundians ready to
seize upon the Country of the Heduois and Seguanois: and that the Frankes under
the conduct of Pharamond their King had passed over the Rhine and would quarter
in Gaul, he was forced by this at home, to make head against them, before he
passed any further; which he did, so happily, that he sent back the Burgundians
to the place from whence they came; and forced back the Franks over the Rhine
where they stayed: yet not without many dangerous skirmishes, as you may
imagine. For the ranks, of all the Northern people are the most hardy and
warlick, and have a great conformity with the Gauls, both in their Laws,
Policies, and Religion: which argues that formerly theywere all but one people
and that the Franks originally were Gauls. But however, Pharamond went back
over the Rhine, and by the prudence and valor of Aetius was forced to stay
there: Now though Aetius was victorious, yet was he so much weakened that when
he passed into Spain, he found himself weaker then those he was to undertake,
for the Vandals fortifying in the Betique, under the the conduct of Genserick,
were grown very puissant. The Swedes and Almaines entered into Meridea, and
there quartered: And the Goths after the Death of Vualius having lost all good
will unto the Roman Empire, and not contented nor contianing themselves within
their limits in Aquitaine; they enlarged them in Spain, so as what the Romans
had, was the least part: Which constrained this great Captain, seeing his
enemies stronger then himself, to use prudence more then the sword, and to
make them enemies amongst themselves: so as he thought it most expedient to
temporize with them till he espied his advantage, and to run no hazards in the
mean time.

But Aetius having already chased the Burgundians and the Franks away, Honorius
expected that as soon as he was arrived in Spain, he should presently hear
news of the defeat of the Vandals, Swedes, Almaines; and Goths: And seeing the
news was long in coming, he suspected him, and had an opinion that he was
slack in his enterprises. This Prince was timorous and having never been in
arms, he was ignorant in matters of war: So as he knew nothing by sight, but
measured every thing by the happy success of the great Theodosius, and
Constantius: In so much as mistrusting Aetius, he called him back, and sent
Castinus in his room.

This Castinus was a great friend of Aetius: And therefore the affairs of the
Empire went the better, because Aetius gave him the best instructions that he
could, opening unto him all their designs and the means to put them in
execution. In the mean time he returned to Rome, where he gave an account of
his actions unto Honorius. But finding that the Emperor had some jealousy of
him, he retired unto his own house, and lived a private person afterward:
seeing these jealousies did daily increase, and that they would question him
for his life, he was forced to save himself in Pannonia amongst the Hunnes and
Gepides; And it it was a very prudent consideration which moved him to fly unto
them rather then any other: For had he gone to the Franks, Burgundians, Goths,
Vissigots or Vandals, It might have been said that the Emperor had just cause
to suspect him, and that he had held a compliancy with them. But this could not
be said of the Hunnes and Gepides, because they were scarcely known unto the
Roman people. Placidia being extremely angry with her Brother, as well for the
loss of Aetius, as for the bad carriage of every thing else, she resolved to
retire unto Constantinople to her Nephew Theodosius, whither she had gone long
before, had not Arcadius her Brother, lying upon his death bed, committed his
Son Theodosius unto the Protectorship of Isdigerdes King of the Persians: and
Parthians. For though he was his friend and confederate, yet the people had
been long enemies of the Empire, and therefore she did not like that any
strangers should have the government of her Nephew. Yet Isdigerdes showed
himself a very good man, in the business: And because he could not go in
person, he sent a very great Captain unto Constantinople, to govern the person
and the state of this young Prince, who was then about eight years of age. The
name of this Parthenian was Antiochus, a man who did acquit himself so well of
the charge committed unto him, as his administration was clear and blameless.
If you will turn your eye that way, you may see the Picture of Isdigerdes,
near that of Arcadius; next him, is Theodosius the second; and next that, his
wise and honest Governor Antiochus; you may perceive by his physiognomy, that
he was a downright honest man, free from ambition. When Theodosius was out of
his Guardianship, Placidta resolved to go unto him, and carry her Children with
her. Now, this prudent Princess being infinitely beloved, and the young
Valentinian began to promise great hopes of himself, many Senators and Knights
of Rome preferred their Sons unto his service. Placidia was very glad, that she
could thus oblige the principal Senators of Rome unto her Children, amongst
the rest Ursaces, Son unto a prime Roman Knight; I do name him, because he did
revenge the death of Valentinian.

Silvander then interrupting the Druide: I beseech you, Father, pardon my
interruption; If you do mean that Ursaces, who killed Maximus, there is none in
the Company can give you a more particular account of him, then my self; for,
I being then at the Massilian Schoole^ fortune, his Ship ran ashore, where, I
believe, both he and his friend Olimbres had dyed, but for the help which I and
my Company gave him; and afterward, staying until his ship was trimmed, he
related unto me the particulars of his life, which was hard to be known from
any but himself.

That is the very same (said Adamas) of whom I speak; and when you have heard
out what I shall tell you concerning the fortune of this wise Princess, I
assure my self the Company will be very glad to hear a relation of Ursaces
from you. But, to return from whence we left. Know, that whilst Honorius lived
in this manner Aetius lived in Panonia, but was not idle: for, Revenge being
the sweetest thoughts of an injured person, and being very sensible of the
wrong Honorius had done him, he studied how to make him repent the unjust usage
of him in this manner: And being a man, whose name and reputation was every
where famous, he easily persuaded these Barbarians unto what he would,
representing unto them, how easy a matter it was, to make attempts against
Italy, especially, by means of that intelligence which he held there; and
setting them a longing after their Riches and treasures. This people, who
desired nothing more then changing their cold habitation, hearing of the
fertility and riches in Italy, they burned with desire to enter into it. When
they had raised a vast number of men, and were ready to enter, it seems, god
had some pity upon the Empire, and allaid this storm by the death of
Honorius. Aetius, wishing no ill unto Italy, but only unto Honorius, hearing
news of his death, did presently change design; and told the Barbarians, that
it was necessary he should go first unto Rome, to see how things stood, and
what Forces they had. They presently approved of what he said, and promised him
all possible relief and assistance. He returned therefore in confidence of
Castinus his friendship, with a design to make himself Emperor; but finding
the faction of Honorius to be very great, and standing in fear of a great
Captain, called Boniface, who had the command of the Affrican Forces, but much
more of the young Emperor Theodosius, he thought it better to put it upon one
John, who was the principal Secretary unto Honorius, with whom he ever had
good correspondency; therefore he made him to take the title of Emperor upon
him, and under his name ordered and disposed of all things: and certainly, he
showed a great deal of prudence in it; for, Theodosius not approving of this
John, declared Valentinian, his cosen-german, the Emperor of the West: And
knowing, that the Sword was the best prop of the Scepter, he raised a very
great Army, and sent it into Italy, under the conduct of a very experienced
Soldier, called Artabures; and this Soldier made his knowledge in martial
matters, very well appear unto Castinus: Yet, the Sea was so contrary to his
designs, that a storm cast him upon the coast of Ravenna, the rest of his
Fleet was dispersed into several places: But Aspar, the Son of Artabures, who
accompanied his Father in this expedition, being by fortune not in the same
ship: when the storm was over and heard of his Fathers fortune, he rallied
together all the Fleet that possibly he could, and landing in the night, entered
Ravenna with all his Forces, through the negligence of the Guardes; and when
day was come, he took John, cut off his head immediately, and delivered his
Father.

The wise Placidia came to Ravenna, with the young Emperor her Son, almost at
the same time; and within a few days after, things succeeded as well as she
could wish: For, Castinus coming out of Spain, not knowing of this John's
accident, he thought to join his Forces with those of his friend Aetius, and
their Emperor, and to that end, made very long Marches; of which, Placidia
being advertised, she sent Artabures to stop his way, who met him at Verceill,
gave him Battle, defeated his Army, and brought him Prisoner to Ravenna. And,
as if heaven would entirely settle the Empire upon Valentinian, Aetius, who was
at Rome, expecting the Forces of Castinus, and also from the Hunnes and
Gepides, he was taken Prisoner by the adherents unto the Faction of Honorius,
who brought him to Ravenna unto Placidia.

In this occasion, this great Princess showed her self, to be of a most
generous and prudent spirit; for, in lieu of taking revenge upon these two
great persons, by putting them to death, she thought, it would be a greater
advantage unto Valentinian, if she could make them his faithful Servants. As
for Castinus, she did not much care for him, so as perhaps she would have
handled him more roughly, had it not been in consideration of his friend
Aetius, whose judgment, experience, and valor, she knew, and thought would be
very useful unto her Son, by reason of the great reputation he had with the
Hunnes and Gepides, who, at his instigation, had made great preparations to
enter into Italy, and were already upon their March. Moreover, she considered
that Honorius, by his suspicions of him, had given him just occasion to leave
his servic^^ and therefore, to save himself, he went amongst those Barbarians,
whose Forces, she feared, might infinitely impede the event of her Son's Empire.

All these things therefore well considered, she thought that if she did punish
Castinus, she should extremely offend Aetius, by reason of the amity betwixt
them; and therefore, in keeping Castinus in safety, she conceived it would
keep the other the more unto his duty, almost forcing him unto it, to save the
life of his friend. In this resolution, she put Castinus a Prisoner into the
Hippodrome, from whence a few days after she released him, purposely to oblige
Aetius the more, unto whom, in the mean time, she gave liberty, and in lieu of
punishment, conferred favors upon him, excusing all he had done upon the ill
grounded jealousy of Honorius She procured Valentinian to send him general
into Gaul, against several Nations that possessed it. Before he went, in proof
of his fidelity, he transacted so with the Hunnes and Gepides, that when they
had set foot in Italy, they returned back, and went into Pannonia. As soon as
he came into Gaul, he raised the Siege of Archilla, which Thierry, the Son of
Vualius, the good friend unto the Empire, had surrounded, and relieved the
place, when it was reduced unto great necessity. Afterward, making head
against the Burgundians, he driv them back unto the limits, unto which the
Emperor had confined them. As for the Francks, though he could not at that
time keep them from making some progress under their King Clodion, yet, he
kept them out of Gaul, so as they got nothing on that side the Rheine. And
because the Britains were not able to resist the Picts, though the Romans had
made there a strong Rampart, in form of a Wall to defend the Britains from
the incursions of their neighbor-people and enemies, he sent Galucon thither,
with a Legion which was then in Paris.

Hitherto all things went according to the wish of the wise Placidia, and the
Emperor her Son: But Boniface was the first, who ruining himself, made them
be of the losing hand, both in Africa and Spain. This Boniface was Governor
in Africa, who was an inveterate hater of Castinus, and by consequence of
Aetius: He hearing how Placidia treated them, and of the great power she had
conferred upon Aetius, in making him a Patriarch, and in giving him the charge
of all Gaul, he resolved to withdraw himself from under his obedience; and
therefore not following his commands, he would not according to order return to
Rome. At which Placidia being offended, she procured Mahortius to be sent
thither with a great Army. Some had a suspicion, that this was the artifice of
Aetius, to ruin him in the opinion of Placidia and the Emperor. However it
was, Mahortius being defeated by Boniface, Valentinian sent Sisulphus thither,
whose Picture you may see next that of Valentinian I was very desirous to have
it, as well for his valor and prudence, as for his constant fidelity unto his
Master, conceiving that his excellent qualities, rendered him worthy to be
placed amongst so many illustrious persons. This Sisulphus, at the first,
seized upon Carthage, and forced Boniface to fly into Mauritania, where finding
no safety for himself, he called in Genserick, King of the Vandalls, who then
was in the Betique. This Vandal was very glad to come out of Spain, because the
Goths, under Thierry their King, having not room enough for themselves, did so
press upon the Vandals, and tormented them, that they were not able to defend
themselves. When Boniface offered Genserick to share Africa with him, he was
reduced unto such a pass, as he knew not which way to turn himself; but he
took that part which Boniface presented unto him. He left the Betique, which
was ever since called Vandalusia, and went into Africa with his Wife and
Children; but he learned from Boniface, what it was to trust unto Barbarians;
for, as soon as he came unto Africa, he seized upon Mauritania, and confined
poor Boniface unto the inaccessable Mountains; afterward, he made his peace
with the Romans, upon condition, he might keep what he had gotten from
Boniface. Valentinian willingly consented unto it; and thinking, that all the
rest of Africa was secured unto him, by this new Peace made with this Vandal,
he called the valiant Sisulphus from Carthage, to employ him in Italy and Gaul.
But Genserick kept his word no better with him, then he had done with Boniface;
for, Sisulphus was no sooner in Italy with all his Forces, but the Vandal
seized upon Carthage, and drove the Romans quite out of Africa; so as this
great City was separated from the Empire, until the valiant Scipio reduced it
unto the Commonwealth.

At that time, there lived in an Affrican Town called Iponne, a great and
virtuous person named Augustine, a very friend unto Boniface and one that
adored only one god; and though he did differ from the Religion that we
profess, yet was he much nearer it, then the ancient Romans; for, he offered
sacrifices of Bread and Wine as we do, and would not upon any terms admit of
any plurality of gods; but above all, he reverenced the Virgin who was to have
a Child, unto whom we have for many ages dedicated an Altar in the Carnutan
Monostarie. But to return unto our discourse. It seems, that at that time it
pleased the great god to change the people of one Country into another, and to
make great revolutions, especially in Europe: For, the reign of the Vandals
begun to begin in Africa, the Visigots in Spain; for as soon as the Vandals
were gone, they planted themselves there. The Anglois seated themselves in
Britain, because Galicia being called away by the Emperor, to be sent into
Africa, the Picts did so torment that Kingdom, that the Britains were
forced to call the Anglois to their aid, who ever since rendered themselves
Masters of it. The Francks, under Clodion and afterward Merovius, did plant
themselves where now they are. Thus, wise shepherds, do the heavens when they
please, make revolutions, changes, and alterations in Kingdoms and Dominions.

Now the wise and prudent Placidia, being grown into great years, and having
had great experience of fortune's variety, seeing her self unable to support
that great weight of affairs which she foresaw would fall upon Valentinian, she
did extremely desire to see him married, as it had been long before resolved
upon, unto the Daughter of her Nephew Theodosius, who ever had the same
intention. And things were so managed, that Valentinian went unto
Constantinople, where the Marriage was solemnized, to the great contentment
both of Theodosius and Placidia; of Theodosius, because his Daughter was to be
an Empress, which he most desired; and of Placidia, because she conceived,
this alliance would be a great strength unto her Son against his enemies, and
would oblige Theodosius to help him upon all occasions, as he did, before her
Son returned from Constantinople; for, he sent with his Daughter Eudoxe, a
great Army, to be employed which way soever Valentinian pleased.

Thus, sage shepherds, have I acquainted you with the life of her, who has run
through variety of fortunes, so as it may be said, that Placidia was all her
time the very Butt, both of good and bad fortune: For, she had been Daughter,
Sister, Wife, Mother, and Aunt unto Emperors; and she had been taken Captive
by Barbarians, and lived, to lament the death of most of those, whom she most
loved. However, we may conclude her happy, since she dyed at Rome, a Mother
unto an Emperor, who loved and honored her, and infinitely lamented
throughout all the Empire; for she dyed, presently after her Son was returned
into Italy with his Wife.

Thus Adamas ended his discourse, which caused all the company to fix their
eyes upon the Picture of this great Princess, considering every lineament of
her face, and admiring her virtue. But Alexis remembering what Silvander had
said, concerning the fair Eudoxe, and desirous to know, whether he had heard a
relation of the story, as she had, from the mouth of Ursaces, which she had
begun to relate unto Leonida, when Adamas interrupted them, she desired that
Nymph in a low voice, to put Silvander in mind of his promise. But it was so
late, that Adamas would not suffer the old shepherds to go away until the
next morning. Leonida desiring to please Alexis in all things possible, and
very desirous also to hear the story of Eudoxe, she summoned him to the
performance of his promise. He offering to excuse himself, because it was
late, Adamas answered, that this should be no excuse for him for he would not
suffer them to go away that night. Diamis, Phocion, and Tircis, made some dorre
at it; but Hylas was very forward to accept of his invitation, saying, Let
those that will go, go, and those that will stay, stay; for his part, he was
all for the stayers, and would with all his heart stay, as long as Alexis was
there. Adamas smiled at this and after thanks, he so entreated all the rest,
that it was impossible they should deny him, therefore all sitting down,
Silvander began thus

Since it is your desire, sage Adamas, and you, great Nymph, that I should
relate the fortune of the fair Eudoxe, be pleased to give leave, that I tell
you, how I came to know it, and from whom I heard it, to the end, you may give
the more credit unto the relation. Now, though you see me in a shepherds
habit, and though I have long had the charge of a little Flock, where these
sage shepherds do dwell; yet for all that, I am not this Countryman, nor was
I brought up a shepherd; but on the contrary, such indulgent care was had of
my education, that to render me the better accomplished, I was brought up in
the best Exercises and Arts, that Youth could be employed in; so as if I did
not much benefit my self and my understanding, it was long only of my dull
capacity. To this end therefore, I was sent unto the Phocensian and Massilian
Schools, where I spent much time in study; and there being much good company,
we used many exercises for recreations sake, in the intervalls of our studies;
sometimes we should go upon the Sea, sometimes play upon the Lute, sometimes
Run, Leap, and Pitch the Bar, or some other recreation to keep us from
idleness, which is the rust of Life and Mother of all Vice.

It happened in Summer time, that five or six of us in company, after we had
wearied our selves with the Book, we went to bathe our selves; and to that end,
went out of the Town toward Liguria, unto the point of a Rock, which shot it
self into the Sea, from whence we were accustomed to leap with head foremost
into the water, and should often times touch the bottom with our hands. At this
time, being upon this Rock, and undressing our selves, we were prevented by a
sudden storm of Wind and Rain, which was presently seconded with Lightning and
Thunder; the heavens grew immediately of a dusky color, and the waves began to
rise so high, that we were hardly safe upon the top of this high Rock, with
such fury and violence did the waves dash against it. It was terrible to see,
how suddenly the day was turned into night, to hear the strange roaring of the
Sea, and to consider the Chaos and hideous confusion of this raging Element;
and certainly, this blustering storm had forced us away, if some good Genius
had not stayed us: We did imagine, that many ships would suffer much damage by
it; and because the wind did blow toward us, we resolved to stay till the
storm was over, to see, if by fortune we could be helpful unto any Sea-beaten
passengers, but, to shelter us a little from the rain and wind, we crept into
a little corner of the Rock, where we were wont to hide our clothes when we
bathed our selves. The storm had lasted above two hours, when we begun all to
be weary; and when we were upon the point of going away, the sky begun to clear
up, and it left raining. Then we came out of our Rock, and going up to the top
of it, we began to look, whether we could discover any thing upon the Sea. The
wind wafted away all the clouds, and the Sun began to shine; yet, the waves
ceused not, because the wind continued still as great and high, as any time
before. As we were discoursing amongst our selves, upon the boldness of
Mariners, especially of him that first adventured to Sea, how terrible the
enraged Sea was, and that a wise man would never trust himself with it, one of
our company, who was more observant of the Sea, then of our discourse: Hold,
(said he) methinks I see a ship. Upon this, we arose, to see whether what he
said was true. At the first, none but himself could see any thing; but
presently after, something might be discerned: The wind was so high, that it
wafted these ships presently nearer us, and then every one plainly discerned
them. There was neither Sails, nor Mast nor Tackling to be seen, the storm had
constrained the Mariners to take them all down, and nothing made use of but
the Rudder, which was scarcely able to resist the Tempest. The sight was very
pitiful, for the wind was so high, as they could not keep themselves from
justling one against the other. The cries of those that were within, which the
wind wafted unto us, was lamentable to hear; they were all on the Deck, upon
their knees, holding up their hands to heaven: Most of them, seeing the shore,
were undrest, hoping, if the ship came any nearer, to save themselves by
swimming. As fortune was, a boisterous wave dashed them against our Rock; the
great rush which the first gave against it, made it recoil back with such a
violence, as meeting with another which followed it, it broke a great part of
the Poop and Prow of the other; and when the Sea was ready to swallow them up,
another wave came, which dashed them with so great a force against the same
Rock, as the ships were quite overwhelmed: Oh god, what a lamentable spectacle
was this! Some laid hold upon the points of the Rock, and strove to get
footing, till some help came; others seized upon the roots, which grew in the
Rock, and so hung by the arms; and some, who had laid hold of such roots, they
breaking both fell into the Sea, till the waves brought them back; some got
upon boards and poles, and such like, but most were drowned. That which moved
most compassion, was to see some women, who had no other help for themselves,
but their cries. I must confess, this moved me so much, as being half
undrest, I hasted to strip my self naked; and though the danger was great, by
reason of the winds and waves, I would do that to relieve them, which I had
often done for my pleasure, I leaped from the Rock into the Sea; and being in
the water, I saw two women embracing each other, ready to sink; I took one by
the hair, and swimming with my other hand, I drew them both ashore, where
leaving them half dead, I went again into the water, to help two men, whose
amity moved me to compassion; for one of them, who could swim, had got the
other upon his back to save him; but his load was so heavy, or else he that was
upmost, who was younger then the other, did hang so about the neck of his
friend, for fear of drowning, as he having neither strength nor breath left,
had already sunk two or three times into the water: I took him that could not
swim by one hand, so as easing the other, he took heart, so as we got to shore.
All my Companions, after my example, did the like, so as we saved many of them.
And because I thought the gods commanded me to have a particular care of those,
whom I had saved from shipwreck, after I had put on my clothes, I went unto
them, and assisted them all that possibly I could; after I had gotten some of
the water which they had swallowed, from them, they began to be reasonable
well, especially the women, who had been in most danger. They thought
themselves so obliged to us, that they desired to know our names, and of what
Country we were; and when they heard me say, that I thought my self either a
Segusian or a Forestian: Oh god, (said one of them) the men of such a Country,
as one of them, are destined to recall us from death. I asked them, why they
said so, seeing it was not a fit time for it, since they were so amazed with
the shipwreck, that they were scarcely able to breathe, nor do any thing, but
hold up their hands, and lift up their eyes, in admiration of their miraculous
escape: And because they were almost all naked, I thought it fit, before I
carried them to the Town, to get them some clothes to cover them, for it had
not been decent to have carried them otherwise. I went unto the Town, and met
with so many persons, who being very compassionate, relieved me with cloths for
them, as I had relieved them with life; and when I brought them to the Town,
they were quartered in such Bourghers houses, as used to have compassion upon
men in the like case. For my part, I defired those two whom I had saved, to go
with me, becaused they seemed to be men of merit. We cannot part, said they,
from these two women whom you have saved, both because they are committed unto
our charge, and because perhaps it would be inconvenient for you. Not at all,
(said I unto them) so you will be contented with the littleness of your
lodgings; but it would rather be a great satisfaction unto me, if you would do
me the favor. So they all four followed me. And because I had a friend in the
Town, who had better lodgings then my self, I carried them unto the house of a
rich Townsman with whom I had familiar intimacy, knowing his liberality and
pity to be such, as he would bid such men in such a condition very civilly
welcome; and so he did, for he did accommodate them with all things necessary.
Now you must know, that these men whom I had thus saved, were two principal
men in Rome, the name of the one was Ursaces, and of the other Olimbres; so as
they sent presently to their houses, and furnished themselves with money and
many servants. But, in satisfaction of my promise, be pleased to know, that
whilst they expected a return from Rome, these two Cavaliers would not be
without me; so as quitting my study, I accompanied them unto all such places,
unto which their curiosity invited them, in which I took much delight, for
their conversation was very sweet and pleasing. At the last, desiring much to
know who they were, unto whom I had done so good an office, one night, when I
was alone with them in their Chamber, (for the two women commonly retired, as
soon as supper was done) I entreated them to tell me, why they should say, when
they heard I was a Segusian, that those of that Country were destined to save
them from death? Unto which, the elder of them thus replied.

The History of Eudoxe, Valentinian, and Ursaces.
COurteous Silvander, (said one of them, for he heard I was so called) your
desire is most just, and I am obliged to give you satisfaction; it is all the
reason in the world you should know the lives of them, whom you have saved, and
the conditions of such, as are so much obliged to you. Nor had we deferred it
so long, had we not been in some fears, that if we were known, we might receive
some displeasure from some secret enemies. And therefore we entreat you to be
close, and take no notice of us, lest all the pains you have taken in saving
our lives, should be lost; also, lest any should hear us, I beseech you shut
close the door. Which being done, we all sat down, and he began thus.

Know, that Theodosius, Son unto the Emperor Arcadius, and Granchild unto the
great Theodosius, being Emperor of the West, he married Eudoxe, the Daughter
of Leontinus, an Athenian Philosopher. Although this Ladies extraction was not
so illustrious, as equalized the Majesty of an Emperor, yet, such was both her
beauty and virtue, as she deserved to be raised unto the highest degree of
honor amongst men. Theodosius had but one Daughter by her: and because he did
most passionately love his Wife, he called his Daughter after her name, so her
name was Eudoxe; and as if beauty and all excellencies were fatal unto that
name, this young Princess in the very budding of her years, did appear such a
beauty, as she excelled her Mother; and every one confessed, that nature had
made her so perfectly fair, as it was impossible, any higher degrees of it
could be added unto her. At this time, Placidia being but ill satisfied with
her Brother Honorius, she went unto Constantinople, to her Nephew Theodosius,
for she was Daughter unto Theodosius the great, and Sister unto Arcadius. She
carried along with her Valentinian and Honorique, her two Children. I was at
that time preferred very young unto Placidia, to be brought up with her Sons,
as many other of the Roman Senators Children of my age were; and when she left
Italy, there was so great affection between Valentinian and me, that the one
could not be without the other.

The Emperor Theodosius seeing his Uncle Honorius had no Children, he resolved
to bestow his Daughter upon Valentinian, and to make him Emperor of the West,
after the death of Honorius. The wise Placidia, who saw this Match would be
advantageous to her Son, she commanded him to apply himself as much as he
could unto this Princess. But see what constraint in love produces!
Valentinian could never love her, though she was the fairest Princess in the
world: yet, because he would not displease Placidia, nor his Cosen-german, upon
whom all his fortunes depended, he dissembled the matter so, that every one
thought him really in love with her.

I being brought up with this young Princess, I must confess, that I did very
inconsiderately cast my eye upon her, and fell so fatally in love, as it was
impossible for me to make a retreat. Should I say the sight of her was a
happiness unto me, that has cost me so much sorrow and pain? But why should I
make any doubt in the question, since notwithstanding all my pains and
sorrows, never was man more happy in such a generous design, then my self?
So then, I became a servant unto this Princess. And there being then
Tournements held in the Hippodrome, at which Eudoxe was present as Valentinian
entered the Lists, under the notion and name of the fair Eudoxe's Cavalier, it
may well besaid, I did the same, being so captivated with her beauty and virtue,
that never man was more. At the same time there was a young Lady, of the best
Families in all Greece, preferred unto the young Eudoxe, to be brought up with
her, her name was Isedore, and it must needs be confessed, that there was none in
all the Court (always excepting Eudoxe) which was comparable unto her.
Valentinian no sooner cast his eye upon her, but he fell presently in love with
her: But, she was so charie of her honor and reputation, as knowing, that
Valentinian could not marry her, she would not allow of his address, but at
the first, did refuse it in as mild a manner as she could; but afterward, did
reject it in a more harsh manner, then perhaps the quality of Valentinian
deserved: And though he was very hot in pursuance of his affection, yet did she
behave her self so, as she forced him to retreat in appearance, because she
vowed, that if he continued, she would acquaint Theoodosius and Placidia with
it. This young Prince fearing to displease the Emperor and his Mother, did so
conceal his desires, as none could see them, except Eudoxe and my self. In the
mean time, my affection still increased, though this young Princess did not
perceive it. The privilege of my youth permitted me to see her when I pleased,
without suspicion, and I was so perpetually assiduous and diligent about her
person, as she employed me ofter, then any other of my Companions. And though
at that time I hardly knew what Love was, yet I took such infinite delight in
being near her, in receiving her commands, serving her, and sometimes kissing
the thing which she gave unto me, as she did attribute it unto my civility. I
remember, one day as she was walking in a Gallerie, where there was abundance
of rare Pictures, there was amongst the rest, that of Icarus, whose wings
failing, fell into the Sea Ursaces, (said she unto me) what does these
scattered feathers, and this man falling into the Sea, signify? Madam, (said I
unto her) he was a young man, who being inflamed with a generous courage, would
not he contented to fly so low as his Father, whom you see by him; and because
his wings were set on with wax, the heat of the Sun melted them, so as he was
forced to fall, as you see him. Truly, answered she, he was very rash and
inconsiderate. However, replied I, he was of a most generous and noble spirit
To what purpose, said she since it brought him to his death. Death, (answered
I) is very welcome, when it leaves a brave memory behind it. What! said she
unto me, do you commend his act? I do so much commend it, Madam, said I, as I
would not refuse to die, upon conditions of the like glory. This Princess was
at this time about some twelve years of age, and I about fifteen or sixteen; an
age, yet hardly capable of Love's resentments, and yet I was not absolutely
free; however, I had not so much boldness, as to discover any thing unto her.
I perceive, said she, that you do esteem your life but very little. Doubtless,
Madam, (said I unto her) there are many things which I do esteem much more.
What! said she, for when we are once dead, all that we leave behind us
concerns us not. Honor and Love, answered I. What is this honor, said she
unto me? It is an opinion, replied I, which we do leave of our selves, and of
our courage; and Love, is a desire to enjoy something, that is great and noble;
and therefore, Madam, I should not refuse to die in any generous acts or in
doing you service; first, for the glory I should have by it; and secondly, for
my affection unto you. How, (said she, Unto me? like a very child) have you
any love to me? How do you know it? By the effects, answered I; for, when I am
out of your sight I burn till I see you again; and when I do see you, I am
vexed that I shall not see you long enough. How did you come by this disease,
(said she unto me) and what is the cause of it? Your perfections, Madam, (said
I unto her) and your beauty, has caused this disease, by staying long with
you. Were I as you (answered she) I would stay as little as possible could be:
but, is there no remedy for the cure of this disease? Yes, (said I unto her) if
you please to love me as well as I love you. How! (said she presently) would
you have me burn when I see you not? Good Ursaces, look for some other Receipt,
for, believe it you shall not have this. I remember, that when I have burned my
finger, I was in so much pain, as I will hardly undergo so much again for your
cure. I durst not reply, because there were many Ladies and Knights talking
together in the Gallery, and took no notice of us, though they were there to
accompany the young Princess; but her childhood, and my youth, permitted me to
be with her without suspicion.

But afterward, she grew more knowing, and I grew more in love then before:
Valentinian, whose whole design was upon the fair Isidore, did hold
Tournements as often as he could; for, having a good agility in that exercise, he
thought by that means, to insinuate himself into the favor of that wise Lady,
still seeming, as if all he did was for Eudoxe. Now, because he commonly took
such as were of his own age, and there being not above two years difference
betwixt him and me, I was always of his party. Fortune it seems had a mind
to favor me, and conferred the Prize very often upon me, which seeming as if
it were in behalf of Valentinian, I always carried unto Eudoxe; and when she
received it, she permitted me to kiss her hand Oh, how well did I think all my
pains bestowed? Yet, I carried the matter with so much discretion, as she could
not possibly be offended, although she did sometimes remember the discourse
which I had formerly with her; for, conceiving them to be but imprudencies of
Infancy, she passed by them, thinking that age would better instruct me in my
duty. The first time that she suspected the contrary, was, one day when she was
walking in the Emperors Garden; after she had wearied her self with walking,
she set her self down in the shade, and fell asleep in the lap of Isidore.
There was a great knot of young Cavaliers discoursing together, not far off the
Arbor where she slept, when a Be, did rest it self upon her fair lip, and
after it had sucked it a while, it did sting it very much. The pain caused her
to start up, and laying her hand upon her pain, she complained against Isidore
for the little care which she had off her* Valentinian who was walking in the
Garden, hearing her cry, and when he was come, seeing her chide Isidore, he
told her, that I had a receipt that would presently cure her, and that he had
seen the experience of it upon many, and particularly upon my self within
this two days. What will he do? said she unto him, he will speak some
certain words (answered Valentinian) upon the place which is pained, and the
pain will immediately cease: Then she asked me, whether it was true, and I
answered, yes, and that it never used to fail me, nor did I think fortune
would be less favorable to me in curing her, then she has been in curing
others: It vexed her extremely that I should bring my mouth so near hers, and
giving me her hand, she commanded me to try upon it. But I drew my mouth nearer
her lip, and touched it; she took away her hand and pulled back her head,
telling me that this was a kiss and not a receipt, and would not permit me to
use it; but the rain did so much increase, as it forced her to bid me teach it
unto Isidore, and she should use the charm upon her lip: This was much against
my will; for I did extremely long to have the celestial happiness of kissing
her lip, though I was very sorry for the pain she endured. Love did advise me
to teach other words unto Isidore, to the end that finding no ease by them, she
might have recourse unto me: My design did take according to my wish; for she
muttering a few gross idle words which I taught her and using other
ceremonies, the pain ceased not. At which Valentinian laughing, Do you think
Mistress (said he) that any one can administer this receipt? For my part, I
profess unto you, I have tried it, and I found a present ease? Now if it do
you no good it is because Isidore has omitted something: Upon this going out
of the Arbor, he returned again, and brought in with him all the young
Cavaliers. Her pain did exceedingly increase, and her lip began to swell, when
she turning toward me, Will you say upon your faith, Ursaces, (said she) that
the receipt is good? I do swear unto you Madam (said I unto her) by that honor
which I owe you, that I never knew it fail, and I am sorry Isidore knows not
how to do it aright: but I wish I were for this once a woman, that I might do
you this service. I know not, Madam, said Isidore, why you should be so
scrupulous but I am confident that if you did see how your mouth is swelled,
you would use any remedy to help it. But pray tell me, Ursaces, replied Eudoxe,
will you be long in applying your receipt? As little a time as I can Madam,
answered I. Then going to her, she went into the most obscure part of the Arbor
as being ashamed to be seen, and the excessive pain forced her to let me use
my Enchantment.

Was ever any Sorcerer so happy as my self? I spoke the words upon her lip:
but when I took hers, between mine, and as I sucked it did press it a little;
certainly if ever any did dye of delight it would have been Ursaces. She went
away from me and blushed for shame; This (said she) is the strangest receipt
that ever was: But Madam (said Isidore) Do you find any amendment? Me thinks,
answered she, that I do. Your pain Madam (said I unto her) will presently be
gone; but I shall have it all my self. How Ursaces (said she), must you have
it all your self? yes Madam (answered I) the condition of this receipt is
such, that he who cures, must have the pain: she who did not understand it, or
at least seemed so; Truly Ursaces (said she) I am very much obliged unto you,
for taking my pain upon you. Madam, answered I, could I as well take upon me
all the pain that ever hereafter you shall endure, be confident, it should
never trouble you. Isidore smiled and said, Madam if you have as much good will
unto him, as he has unto you, you must presently cure him of his pain, as he
has yours. I had rather, in this be beholding unto him (answered she) than he
unto me; and I am sure he is so civil and courteous, that he will not now give
me that pain again which he has taken from me: Most true Madam (said I unto
her) but I must tell you my pain is not so much in my lip as my heart. She
understood my meaning very well, though she seemed not to hear me, and had not
Isidore been present, I had talked more unto her.

I should be too tedious (Silvander) should I relate the whole Series of my
affection, from the beginning; I shall therefore tell you only what is
necessary for you to know, and omit the rest. Love did at the last render me so
hardy, as I resolved to declare unto her the resentments of my soul: yet I was
long in dispute with my self whether it should be by Letter or by word of
mouth: at last I concluded it better to use my tongue then pen, having long
since learned, that to write where one may speak, argues too much fear, and
those who ask any thing fearfully, do teach how to deny: besides, I saw there
was much difficulty in the conveying of Letters unto her: But, Oh heavens, how
often did I turn back again, after I was gone out of my lodging with this
resolution? But heaven at the last favored my design, and afforded me an
opportunity.

Eudoxe used very often to frequent the Emperors Gardens: And I was always
very officious and ready to be employed in her service; though it were but to
gather her a flower in a day, I was well centented with it and having long
since learned that love does as often begin by trifles as by things of greater
importance which very seldomfall out, and that those services which oblige
much, do rather produce emnity then love, but that nothing winnes more upon
another then affection; therefore I was very assiduous in serving her upon
every trivial occasion. Not one of her servants was so officious as my self.
It happened one day, that Valentinian followed her, for Isidores sake, into the
Garden; and Isidore being a little weary, they separated: Eudoxe continued
walking, and Isidore went into an Arbor, where she found seats of grass,
covered over with boughs: she had not been there long but Valentinian who was
walking with Eudoxe, began to complain of weariness, and made that his
pretense for going to sit down in the same Arbor: Isidore offered to go out,
but he held her by the gown: Eudoxe seeing this, looked upon me and could not
choose but smile: I thinking this to be a fit opportunity to put my intended
resolution into execution, I would not let it slip. I smiled therefore as
well as she, and she asked me why I did so; to which I answered very freely
that it was because Valentinian had left her to go unto Isidore. And why,
Ursaces, (said she unto me) do not you the same? I Madam (said I unto her) do
you think I have so little judgment? Me thinks (said she) that you ought to
do it, because it is fitter that you should do her service then Valentinian. I
know very well Madam (said I) that there is much more equality betwixt Isidore
and me, then betwixt Valentinian and her, but I must needs confess that I had
rather commit a fault contrary unto that of Valentinian. How do you mean?
(said she) I mean Madam (said I) that rather then serve one who is equal unto
my self as Isidore is, I would dye for the love of one who is above me as you
are: How me? answered she, do you Ursaces, know what you say? I say Madam
(answered I) that I had rather dye adoring You, then live and love Isidore: and
that the vast inequality betwixt us could never put me out of this mind since
the first day I had the glory to see you. Surely (said the Princess) you are
out of your wits, otherwise you would never talk thus to Me. Do not think so
Madam (said I unto her) for I am sure I never spoke more truly, nor with a
sounder judgment. She stood still and looked steadfastly upon me, and
afterward said, Is this language, Ursaces, in earnest or in jest? I do swear
Madam (said I unto her) by that service which I owe you, that I did never in my
life utter words more unfainedly, nor with a more resolved will then these; and
take them as you will, hate or treat me as you please, I shall never change.

Ursaces, (said she unto me) I am very sorry for your folly: I have esteemed
you and your service above any that have been educated under the Emperor my
Father: But since you are grown so beyond all bounds of reason impudent, and
quite forgot your duty and distance, be assured, that if ever you use the same
liberty of language again to me, I will make you repent of your rashness, and
acquaint both Valentinian and the Emperor with it. Madam (answered I) did I not
fear that those who are in the garden would observe me, I would ask pardon
upon my knees for my presumptuous crime: but I beseech you give me leave to
say, that all your menaces cannot prevail with my will: this affection is
rivetted into it, heaven and earth cannot dissolve it: and therefore there is
no hope that any fear of the Emperor, or any consideration of Valentinian can
divert me. It Is true, I may be silent, and languish away for the love of the
fair Eudoxe: and so I believe I shall. Now for a proof of this and not to
offend you any longer with my impertinent talk, I do swear unto you by that
eternal humble service which I owe you, that I will never speak to you of it
again. But remember this, that as often as I do you any reverence, or bid you
good morrow, my heart then says unto you Madam, that Ursaces is dying for the
love of you, and tacitly tells you that you will never have a more faithful
servant then he: And when I take my leave of you, or bid you good night, then
do I say, how long is it your pleasure I shall be miserable? and how long will
your rigor last? And to begin (said I sadly to her) permit me to take my leave
of you and bid you good night. Upon this I made a low reverence and retired,
lest I should too much offend her with my words: but as I went, I observed that
she turned the other way and smiled; which gave my heart no little hope. Thus,
kind stranger, have I lived ever since with her, never making any semblance of
what was past except by my good morrowes and good nights; which when none could
see her, she would often answer with a ^^ake of her head, as if she were still
offended at the memory of that which I hinted unto her. Above six Months
passed on this manner, and all the while she showed not the least kind of any
reception of my affection. At the last I vanquished: one morning when
Valentinian was leading her to the Temple, I went to her, and making an humble
reverence I said, good morrow Madam. At which she smiled, and turning toward
me; Ursaces, (said she) your good morrowes are very kindly accepted. Oh
heavens? how can I express my joys? I protest I never hoped for any
happiness, especially when nothing was talked of but the marriage of
Valentinian and her. Yet I understood since, how that, which I believed would
have ruined my hopes, was that which obliged her, more unto me: For she
perceiving how his affection to Isidore increased, and all his expressions unto
her, were only to please the Emperor, she resolved to entertain my love,
rather then to be the wife of an Emperor, and to accept of my service, since
Valentinian was wholly devoted unto the service of Isidore. I knew her
resolution presently after: for upon the first opportunity which presented it
self, she told me, that my constancy, and Valentinians affection unto Isidore
had overcome her: And that if I did continue still in my discreet behavior she
would continue her affection to me: So as ever since that day, she permitme to
call her in private, my Princess; and she called me her my Cavalier. Judge,
Silvander, whether ever man was more happy then my self. For Eudoxe was
absolutely the fairest Princess in the whole world; aged about scaventeene or
eighteen years, and never loved any one but I.

Whilst we lived thus in this manner, Honorius who married the Daughter of
Stilicon, dyed without Issue: And because a Roman whose name was John, his
Principal Secretary was elected Emperor by the means of Castinus and Aetius,
the Emperor Theodosius intending to make his cosen German Valentinian,
Emperor of the West, he would send him thither with his Mother Placidia. I
made a flourish as if I were desirous to make one in this voyage but indeed my
desires were to stay for the gaurd of Eudoxe: For though the desire of glory
did invite me into Italy, yet love kept me at Constantinople, by stronger ties:
for this fair Princess did so second her promise, as her affection was no
less to me, then mine to her. At the first, I believed her intention was not
to go so far But love in this resembles death; for as one cannot dye, so one
cannot love, by halves. Now as I was pumping for a good excuse to stay at home,
the Emperor received inetlligence of a great Army which was marching toward
Constantinople. This news invited many to stay, who otherwise in point of
honor and duty would have gone under the conduct of Artabures, who carried a
very great Army by Sea; having with him, Aspar his Son; a very valiant and
fortunate Commander, as afterward he made it evidently appear by taking John
in Ravenna, and delivering his Father. Now though I was not jealous of
Valentinian, for all Eudoxe's favorable aspect upon him, because I knew it was
only to please Theodosius, yet I seemed as if I were, and seemed to rejoice
very much at his departure.

I shall not now relate unto you, the voyage of Valentinian, for I believe you
have heard it by many: But so it was, that after all things were set in good
order in the West, he returned to Constantinople. Where he was received by
Theodosius as if he were his Son: And by the solicitation of Phacidia who
stayed in Italy, the marriage of the fair Eudoxe was concluded upon. It is
imposible I should express my sad resentments upon this occasion: I could not
believe it, and was so surcharged with fears and sorrow, that, but for Eudoxe,
I had not been able to have supported them. But she who was wise and prudent,
though it grieved her to the very soul that she was to be his whom she did not
love, yet she surmounted her sorrow by resolution. And because she saw in what
pain I lived, she gave me the opportunity of speaking to her in her closset,
when none was present but Isidore, whom she did infinitely love Well my Cavalier
(said she unto me) I see you still doubt of my affection; and complain against
me.

My fairest Princess, (said I unto her) had I not been accustomed to receive
more favor from you than I can any way merit, you might have had some reason
to say so now, when I do receive so high a one, as transcends all degrees of
gratitude, to acknowledge sufficiently. But why will you not give me leave to
complain of my fortune, who showing me the good which she may give, me gives
it unto another, whose merits in matter of love are inferior unto mine? my
Cavalier, answered she, live contentedly, and be assured, that Ursaces enjoyes
all that a violent affection can obtain: And what favor I show unto any other
is more out of duty then love, and since it is so, what reason have you to
complain against your fortune? My reason for it, replied I, is as great as my
obligation unto you for this assurance. Why (my fairest Princess) should I not
complain of her who in lieu of favoring my affection, does deprive me of that
which only can bring me unto the happiness which I desire? Oh Cavalier (said
she) you do offend me. What? would you not have loved me, but only to obtain
that of me which my duty desires you? What did you think of me, and how little
did you love me, if you have so bad an opinion of me? I was not able to answer
her, seeing how she took it; but kneeling down, with a deep sigh, I stopped my
mouth by holding her hand upon it. At the last, I rose up again, and answered
her: I must needs confess, my fairest Princess, that I do love you more then
you would, and more then reason would; but who can love you less? I must
confess, that neither reason nor duty, can measure the grandeur of my
affection; and if I do offend you in it, I beseech you pardon me, considering,
that to love you less, would be to profane your beauty. Also, I beg your
pity, who have so much courage, and yet want so much merit. And yet you might
well wink at these faults, if love had a little more force in you. I do not
understand you, said she unto me. Alas! replied I, how hard a matter it is to
make you understand it by my words, if love will not make you conceive it? But,
I mean, my Princess, that if love had a little more power over you, this duty
which you speak of would have less; the too-happy Valentinian would enjoy what
he is in quest of, and I, what I desire. Oh Cavalier (said she, with a deep
sigh) did you but know the resentments of my soul, and what restraint it is in,
you would know, that Love has as much power over me, as it can have over any
heart: If I do deny you any testimony of this power, consider my birth, and
unto what Laws it obliges me. Had I been the Daughter of the Athenian
Leontine, as my Mother was, I might have disposed of my self and my affection;
but being Daughter unto the Emperor Theodosius, Grandchild unto the Emperor
Arcadins, and having Theodosius the great unto my great Grandfather, do you not
see, I am not my own but theirs, who gave me my being? It is the Tribute of
humanity, and the Law of divinity, to submit unto Emperors and Grandeur;
Reason of State, as well as Love, is to be considered. This is no news either
to you or me, we both foresaw this long since; and when I first set my eyes and
affection upon you, it was still with a resolution to marry Valentinian; I am
confident you had the same thoughts, the first day you began to love me. What
is it then which now troubles you? What accidents have happened, which should
divert us from our first principles? These words touched me so to the quick,
that I could not permit her to go on without interruption: Can you think,
Madam, said I unto her, that these are considerations of Love? Can love be
confined to any Laws of duty? Oh heavens! how infinitely are you and I
mistaken? You, in thinking that you love; and I, in thinking that you loved me.
Then, stopping a little, I began again, when I saw she offered to speak: The
Laws of Love, Madam, are far different from those you mention, and if you
would know what they are, read them in me, and you will find, that as the
great inequality which is betwixt us, could not keep me from lifting up my eyes
so high as my fairest Princess, so it should not divert you from looking so
low, as your poor Cavalier; for, there is no more difference betwixt you and
me, then betwixt me and you. And as to what you allege concerning your birth,
since it is so high, that it is in the superlative degree, and can admit of no
higher then you are, why should you not in lieu of looking at Grandeur, which
can receive no addition in you, cast your eyes upon your own contentment, to
the end, that as you are by birth the greatest Princess in the world, so you
may be, by your choice, the most contented Princess that ever was? You say,
that I began to serve you, in the opinion, that Valentinian should be your
Husband: Oh, Madam, I must confess, that when I first devoted my self unto
your service, I thought my self able to support that opinion; but, since my
affection is so increased, that it is absolutely impossible for me to endure
it, what can you answer me, but that your affection is weak, since it is not
augmented more then it was at first? I wonder, my fairest Princess, how you
can deny your favors unto me, who adores you, and confer them upon one, who
does not love you. Can you ever consent, that your beauty, which without all
dispute, may be the recompense and perfect felicity of any true Lover, should
be enjoyed by one that disdaines it, and does not value it? How can you endure
his carrasses, and not pity the pain of your poor Cavalier? Isidore, who heard
our discourse, and was very desirous to favor us, not out of any amity she
bare unto me, or any desire she had to have any hand in such businesses, but
out of a hope, that this affection might pass so far, that perhaps it might
break off the Marriage of Valentinian and Eudoxe; and to give us more
opportunity of talking together, she withdrew her self into a little Closet,
in which at the last she fell asleep. I presently perceived it, though I had my
back toward her, because passing betwixt the candle, I saw her shadow against
the wall, which made me observe her when she went away. The Princess, who was
leaning upon her arm in the Couch, and was very attentive upon what I said
unto her, never observed her, though she went close by her. And because my last
words touched her to the quick, she stayed a long while before she answered,
and still looked upon the ground: At the last, she raised her self up, and
with a deep sigh, said thus: Oh my Cavalier, how cruelly do your words wound my
soul? But what can I do? What will become of me? If I do not marry Valentinian,
what will be thought of me? And if I do marry him, unto what a torment am I
destined? At these last words, I saw tears trickle down her cheeks, and she
durst not speak more, lest her words should too much betray her own weakness.
These tears moved me to much pity, giving me no small assurance, and much
augmenting my courage. I must confess, (kind Silvander) that I never hoped to
bring this Princess unto this; but finding more love in her then I did
imagine, I took upon me more boldness then ever I intended. I approached
therefore a little nearer unto her then before, and seeming, as if I would only
support her drooping head in my breast, my mouth was just betwixt her eyes; I
durst not at the first kiss her, only seemed, as if what I did, was not done
intentionally; but seeing she said nothing, I descended by little and little,
until my mouth met hers; and because she gave me no check, I put my hand into
her breast, but with so much ravishment, that I trembled like a leaf shaken
with the wind. Since that time, I have been in many dangers, and several
deep-fought Battles, but I was never so sensible of fear, as upon this
occasion. Thus she permitted me this freedom; but when I grew to be a little
bolder, she said thus unto me: Fie, fie, my Cavalier, what do you mean? Isidore
will see you. It is long since, my fairest Princess, (said I unto her) she
left us alone. How, (said she, and started up) is not Isidore here? she is very
much to blame in leaving us alone. Why, Madam, said I, we have no business for
her. Perhaps not you, replied she, but I have; and if you do love me, as you
say you do, be contented with these favors which I have permitted, and press
me not to confer more upon you, then I ought or can. I thought, that the
presence of Isidore would have restrained you from offering any thing, but what
decency allowed; and could have wished, it might have been she, and not I, that
should have given you the check, to the end, you may see how willing I am, to
give you full assurance of my affection; but since she is gone, and since you
cannot keep within the limits of what you ought, I am constrained to tell you,
that if you make any attempts against my honor, I will permit you, but upon
condition, that I have, a naked Dagger in my hand, to pierce my heart
presently, for the fault which you should constrain me to commit: If you would
have me live, then constrain me not, I beseech you to permit that, which I
ought not to do, unless I die. I must confess, these words did put me into
such a confusion, that rising from the place where I was, and falling down upon
my knees, I protested unto her, that I would never seek for any further
testimonies of her affection, nor satisfaction to my desires greater, then
those she has been pleased to show unto me. If you do so, said she unto me, I
will as long as I live allow you the same privacy you have received; and this
proof of that affection which you bear unto me, shall be pleasing unto me,
knowing, that right love can keep within the limits of decency. Upon this, she
took my head in both her hands, and kissed me, as an earnest of her promise,
and we spoke so loud, that we awaked Isidore. Now because the night was far
spent, and the candles almost out, Eudoxe called her, and asked what a clock it
was. It Is time, Madam, said she, that we go to bed, for every one is asleep
except you. Do you think, Isidore, said the Princess, that Valentinian is not
now awake for his Mistress? I know not what he does, said Isidore; but I am
sure, if I were in bed, I should sleep soundly. I answered her, That it was in
bed where he would find her. What! answered she, would you be any where else?
The Princess laughed, and said unto her: What do you think on, Isidore? I
believe you are yet asleep. What would you have me do, (said she, and rubbed
her eyes)? Ursaces makes a fool of me.

Now because it was late, Eudoxe rose up, kissed me, and commanded me to
retire, which I did, but not without using the privilege of kissing her, which
she had given unto me: And because she saw, that Isidore observed her, and said
nothing, Eudoxe said thus unto her: What do you look at, Isidore? I look, Madam
(answered she) whether the Be have much strng you. What Be, said the
Princess? The Be in the Garden, answered she, against which this Cavalier
has so often given you a Receipt. Upon this, taking the Candle which was upon
the Table, she lighted me down the stairs into the Court; but not before Eudoxe
smiled, and said unto her: Take heed, lest being alone with him, he do apply
the same Receipt unto you. Neverfear, Madam, (said she) that Receipt will not
do any effect upon me, because I do not believe in his words.

See upon what terms I was, when Valentinian married this fair Princess, whom
presently after he carried into Italy. I shall pass over my sorrows and
displeasures I had, especially the marriage night. But those of the fair Eudoxe
were no less, as afterward she told me; and Isidore, whom she carried with
her, when she left Greece, because of the great confidence she had in her. You
may imagine, that Valentinian did not contrary her in it. But as this first
night was almost intolerable to me, so I needed not to seek out for an excuse,
in not following this fair Princess; for, I was fallen extremely sick, upon
the great displeasure which I conceived, when Valentinian departed. After I had
recovered my health, I begged leave of the Emperor to follow Ariobindes and
Asilas, two great Commanders, which he preferred unto Valentinian, with an
Army, to assist him against the innundation of the barbarous people, who
threatened from all sides to fall upon the Empire. My age and my just request,
easily obtained what I asked. But, as ill luck was, this Army was countermanded
back, because Attilas, with the Hunnes, Almaines, and Gepides, and an infinite
world of people, were upon their March toward Constantinople. This countermand
was no sooner brought unto Ariobindes and Asilas, but they heard of the death
of Theodosius, who being infected with the Plague, dyed suddenly, without
Issue-male. I had no disposition to carry this sad news unto the fair Eudoxe,
but besought Ariobindes, that I might accompany the Messenger whom he sent,
seeming very desirous to see Italy, before I returned; which request he easily
granted unto me. In our way, we came to Naples, and from thence to Rome, where
I was welcomed with all desirable carasses. Eudoxe did sadly resent the death
of her Father, as nature required of her; and during the days of mourning,
Valentinian received intelligence, that Pulcheria, the Sister of Theodosius,
who had married an old General, called Marcianus, had gotten him to be elected
Emperor. This Marcianus was he, whom Genserick King of the Vandalls, having
him Prisoner in Africa, did see the Eagle fly, and with whom he afterward
contracted a great league of friendship. And because he was a very great
Commander, and of high reputation, he quickly forced Attilas to retreat into
Pannonia, where envying his Brother Bledas, he traitorously murdered him, that
he might remain sole King over all those barbarous People. When I had
intelligence of the election of this new Emperor, and that Attilas was
repulsed, I conceived, that then there was nothing which could invite me out of
Italy; but that, War being on all sides, it was better to stay where my Love
invited me. As I was in these considerations, the Emperor was advertised, that
this Attilas, who may well be phrased, the scourge of god, had taken Gaul for
his first design: and having by his Arms subjected Valamer and Ardarick,
Kings of the Ostrogots and Gepides, he constrained them to join with his
Forces, which were composed of Erulians, Almains, Turingians, Marcomances, and
of some Francks, who remained in their old habitations beyond the Rhein, when
under the great Pharamond, this warlick People forced their passage, and
possessed themselves of that Country, which now they hold in Gaul, and which
began then, from the name of Francks, to be called France. As soon as this
news was made certain, the Emperor reinforced the Army of the Patriarch
Aetius, who was one of the best and greatest of all the Roman Captains, and who
had the charge of the Gauls. Now though it went much against my mind to leave
the fair Eudoxe, yet, go I must: and when I asked leave of her: Why, my
Cavalier, (said she unto me) will you be so far distant from me? What cause
have I given unto you? Have you so slender affection, as to leave me thus? My
fairest Princess, said I unto her, if I should not go in this expedition,
wherein all the Gallantry of the Court are employed, what will the world think
of my courage? What will they think, if I stay at home? Nay, what would your
self think of me? Unto which she answered, with a smile: I remember, that
before my Marriage, none of these excuses were urged. What! do you love me
less now then before? Believe it, though I will keep within compass of my
duty, yet I do love you as well now as then, and shall be very sorry to part
from you. Then she kissed me: Remember (continued she) that you return quickly,
and be still faithful. Thus I left her, and went unto Aetius.

In the mean time, Valentinian, who was infinitely in love with the wise
Isidore, continued still his addresses, but with abundance of wariness and
discretion; and thinking, that her denial proceeded only from some fears, as
commonly young women have, that it would spoil her Marriage, if it should be
known, that she was loved: Therefore he resolved to marry her; and thinking
with himself, who in all the Court was most fit for her, he pitched upon
Maximus, a Roman Knight; of great authority; he was thought the fittest person
for the business, as well, because he was often in Rome, so by consequence he
might easily see her; as because he was very ambitious, and by doing him
honors, he might the more easily deceive and abuse him. Maximus, who desired
to marry, and who expected his advancement from the Emperor, received this
offer as a very great honor; for, the Lady was very fair, and of an
illustrious Family; also, had as good a reputation as any in the Court.
Isidore, on the other side, was not against it; for Maximus was as rich as any
in Rome, and had been twice Consul. Also the Empress, who infinitely loved
this Lady, was very glad that she was to be married in Rome so advantageously.
There being therefore no obstruction in this Match, Marriage was presently
consummated, to the contentment of them both. But when the Emperor, some few
days after, offered some addresses unto the wise Isidore, he found her more
slack and cool in her affection, then before; at which the Emperor was so
vexed, as he resolved to have no longer any recourse unto supplications. It
happened then, that he and Maximus being at play, as they often used, fortune was
so averse to Maximus, that he lost all his money; and having nothing about him
to make stake, but a Ring which he usually sealed withal, he pulled it off
from his finger, put it to the stake, and lost it. The Emperor conceiving, he
had met with a good occasion to accomplish his design, he pretended some
important business, and leaving one in his room, he bad him play on upon
credit, till Maximus had quitted all he had won; which he did, only upon
design to amuze him the more. In the mean time, he sent to the wise Isidore,
in her Husbands name, commanding her to come and visit the Empress, and as a
token of his desire, showed unto her the Ring of her Husband. She giving credit
to the Messenger, and suspecting nothing, went, and was conducted into the
Garden being told that the Empress was there: Being brought into the most
retired place of all the Garden, you may imagine how astonished she was, when
she saw her self in the hands of Valentinian: She began presently to look very
pale upon it, and to tremble. The Emperor seeing it, took her by the hand, and
would have carried her to sit down in an Arbor, which was in the midst of the
Garden; but seeing her self alone with him, she refused to enter; yet, he
taking her by the arm forced her in, and shut the door after them. Oh heavens!
Silvander, in what a terrible affright was poor Isidore, when she saw this
violent beginning; it was as great, as if she had been brought to the place of
execution. But the Emperor, thinking to vanquish her by fair words, and
thinking, that no woman would deny him, he sat down by her, and spoke in this
manner: I make no doubt, fair Isidore, but you think this stratagem which I
have used, very strange, and, perhaps, are angry with me for it; but I hope,
when you consider the violence of my affection, how long it has continued, and
how neither my own reasons, nor your rigor, can quench it, I hope, I say,
that you will pardon my boldness, that you will not think this action strange,
but will render my affection some satisfaction, before you depart from hence:
Every thing does invite us to it; first, my unequaled affection; next, the
quality of him who loves you, who being Emperor, you may aspire unto the
Empire, if you will render me as much satisfaction, as my love deserves; and
lastly, the consideration of Maximus may move you unto it, since you may see by
his Ring, that he does not only consent unto it, but desire it. What then, my
fair Isidore, should hinder you, from giving satisfaction to my longing
desires? Then offering to kiss her, she turned her head the other way, and
would not permit him, but beseeched him, to sit down and hear her, desiring if
it were possible to overcome him by sweetness: I must needs confess, Sir,
(said she unto him) that I am infinitely amazed, to see my self alone with
you, in this dark and solitary place, and so much against my mind, since upon
it, depends the ruin of my honor and my life; but, I have a great confidence,
that you will do nothing against reason, or my will, especially when I do
consider, who you are, and who I am. Considering you as your self, why should
I fear, being in the hands of the great Valentinian, Son to the generous
Emperor Constantius, the most accomplished of any that ever wore the name of
Caesar? Valentinian, I say, whose Mother was the wise Placidia, the honor and
pattern of all Ladies. Can you think, great Sir, that I am afraid of you,
whose wisdom is known throughout all the world, and whose prudence every one
admires; also one, from whom Justice is generally expected. I should show my
self too ignorant of my Emperor's excellencies, did I doubt his goodness, or
fear any harm from him in this solitary place, where I am alone with him: No,
no, I dare trust my self any where, in the hands of my honored Emperor: but
I must needs confess, I think it strange that I should be brought hither by
the consent of Maximus: It vexes me to the soul that he should think me so
unworthy, and that I should have one to my husband who is the very shame, and
scorn of men.

Now Sir, I will not ask what it is you would have of me, nor what occasion
brought you to this place. That Traitor who is the owner of this Ring, and your
own discourse does but too plainly tell it. But I do most humbly beseech you,
great and good Sir, to consider that I have no more honor when this is gone,
and if you love me, let me live worthy of great Cesars love: Consider Sir, that
you trample under your feet, the honor and the life of her you love, and will
so much injure your own honor and reputation, as well as mine, as I know it
will be impossible for you, to repair it again. You tell me that in rendering
you this satisfaction, I may pretend unto the Empire: Oh heavens? can you think
me worthy so much as to live after so great a crime, and stain unto mine
honor? If you do bear any good will unto me, preserve me unstained until you
can make me such as you say, and stay till it shall please the gods to bring it
to pass. If there be any truth in your words, that you do love me. And if you
do love me, never offer that which will make me exteamly hate you. Can you
imagine, I shall ever love him that ravisheth away my honor, which is much
dearerto me, then my life? No, no, Sir; I never can. But I beseech you, think
upon Constantius your Father, think upon Placidia your Mother, and think upon
God, who has miraculously seated you in the Throne: he has given you power to
vanquish John, by the hand of young Aspar: John I say, who otherwise had
possessed the Empire: he has overcome for you, the valiant Castinus, by the
valor of Artabures, who a little before was a prisoner in Ravenna: he has
subjected unto you, the Prudent Aetius, by the means of those who hardly knew
you: He has defeated Boniface the Usurper of Africa; he has made the
Puissant Genserick King of the Vandals your friend: To be brief, what has not
this great God done for you? And how thankful ought you to be unto him? Now
Sir, the very same god who has done all these for you, does at this very
instant see you, and observes what cause you will give him either to continue
his favors, or to send you punishments: Consider what miserable accidents and
fatal tragedies, have heretofore besalne this Empire, upon the like occasions
as this.

Oh most omnipotent Diety, rather shower down all thy thunderbolts upon me,
and hide me in the profundity of the earth, then suffer me to be any cause of
moving thy wrath against this Emperor. Upon this, she kneeled down, and
continued; And you, great Sir, I beseech you rather put me to death, then
ravish from me, that which makes me worthy of your love, or before you make me
isntrumental to bring the odium both of god and men upon you. Now Sir, show,
that you are truly Caesar, and be as well a commander over your passions, as you
are victorious over your enemies.

Valentinian seeing her upon her knees, he took her up, and was so moved with
her expressions as he was ashamed of what he had done, and wished that he had
never attempted it. Her words did so flow with reason as fast as her eyes with
tears: so as working upon her good nature, they forced him into a resolution
of overcoming himself, and promised her with an oath, that he would never use
any force against her. But he beseeched her to take his affection into her
consideration, to forget what he would have attempted, and that when Maximus
and Eudoxe dyed, she should marry him. The wise Isidore hearing these words,
began to take: heart; to promise him all that he desired, and to beseech him,
he would permit her to depart. Upon this Valentinian kissed her hand, and with
a deep sigh, called unto him Heracles the Eunuch, whom he trusted most of any
in the Court and whose counsel he most followed: This Eunuch, was a very
wicked man, nothing pleasing, only faithful. But he was the most coveteous
wretch, and the greatest flatterer that ever breathed. This was he who carried
the Ring of Maximus unto Isidore, and conducted her into the Garden: Now
because the Emperor desired that this business might be carried with all
secresy that was possible, he took none with him but this man, whom he
commanded to stay behind the Arbor, and to come unto him when he called.
Heracles, hearing the Emperors voice, ran presently unto him, thinking that
because Isidore would not consent unto the Emperors will, he called him to
help: but when he heard, that he was commanded to conduct her back: Is it
impossible Sir, (said he) that words should so far prevail, as to let so
fair an opportunity to slip? and to let her go without one touch? Shall a
little fear make you lose so fair an opportunity? Do you think she would have
given you such sweet language, but only to get out of your hands? Do you
insist upon what will be said concerning your self, or her? The worst report
that can be, will be only this, that you were infinitely in love with a fair
Lady. What hurt is there in all that? the worst will be but nine days wonder.
Whatsoever you do, will be done in secret betwixt you two, and what wound will
that be to any reputation. As for any matter of conscience alas Sir god knows,
that though you be Caesar yet you are but a man and will excuse it as a humane
slip as well in you as in others. If he should pardon none that are guilty of
such a crime he would be alone in heaven; few mortals would ever come there:
lose not therefore such an opportunity, which you will repent, if you let it
slip and make no use of it.

The wise Isidore, seeing the Emperor lend an ear unto the wicked persuasions
of Heracles, offered to answer unto what he had urged, but the Eunuch being
afraid, did interrupt her thus: Sir, (said he) do not hearken unto the voice of
this Siren who speaks only against her own conscience, and would be glad to
be forced unto that which she denies: believe it, if you let this opportunity
slip, she will disesteeme you, and mock you: and if you will give me leave to
hold her, she will thank me: and you shall see whether or no, I say true: Then
offering to lay hands upon her, she gave him such a blow upon the face, as
blood immediately gushed out of his nose: but the Eunuch being accustomed unto
such encounters, and seeing the Emperor said nothing, did get behind her, and
foulded her arms within his, so as she could not stir. Then she began to cry
out, and make the best defense she could; but all to no purpose: for the
Emperor, by the help of Heracles had what he desired of her. Ah Valentinian
(said she unto him) thou have done an act unworthy of thy self; and I will
dye, but I will be revenged; Then she fell upon Heracles and with her nails
and teeth, hurt him in a hundred places, and not being able to do him any more
hurt, she ran out of the Arbor to seek for something wherewith she might kill
both Valentinian and herself: but as fortune was she found nothing, she still
thinking upon this injury, would gladly have killed herself, she struck her
self upon the face, tore her hair, and used all the actions of one
transported. When Valentinian saw her in this condition; he began to persuade
her, to ask her pardon, to accuse the Eunuch, and promising to do for her
whatsoever she would ask. She being hardly able to stand, for weariness and
sorrow, sat down upon a seat, so much out of her self as she was hardly able
to speak. Valentinian came to her, did set himself down by her, continued
his supplications, and told her that her husband knew nothing of it; and then
related to her how he came by the Ring.

The Emperor told her this, to the end she should not tell Maximus and to give
her some consolation in knowing that her husband was ignorant of it: for her
greatest displeasure was, to think that her husband should consent unto it. But
when she heard that he was innocent, she was much better satisfied, hoping now,
that he would revenge her wrong. After she had sat sadly a long while and spoke
not a word, she constrained herself so, that Valentinian thought her a little
better satisfied: for she seemed much contented that Maximus knew nothing of
it, and conjured him to keep it secret both from him and all the world, to the
end she might live still in the good opinion of every one. The Emperor, who
did most passionatly love her, and who but for the Eunuch had never used any
force, he promised her with a thousand oaths that he would do whatsoever she
desired: and charged the Eunuch that he should never speak the least syllable
of it to any in the world. After she had tied up her hair, and dressed
herself as well as she could, she went home, where she expected the coming
home of her husband, whom Valentinian found still at play, and had recovered
some part of his losses: Night being come, he went home, where he was no sooner
come, but according to his custom he went to see his wise and dear Isidore:
she was in her closet all alone, so swelled with tears, as when he saw her he
was astonished and entreating him to sit down by her, husband (said she unto
him) do not wonder to see me in this condition: I have so much occasion for it,
that I will live no longer: but, before I die, satisfy me so far as to
swear, that you will revenge my death. Maximus, who did extremely love this
Lady, both for her wisdom and beauty, he came to her as his custom was, to
kiss her and to know what it was which so much troubled her. But she recoyled,
and said unto him: It is not reasonable, Maximus, that you should come any
nearer unto this defiled body; I am not now the same Isidore, whom you have so
much loved, and who never loved any but you. I am another woman, who dares not
call you Husband. The most wicked and cruel Tyrant that ever was, has defiled
me, and I will not live any longer, since I am not worthy to be your Wife. Upon
this, she related the whole passage unto him, and showed him the blood of
Heracles, which dropped upon her, as he held her. I should be too long and
tedious, if I did relate all the complaints which passed betwixt Maximus and
her.

But so it was, that Revenge was resolved upon; but he desired her, upon any
terms, not to shorten her days, lest she should incense the gods against her,
telling her, that he would carve her so much revenge, as should give her
satisfaction: He told her, that since there was not an act of her will
consenting, he should not think her the less chaste, nor less worthy of being
his Wife then before: And that in order to his design, he would have her
assure Valentinian, that she had never acquainted any with it, to the end, he
might think himself the more secure. She carried the matter so, that the
Emperor never made question of it, and she gave him back her Husbands Ring,
the better to persuade him. About this time, Eudoxe was brought to bed of a
Daughter which was called Eudoxe, after her own name; and about a year after,
was delivered of another, who bore the name of her Grandmother, Placidia.

In the mean time we were in Gaul, expecting Attilas, where Aetius was making
all necessary preparations. This Barbarian, having gathered together a very
vast Army, as I told you, he intended to fall upon Constantinople; but being
prevented in that by the wise conduct of Marcianus, and not being able to
maintain that world of People which followed him, either in Pannonia or
Germany, which was grown almost desert, by the passage of so many Nations
through it, he determined to fall upon the Western Empire, which was already
well shaked, and begun to totter. The assistance which Genserick King of the
Vandals promised unto him, was no small spur unto his design. This Vandal
having gotten the Daughter of Thierres King of the Goths, in marriage unto
Honorius his Son, he had a conceit, that she would poison him, and under this
pretense, he cut off her nose, and sent her back into Gaul unto her Father; and
standing in fear of his anger, he thought it most expedient for him to fortify
himself, with the friendship of the Hunnes, by promising them all manner of
assistance. Attilas who promised unto his ambition no less then all the
Western Empire, having recruited and put his Army into good equipage, he
marched toward Gaul; but first dispatched an Envoy unto Thierres, then the
most puissant King of all those that possessed it; for, he held almost all
Spain, and a great part of Gaul, that is to say, from the Pirennian Mountains
unto the Loyre. And because Attilas feared the grandeur of this puissant
Barbarian, he let him understand, that his coming into Gaul was only against
the Romans, and that they two would divide the Empire betwixt them, as soon as
it was overthrown. He sent the same message unto Gondioch, King of the
Burgundians, and unto the valiant Merovius, King of the Francks, and successor
unto Clodion, the Son of Pharamond. He treated and transacted so secretly with
Singiban King of the Almaines, as he promised to take his part. But Aetius, who
was as wise a Captain, as was in the whole world, knowing his subtlety, did
discover it unto these Kings, giving them to understand, that when the Romans
were defeated, Attilas would turn all his forces against them, and make them
Tributaries to himself, as he had already done Valamer and Ardarick, and the
rest of his Neighbors; and that the amity of the Emperor Valentinian, was
more necessary and honorable for them: Necessary, in respect that the Roman
Empire was so great, and surely established, that it was impossible for them,
having so puissant a Neighbor to their enemy, to sleep quietly in their
houses. As for Attilas, he was but a storm, which looked foul, but would
quickly be blown over. That the Amity of the Emperor was more honorable unto
them, because Valentinian was a great Prince, and a good, and that they were
already linked in amity with him. That he had given the Burgundians their
habitations where they dwelt; and that the amity of Vualius, with Constantius,
the Father of Valentinian, had gotten the Visigots all that they held in Gaul.
Briefly, That they had experience already of the Roman Empire, which might put
them out of all doubt: Whereas it would be a mad solly in them, to trust
Attilas, whose ambition was such, as that against all rights, both divine and
human, he would not suffer his Brother Bleda to be his partner, but miserably
put him to death. These Remonstrances caused the Francks, the Visigots, the
Burgundians, and the Almaines, to confederate themselves with Aetius against
Attilas, who, after some years, fell into Gaul, with five hundred thousand
fighting men: The first he fell upon was the Francks, plundering and firing
almost all their Towns; but it was only of such, as had not the courage to
pass over the Rheine with the first, who took up their habitations in Gaul. At
the last, he came to a City of Carnutes, called Orleans, which he besieged,
and doubtless had taken it, if the Francks and Visigots had not appeared with
such an Army, as constrained him to rise and go away. This Army, and that of
Aetius, was composed (as well as the Army of Attilas) of several Nations, as
of Francks Visigots, Sarmatians, Almaines, Armoriguans, La^esiuns, Burgundians,
Saxons, R^barolds, Auvergnians, Heduois, and several other people of Gaul,
together with Lombardian Auxiliaries. Attilas, mistaken in his attempt (for he
thought, that Sig^ban, King of the Almaines, would have put Orleans into his
hands) not knowing well whether he should fight or return, retreated unto the
plain of Mauriack, when enquiring of the Priests what would be the issue of the
Battle, they answered, that he should lose it; but the chief of the enemies
side should be killed. Attilas, who thought, that this must needs be Aetius, he
resolved to fight not caring which way it went, so this great Captain might die,
hoping afterward to recruit another Army, when his enemies wanting such a
Conductor, he would presently make the Roman Empire a Tributary. The next
morning therefore, Battle was given. I could give you a particular relation of
all the Fight, for I was in it, and fought next Aetius that day; but it would
be too long, and not pertinent to our discourse: But so it was, that Attilas
was overcome, and forced into his Camp, which he had fenced about with his
Carriages: And because he had an opinion, the Enemy would fall upon him there,
he caused a great heap to be made, of all the Saddles and Baggage of the Army,
intending to set it on fire, and to burn there, rather then to fall into the
hands of his enemies. I saw him that day, and the next morning also; and one
might plainly see, by his mind and garb, the vanity which was in the soul of
that man. But Priseus, Secretary unto Valentinian, who was sent into Syria,
before he came into Pannonia, he told me, that he never in all his life saw a
more imperious or haughty minded man, aiming at no less, then the Monarchy of
the whole world; and then gave himself the title of King of the Hunnes, Medes,
Goths, Danes, and Gepides. He also took upon him the title of, The terror of
the world and, the scourge of god. And because I asked him, whether his stature
was equal to his courage: he answered me, That he was rather low then tall;
that he had a large breast, a great head, little eyes, but quick and sparkling;
his nose flat, his hair brown; his strutting pace showed the pride of his
mind, and the whole Symmetry of his face, spoke him to be a lover of War.

Moreover, he was subtle; and though he was courageous, yet seldom used to
fight in person, unless in great extremity, reserving himself always for a
great necessity. As he was very cruel and inhumain to his enemies, so was he
very sweet and courteous to such as submitted, or having offended, asked
pardon; unto whom he would always keep promise inviolable, and defend them
against all whomsoever.

This character which Priseus gave of Attilas, at his return to Rome, did cause
Honorica, Sister unto Valentinian, to desire a Marriage with him, as afterward
I shall tell you. But in the mean time, to return unto Aetius, be pleased to
know, kind Silvander, that this great Captain being out of Attilas's danger,
yet he knew, that he was entering into a greater; for, should the Francks,
Burgundians, and Visigots, come to know their own strength, they might much
offend the Empire. To keep them therefore in some fear, he thought it expedient
to save Attilas, thinking, that the fear they would have of so great an enemy,
would keep them always united to the Emperor And because Thierres. King of
the Visigots, was slain in this Battle, and Thorismond and Thierres, his
Children, in revenge of their Father, would needs force Attilas in his Camp, he
seemed to love them much more, then he hated Attilas, and advised them to
return in all haste unto Toulouse, with the rest of their Army, lest their
Brothers who were left there, should seize upon the King dome in their absence.
Thorismond, who was of a distrustful nature, and knowing that he had three
other Brothers in the Country, called Frederick, Rotomer, and Honorick, also
taking Aetius for his friend, without more delay, he took the Body of his
Father, and went in all haste into Aquitain, where he was very well received,
his Brothers having no such intention, as Aetius persuaded him. These Forces
being thus separated from our Army, it remained so weak, that every one was of
opinion, that it was best to let Attilas go away; and that a prudent Captain
will make a Bridge of gold sometimes for his enemy to pass over. Thus
therefore this enemy of the Empire escaped the hands of Aetius; and though this
great Soldier had a good intention in it, yet afterward, the Emperor took it
very ill.

I always followed Aetius in all this last expedition, and durst not leave the
Army, as well because several occasions of fighting presented themselves, as
because the fair Eudoxe commanded me so to do, being desirous I should be
absent from her, lest any should take notice of my familiarity with her: god
only knows how much it was against my will, and how often I resolved to
depart, setting all considerations of duty and discre^^ behind me; but, when I
remembered the express command which she had laid upon me, I could not disobey
it. Yet I stayed therefore in the Army about twelve years, at the end of which
time, this Battle which I have told you of was fought. It Is true that in this
long exile, I received many Letters from Eudoxe, by which she did still
continue unto me assurances of her favor. And because I had a great desire to
do something, which was worthy the amity of so great a Princess, I let pass
no occasion of signalizing my self, and giving testimonies of my courage; by
this means I got much reputation in the Army, but more in the opinion of the
fair Eudoxe, who coming to the knowledge of it, by Letters which Aetius writ
unto the Emperor, she rejoiced at it. I shall as long as I live remember a
Letter which I received from her, after this great Battle; it was thus written.

Eudoxe's Letter unto Ursaces.
IT is only my Cavalier, that can astonish his enemies by his arm, and his
friends by his valor. Twice, to relieve the Roman Eagle, and recover it from
the Francks and Gepides; thrice in one day, to set Aetius upon his Horse, when
he was ready to be trodden in pieces by his enemies, are actions most worthy of
him, who has my heart. Since fortune has hitherto seconded your valor, I do
forbid you to venture your self so far for the future, as you have done for
the time past: And I command you to preserve your self, not as your own, but
as mine; have a care therefore of that which I give you to keep. And when
Aetius leaves the Army, come you also, and give me an account of it; that as
you have shared with him in his pains and dangers you may share also with him
in that honor and welcome, which all Italy will give him, and which I will
prepare for you.


During the time I was in the Army, I fell into a great intimacy with a young
Roman Cavalier, called Olimbres, the same you see here; many good Offices
passed betwixt one another, as in such places many occasions fall out, which
tie such knots of friendship, as never are loosed, so as nothing ever since
could separate us. This Cavalier, in respect of the amity betwixt us, was so
much in favor with Eudoxe, that he was called to the Senate, and created a
Senator: And certainly, next her, he prised my friendship at the highest rate,
unless Placidias; for you must know, that the intimacy of affection which was
betwixt us, would never let us part, since the first beginning of our
acquaintance, unless it were in the service of each other. So as he seeing me
resolved upon a return for Rome, when Aetius returned, he would needs come with
me; and since, nothing could be so secret, which was not communicated unto one
another; I freely acquainted him with my affection to Eudoxe, and her favors
to me, yet imposed a strict injunction of secrecy upon him, and to take no
notice of it lest she should be offended at me. This declaration was a cause,
that he growing into familiarity with Eudoxe, he presumed so high, as to cast
his eye upon Placidia, her Daughter, and began to court her, when she was not
above twelve years of age, showing in this a sympathy of humor betwixt him and
me; for, it was at the same age when I began to court her Mother, whom this her
Daughter did much resemble. Olimbres was younger then I, being then not above
seven and twenty years of age, and I about thirty five, and the fair Eudoxe
about thirty. The fair Eudoxe and I took notice of this growing affection, and
Placidia did not give it any check. And though Olimbres was neither King nor
Emperor, yet Eudoxe was not offended against this affection, because Olimbres
was very rich, and of as illustrious a Race, as any in Rome, his Father,
Grandfather, and great-Grandfather, being all Senators, and oftentimes
Consulls; so as upon these considerations, so it came not to the eye of the
Emperor, she was not against it, especially for the friendship sake, that was
betwixt him and me.

I thought fit to acquaint you with these things, before I related my reception
by the fair Eudoxe, lest I should be constrained to interrupt my discourse.

Know therefore, kind Silvander, that we returning with Aetius, we were
welcomed into Italy with all possible honor and thanks; the Roman-people made
such acclamations, when this great Captain entered into the Town, that never was
a greater triumph. But the Emperor had no great liking unto all this; for,
this grandeur of courage which was in Aetius, the prudence wherewith he managed
all ^is actions, the applaud which the people gave him, and the honor which
all Italy rendered him, did make Valentinian so jealous of the grandeur of
Aetius, as he ever after looked asquint upon him, and was apt to hearken and
consent unto any ill counsel that was given him. But for my part, who looked
after no matters of State, but was wholly intent upon the favor of the fair
Eudoxe, as soon as I arrived with Aetius, and had kissed the Emperors hand, I
went unto the Empress, where, pretending I had some business with her from my
General, I saw her in private, and received such a welcome, as my twelve years
seemed well employed, since army return I received such extraordinary favors.
Being at the last constrained to go out of her Closet, lost my too long stay
should beget suspicion, I went unto the wise Isidore, as to one, whom, next
Eudoxe, I loved and honored most; but, I found her so changed from what she
was wont to be, as I wondered at it: I asked her the cause, but all the answer I
could get, was tears, at which I wondered more: I thought at first, that cares
of Marriage might perhaps be the cause; or else perhaps, her Husband was very
sharp with her, or else disdained her for some other; and this doubt made me
shorten my visit sooner then I would: But when afterward I observed, that
Maximus did love her, and infinitely carrassed her; and when I looked upon the
riches and plenty of his house, I was quite out of my first opinion, and could
not imagine what should be the cause of her sadness. But one night, as I was
talking with the fair Eudoxe, I understood, that she came very seldom at
Court, and was so altered, as she hardly knew her. I began presently to suspect
the business, though not all, yet in part; and enquiring whether the love of
Valentinian continued; unto which she answering, that she never took any notice
of it: Believe it, my Princess, said I unto her, that there is some ill
understanding betwixt them; the Emperor has done her some displeasure, or
would do, and that keeps her from coming to the Court; for, you have not
driven her away by any disfavour, her Husband is not unkind, Domestic affairs
cannot trouble her; and therefore her grief must proceed from some higher
cause: Were it any malady of body, it would appear. I do believe, (said she)
that you are in the right; for, she never sees me, but with tears in her eyes;
and when the Emperor comes where she is, I shall see her change presently, and
go away as soon as possibly she can: I have often asked her the reason, but I
could never get her to tell me. Upon these considerations, she commanded me to
go unto her from her, and use my best endeavors to discover the cause; but all
my labor was lost, and I could find out nothing, but a great animosity
against the Emperor. When I made this report unto Eudoxe, I advised her to
seem, as if she knew something concerning Valentinian, and that perhaps would
make her discover more. And it happened as I did imagine; for, being one night
all three in the Closet of the Empress, and Isidore falling into her usual
tears, Eudoxe seemed unto her, as if she knew the cause; upon which, she began
to confess unto us, the injury which the Emperor had done her, and fell into
such passionate expressions against him, as the fair Eudoxe could not choose,
but accompany her in her tears. I did extremely compassionate this good Lady,
and I must confess, that had it been any but the Emperor, I should have
offered her my hand and sword, in revenge of the wrong do (...) to her: but
against him, whom I acknowledged for my Lord, unto whom I had pro(...) my
fidelity, and from whom I had received many benefits and much honor, (...)ld
sooner have dyed, then entertained any thought of such a thing, or attempted
any thing against him or his Estate. When they had condoled together a long
while, and that I could speak unto Eudoxe: Madam, said I unto her, methinks
you have now a good occasion offered to make me the most happy man alive. How,
answered she? You may, my fairest Princess, said I unto her, revenge your
self, by the same arms you are injured, and do three or four actions worthy
of your self: First, you will be revenged upon him that has wronged you;
next, you will give some satisfaction to your dear Isidore; and you will
recompense me, and make me the most contented man upon earth. The wise Isidore,
who had not spoke a long time, by reason of her tears, did reply before the
Empress: Madam, (said she, and fell upon her knees) I protest unto you, I
conceive, that this is the most just revenge and best, that I can any way
receive; nor is it reasonable, that he who does so ill requite a happiness,
which the heavens have given him, should enjoy it without the same measure that
he uses unto others. Madam, he is unworthy of you, and you are unjust, if you
continue any longer his: The injury which he has done unto you, his
ingratitude unto the Emperor your Father, the dishonor he has done unto your
House, and the affront put upon the miserable Isidore, whom you have heretofore
loved, does invite you to grant the request, which Ursaces makes unto you: What
harm can come unto you by it? You do love this Cavalier, he is discreet, none
can ever know it, and you may this way sweetly revenge an injury, which is any
other way irreparable. The Empress smiled, and answered us: Persons that are
interrested, are not complete judges; you do both of you advise me to a
revenge, which will offend me much more then before: If the Emperor have
committed a fault, it is true, I do receive an injury by it; but since I have
not the dispose of his actions, I am not culpable of his crime. Now should I
commit the same fault, I should be culpable as well as he. Fairest Princess,
(said I, and interrupted her) there is a great deal of difference betwixt the
cases; for, you shall never hear me complain of any force, which you have used
upon me. I do believe, answered she, that it would be an act of your free will;
yet, let me tell you, that if you will be truly my Cavalier, you must make it
an act against your will; for, that title does oblige you, to preserve my
honor as deerly as my life. Madam, answered I, I know not why you may not take
this revenge, nor can I see which way it should concern your honor, since none
shall ever know it. If none do know it, answered she, then where is the
revenge, for that which is never known, nor resented, is as if it never were?
But, my Cavalier, I should be glad of revenge, so it could be without any
injury unto my self; and since this way cannot be, but upon that score, let us
talk no more of it, and turn our thoughts upon something else. The wise
discourse of this great Princess, did stop both our mouths; All we were able
to answer her, was, that she deserved a better Husband then Valentinian, or
else, Valentinian a worse Wife then Eudoxe.

However, the refusal of this way of revenge, which perhaps had contented the
mind of this offended Lady, was a cause, that Isidore, never letting her
Husband rest, did continually solicit him to revenge the injury, which both he
and she had received. Maximus, who had not forgot it, but only seemed so, that
he might the more home-ly execute his Design, he studied night and day which
way he should bring it to pass: At last, aiming at no less revenge then the
life of the Offender, he thought, that if he did attempt any thing against the
Emperor, his Forces that were in the hands of Aetius, and the authority and
prudence of that great Captain, might be his own ruin; therefore he thought it
much conducible unto his design, to take Aetius out of the world, and
Valentinian being weak on that side, might be the more easily ruined: But when
this course was resolved upon, all the difficulty was, to execute it; for, the
great power of this valiant Commander was such, as it was a very hard matter to
hurt him by force; and his prudence and circumspection was so great, that any
policy could not deceive him. He thought therefore, that there could be no
better instrument of his ruin, then Valentinian himself, whom he knew to be
of a very jealous nature, guided by vile and unworthy persons, and feared the
very shadow of any danger. He addressed himself unto Heracles, who ever since,
as a secret punishment of heaven, did bear the marks of Isidore's nails in his
(...) he acquainted him with the suspicious grandeur of Aetius, the honor all
Ita^^ (...) him at his return, the applauds which every one gave him, the love
which the people bare him, the affection of the Soldiers, the riches he had
gotten in Gaul, his liberality, or rather prodigality toward all the credit he
had amongst strangers, the correspondency he held with the Empire's enemies;
and briefly, to confirm all suspicion, he instanced, how when he might have
quite ruined Attilas, he saved him, and gave him passage, with a promise
probably of assistance in his pernicious design: That since, he has made unto
himself a friend, not only of the Visigots and Burgundians, who are already in
Gaul, but also of the Francks and Vandals, by the means of whom, he has ruined
the affairs of the Empire, both in Africa and Spain: Also by tampering with
the Angles, has lost Britain and almost all America; and that his ambition
was so great, that if he be not prevented, much dange may be expected to ensue.
That for his part, he concluded, that for the public safty, it was expedient
to banish him, not only out of the Empire, but out of the World, because a man
so ambitious as he was, would never be won, either by fair means or soul.
Heracles, who was naturally pusillanimous and effeminate, and consequently very
suspicious and cruel, was easily persuaded, that Aetius had some ill designs,
and that it was requisite he should be prevented. In this opinion, after thanks
unto Maximus, for his care of the Empire and public good, he went unto
Valentinian into whom he infused such aprehensions of great and sudden danger,
that he caused Aetius to be killed the very same day by his Eunuchs; an act,
which rendered him so odious unto every one, as from that time, he almost ceased
to be Emperor, being obeyed only as a Tyrant; and certainly, he sound
presently after, that Proxmus, a Roman Knight, answered him very truly, when he
asked him, whether he had not done well in killing Aetius: As for that,
(answered he) I leave it unto your own judgment; but I know very well, that
your left hand has cut off your right. For, Aitlas moved by the love of
Honorica, who had sent him her Picture, and being ill treated by her Brother,
desired to be out of his hands, and to marry this Barbarian King: Moreover,
being exasperated by his ambition, seeing his grand enemy Aetius dead, he put
his Army into a posture, and fell upon Italy so furiously, that our first
Forces which opposed him were defeated, and none but Towns held head against
him, amongst the rest Aquilea, which, after a three years Siege, he took, and
pulled it down to the ground. The Padoans at the same time, and a People called
the Venteians, flying from the fury of Aetilas, retired themselves into some
little Isles of the Adriatic Sea, with their Wives, Children, and Goods, and
all that was precious unto them, where draining the Lakes and Marshes which
they found there, did plant themselves. At the first, they called the place
Rialte, meaning, as I think, Rive-al^e, which signifies a high Bank, because
the place there is higher then the rest. And since finding the place
convenient, they rested there, and afterward called it Venice, and the
Inhabitants Venetians. As soon as Aquilea was demolished, all those that could
save themselves, did run to these Isles which were about Rialte, and there
built Guards. Those of Concord Gaorly, those of Altine Vorcelly; briefly,
those of Vincentia, of Bresse, of Mantua, of Bergame, of Millaine, and of
Pavia, seeing how safely these first lived in those places, they retired
thither also; and building together as well as they could, they became such
friends, that since, they make but one People, who being composed of several
Nations, could not agree upon the election of a King; but, to remove all
jealousy, did agree upon common Laws, and began to live in the way of a
republic, distinct, and separate from the Empire.

The reason why I have so long insisted upon this, is, because all Astrologers,
who have calculated the fate of these fugitives, do say, that never was
Republic founded upon so happy a point as this; not for any great and large
extent of Dominion, but for its long continuance, which seems, as if it would
never have an end, until all things sublunary must have an universal change;
their lives are very pleasant their Laws are very good, and they are excellent
both in Peace and War; their Armies have been victorious; God has given them
the Sea for their Walls, and does in every respect favor them, so as there is
great likelihood of future Grandeur. These Isles do not now appear to be Isles,
but a great City, built upon an infinite number of Bridges; the Sea is their
streets, which running through in so many parts with so much art is admirable
as well as their original. But to return to our (...) from whence I
digressed, after Attilas had taken Aquilea, he made toward Rome: and
doubtless had sacked it, if Valentinian for want of corrage had not rendered
himself Tributary; and consented that his Sister Honorica, should be his wife.
But this dishonorable peace being made, he retired into Pannonia, where upon
his marriage night, and after abundance of wine and banquet, being gone to bed
he was found dead in it, in the morning Some said it was by bleeding at the
nose which choked him: others, that he was killed by one of his wives: which
way soever it was, he dyed the very night of his marriage easing the Empire, by
this mean, both of fear and Tribute. Valentinian in this necessity, found
what a fault he had committed in killing Aetius, having not one Captain that
could stop this Barbarian nor any that cared for doing him service, since he
had showed himself so bad a pay master. For my part, I was ashamed to be in
Italy, and see things in such strange desolation; and would have tried to have
ruined my self with it, had I not by Valentinians and Eudoxes command been
sent unto the Emperor Marcian to demand aid, as soon as Aquilea was
besieged: but I found Marcian very faint toward Valentinian, as well because
of Aetius his death, as because Attiles sent him word, that his coming into
Italy was only to obtain Honorica, with whom he was in love. And knowing that
Valentinian did obstinately deny her unto him, he would not relieve him in this
necessity into which he had brought himself by his ill government, and without
reason. Whilst I was negotiating this business, I fell so sick, that every
one left me for dead and some told Eudoxe that they saw me buried. You may
imagine how she mourned for me: for I may truly say that never any loved more
then she me: my disease was very dangerous being a spotted Fever and I
continued in it, above eight months, and a friend of mine did write unto
Isdore intimating my condition, for I was not able to write my self. In
conclusion, having stayed in Constaninople some eighteen or twenty months to
no purpose, I resolved to take ship for Ravenna, where Valentinian was
retreated with Eudoxe for his safety.

Italy, being thus settled in peace Petronius Maximus the husband of wise
Isidore. began to think upon his revenge, all things seeming to second his
design. He was a man of great Authority in the Empire; For he was Patriarch,
and having a design of revenge, and happily to make himself Emperor, he had
long beforehand gotten the love of the people and the Soldier; of the one by
his liberality for he was very rich; and of the other by his popularity in
seconding all requests which was made for the ease and freedom of the people.
And to render Valentinian odious unto every one, he advised him secretly not to
recompense the Soldiers either with honors or benefits, and to lay such a
load of taxes upon the people, as should always keep them poor, and unable
to attempt any novelty; and the better to accomplish his design, he
exasperated all the friends of the great Aetius, as much as possible he could,
and courted himself into intimat familiarity with them. The Emperor never
doubted of any of these things, for he knew Maximus was of opinion that it was
best to ruin Aetius: besides it was now so long since the murder was
committed, that he believed every one had forgotten it. And as for his injury
done unto the wise Isidore, he believed she had not acquainted her husband with
it, since in so many years he never made show of any discontent Briefly, he
lived in such a careless security, that he permitted the greatest friends of
Aetius to be about his person. Which Maximus having long observed, and seeking
for a means how to satisfy the wise Isidore, who was continually putting him
in mind of it, one day taking Thrasiles apart who was one of the greatest
friends which Aetius had, and who then had the guard of the Emperors person,
he set before his eyes the untimely death of his friend, and the carelessnesse
of Valentinian, intimating what an easy matter it was to take revenge upon
him; in so much as he molded him unto his own will: And not being content
with revenge only, he went further, and resolved to usurp the Empire: Maximus
told Thrasiles that when this was come to pass, he should find full
satisfaction and contentment. This resolution being taken, it was not long
before it was put in execution: For Thrasiles had the opportunity when he
would, being always near the person of the Emperor. One day therefore when
Valentinian dyned in private, Thrasiles and Maximus; did miserably murder him
and Heracles the Eunuch, not for any offense that he made, but for the counsel
which he gave the ^^perour when the wise Isidore was forced. Thus dyed
Valentinian after he had raign^ ^^irty years. Had I been near his person at
that time, doubtless I had dyed in defense of him: For though the act which he
had committed against Isidore was wicked; yet there can be no cause whatsoever,
for lifting up a hand against a Sovereign. Advise one may, but never chastise,
much less take that life away, which to save he ought to lose his own. I was
then at the sacrifice with the fair Eudixe, where the tumult was so great,
that for safety of herself she was forced to go out of Rome. For Maximus
having committed this homicide he knew that wickedness must never be done by
halves; and therefore finding the power in his hands, by the means of
Thrasiles, and some whose friendship he had gotten, and also being assured of
the peoples consent, he presently caused himself to be elected and proclaimed
Emperor: and all this without the least opposition though the Town was full
of tumult. Isidore was presently advertised of it, both by her husband, and by
the common report of Valentinians death. And she had such an inveterate hatred
of him, that she could not believe unless she saw him dead. Therefore she left
her house and went to the Palace, and seeing his corpse without a head, she
washed her hands in his blood, and received such a strange contentment in his
death, that for very excess of joy, she fell down dead. I was then, as I told
you, with the fair Eudoxe, and would not leave her in such a dysastrous
fortune; but waited upon her whither soever she pleased, in testimony of my
affection and fidelity. The haste we made was such, that we hardly took any
with us. And losing our way in the night we were forced to take up lodging in a
wood: She had none with her but her two Daughters, Olimbres, and two young men
who usually followed us, and who were much troubled in looking to our horses:
So as there was none with her all the night but these two young Princesses;
Olimbres, and my self. I did lie down upon the ground, and she laid her head
upon my breast, her two Daughters lay at her feet; and thus passed away the
night as well as we could. Our intention was to get out of Italy, and to go
unto Constantinople to Marcianus: For since Maximus had killed the Emperor, and
had taken upon him the title of Augustus, we feared he would be revenged upon
her for the injury done unto Isidore. Though the night was very dark, and sad
to the fair Eudoxe, yet I must confess it was the sweetest night unto me,
that ever I had in my life: for I had my hand continually in her bosom, and
her lips close unto mine. Love knows how I was thus transported, and how often I
was ready to cast off all respect. Which she perceiving, and finding her
Daughters to be both asleep, she whispered me in my ear, and said thus unto
me: Fie, fie, my Cavalier, do you think the gods are not enough incensed
against me, but you must needs provoke them more by mooving me to commit fresh
offenses? After this she was silent, and giving me a kiss, she laid her head
where it was before: this was a sufficient testimony that she loved me, and
after this favor I laid my mouth unto her ear, and said thus unto her. But,
my fairest Princess, what offense would it be, since now you are nobodies but
your own? Would you have me stay until another shall enjoy you before my
face? Is it possible you should reserve your self for one who never loved you,
or for one that can never love you so well as I? Then she set her mouth unto my
ear: My Cavalier, (said she unto me) do not offer to offend against god or my
honor: and, to put you out of all these doubts, receive this Vow. I do vow
and swear unto you Ursaces, by the great god whom I adore, that I will never
marry any man but you: and if what I have been, would permit me freely to
dispose of my self, I would take you to my husband this very hour: I do
believe your affection such unto me that after I have been Empress you would
not have me hold a less degree: Fortune perhaps will so dispose of you, that I
may with honor give you contentment, and then, curse me if I prove false. In
the mean time, live with this satisfaction, that I will never marry any but
you: and for assurance of what I swear, take this kiss, and then joining her
lips to mine, she continued very long upon them: Judge, kind stranger, whether
I did receive the oaths with all my heart, since I never desired any thing
more passionately. Then I answered her thus: My fairest Princess, I receive
this promise with such a thankful heart, and affectionate soul that in
exchange I do entirely give you my self. And I do vow and protest that I will
never revoke my gift: but give me leave to swear by that great God, before
whom you have made this promise that if ever it happen with your consent or
otherwise, that any one do enjoy you as a husband, I will kill him with the
same hand which now you hold in yours: Unto which she said in mine ear, I
shall hold you for a faint hearted Traitor, if you do not: After this, she laid
down her head, and we passed away the night as we begun it: But alas I did not
long enjoy this happiness of being with her, no more then my friend. Olimbres
the happiness of being with Placidia: For the next morning, the Tyrant Maximus
hearing that Eudoxe and her two Daughters were escaped, he sent so many men
several ways, as at the last they found us, and carried us back, do what
Olimbres and I could in defense of ourselves: Who after several wounds, and I
more then Olimbres, we were carried to this Tyrant: who not being contented
with the murder of Valentinian and usurping the Empire, but would take a full
revenge or rather a confirmation of his usurpation, and, to give it a gloss,
would marry the fair Eudoxe: Oh heavens? what would she not have done to
prevent it? But, Oh heavens! how did I resent it? I was so wounded both in my
thigh and in my right arm, that I was not able to stir out of my bed: so as
I was disabled from doing her any service. In conclusion, the Tyrant seeing
that Eudoxe would not consent unto his will by fair means, he used her so
coorsly that within twelve days after the death of Valentinian, he forced
Eudoxe to be his wife. I heard the news of it by Olimbres who was already
recovered, and who never stirred from my beds side. And when I knew not how to
judge of this Act, but was in doubt of Eudoxes consent, I received a Letter
from her which was this.

Eudoxes Letter unto Ursaces.
IF Eudoxe be not miserable, then never any in the world was. I am in the hands
of a bloody Tyrant, who has forced me unto an unjust marriage: I call the
great God by whom I swear unto you for a witness that I never did nor will
consent unto it with my heart or will: I summon you to the promise which you
made at that time. If you permit me to lament my sad fortune to see my self in
his hands, who has so unjustly ravished me from you, I shall curse you, and
accuse you with want of affection: Keep therefore your word as I will mine, and
let sat do her worst.


What attempts would I not have dared, if my power had been equal to my will?
or if my wounds had permitted me? But alas I was in a condition far unfit to
do any thing to another, when I was not able to run my self through with my
sword, when I heard Eudoxe was to be enjoyed by a Tyrant: and but for Olimbres,
perhaps I had served my own turn, for he was so careful of me that I could
not do any thing to my self; but gave me so many diverting reasons to the
contrary, that he kept me alive nine or ten days till I was so happy as to
see the wise and fair Eudoxe enter into my chamber. She had obtained this
leave of Maximus, telling him it was but reasonable to see him who had been
wounded in her defense: Maximus who desired to gain me by fair means if
possible, and having no suspicion of me, so handsomely did we carry the matter,
and so discreet and faithful was Isidore unto her Mistress, that Maximus
permitted her. So she came to see me, and leaving all her followers at the
door, she brought with her none but the little Princess Placidia, knowing that
Olimbres would so entertain her in discourse, as she would not mind what she
said. She came to my beds side, and sitting down offered to speak, but could
not: At last seeing tears flow from mine eyes, and that I was not able to
utter one word, she turned herself, so that none should observe our grief.
Thus silently we sat along while; and spoke not one word. At last having took
a little courage I spoke these words. For ought I see Madam, there is none
losers by the bargain but Valentinian and Ursaces: He in losing his life his
Empire and his wife: and I the favor of the fair Eudoxe. But alas his loss
is nothing unto mine, for being dead he has lost all sensibility of misery, and
I that am alive can only be called miserable because I do resent my misery.
She answered me, first with her tears which she could not restrain, and then
by her words: Will you, my Cavalier, help to augment my grief, and in lieu of
giving me some comfort and pity, will you by your reproaches make me more
miserable? But it is well done; I am contented to be killed, since I see
Ursaces does not love me. Oh heavens, cried I, as loud as I could, being
offended at her words, and sorry I had cried so loud, for two or three came
running to me to know what I ayled, to whom I answered that my wounds pained,
(but the pain was gone) and when they were gone also I began to speak again.
How Madam? Does not Ursaces love you? Can you say it, and not blush? are you
not afraid the heavens will punish you for the wrong you do me? Ursaces not
love you Madam? how long have you known him changed? was it before Valentinian
dyed? No, you have writ the contrary. Was it since his death? No surely, you
cannot choose but remember my vows and promise. But perhaps it is since the
wrong you have done me in giving your self unto this cruel Tyrant. If so, it is
time indeed to change my miserable life for a happy death: but you may thank
Olimbres that I live, for he only has hindered me from dying. But since I live,
you may be certain, that you shall live no longer then till I recover so much
strength as to take a life away: though you do not love me yet you might well
have rendered me some testimony of pity. But what pity or compassion can I
expect from the wife of a Tyrant? how can I ever think you any thing but a
piece of ingratitude? if you would live and enjoy your tyranicall husband: do
you your self reach me my sword, that you may save your own life and his, and
see that it is not want of will but strength that keeps me alive. She not being
able to endure I should continue any longer, coming nearer answered me thus In
saying that Valentinian and you are the only losers, you might very well have
put me into the number, for since you do not love me, my loss is the greatest
of all: Did I not fear our discourse would be observed, I would say more, and
swear that I love none but you, and beseech you to believe that as you are
kept alive by force, so revenge keeps me, for I do not take this Maximus either
for husband or Emperor; but for the most cruel Tyrant that ever was in Rome:
Were it not in desire and hopes of this revenge, I would not live a minute, and
see you thus wounded. But heaven which is just does promise me revenge for the
blood of Valentinian, and for the wrong which is done unto Ursaces and the
miserable Eudoxe. In the mean time (my Cavalier) take corrage and recover of
your wounds as soon as you can, for there is no other means to come unto our
desired ends, but that. This declaration was comfort enough to my soul, in so
much as I recovered of my wounds very suddenly: For this time, she would say
no more, but went away, to prevent all suspicion of our design. But about
three or four days after, she came to see me again, told me the manner how
Maximus had killed Valentinian, and how he intended to marry her, as he said
himself, at which she was so extremely offended as she resolved to dispatch
him some way or other, out of the world. Oh my Princess, (said I unto her) you
must do nothing imprudently, for if you once failn your enterprise, you can
never after hope to attempt it without abundance of danger to your self;
besides, you would do me very great wrong, if you employ any other hand but
mine in the blood of him who is the Parricide of my Sovereign, and the ravisher
of you. This is the course which I conceive best to be taken: Valentinian, long
before Attilas turned his arms against Italy, had concluded a peace with
Genserick King of the Vandals, and left all that he had in Africa unto him,
upon condition he should be his friend and confederate. This Barbarian has
ever since made great demonstrations of love unto the Emperor, and would never
take part with any that were his enemies: Make known unto him the wicked
machinations of Maximus; acquaint him with the murder of Valentinian; show him
how he has usurped the Empire: complain unto him of the force he offers
unto you, and summon him unto the promise upon which Africa is his: Fear not
but he will relieve you: for though he be a Barbarian, yet he is generous, and
it is their National virtue to keep promise unto death, and more unto the dead
then unto their loving friends: Now, to make sure work, because all these
Barbarians are naturally greedy and covetous, offer him the Empire, that he may
be more eager upon it: tell him what friends and means you can make for him in
Italy. And that you are able to make his way easy unto him, by the assistance
of those who are adherents unto you against the murderer of the Emperor: now
though I must need say, it is hard to endure, that any Barbarian should ever
Lord it in Italy; yet better so, then to be without revenge. Eudixe considering
a while upon what I said, did answer me, that all the difficulty in the
business would be, how to treat so secretly and speedily with this Barbarian,
that he might be in Italy before it was discovered; and considering my present
condition, she knew not whom to employ, that would be quick enough in the
expedition; that she had rather die a hundred deaths, then ever Bed with this
Tyrant; that she could put it off a while, by counterfeiting sickness, but
that could not be long. I advised her to continue her counterfeiting and the
better to delude the eyes of those who saw her, that she should every morning
use the some of Brimstone to her face and hands, which would make her look so
pale, that every one would believe her really sick. As for dispatching into
Africa, it was my misfortune to be in such a case, that I could not; and
besides, I had made a vow never to go out of Italy, until I had killed the
Tyrant: But that she might very well trust my dear friend Olimbres, who, I was
sure, would be both faithful and diligent in her commands, and that I would
answer for his fidelity and capacity. She, who desired nothing more then
revenge, and to be out of this Tyrants power, referred the whole management
unto me, and desired me to dispatch him with instructions, which I did; and
Olimbres showed himself so wise and diligent, that within fifteen days he
arrived at Carthage, negotiated so with Genserick, as he disposed him unto
Revenge, unto Usurpation, and to the Plunder of Rome; insomuch as within two
months after, he set foot in Italy, with three hundred thousand fighting men,
composed of Affricans, Moors, and Vandals, which put such a terror into the
City and all the Province, that every one fled to the Mountains, Woods, and
Rocks. And because we did solicit him to come straight to Rome, that he might
take the Tyrant, he made all the haste that possible he could, without any
halt, or stay in any Towns by the way.

This put Maximus into such a fright, as without seeking to make any
resistance, he permitted every one to shift for themselves as well as they
could, and for his part, he fled into the Mountains with the rest. I was by
this time well recovered of my wounds; and had not the fair Eudoxe charged me
to the contrary, I had executed my design; but she still restrained me, until
for more safety, the Vandal was nearer the Town. But now, seeing that in lieu
of defending his usurped Estate, he left it as a prey unto the Barbarians, I
was afraid lest he should save himself, and that when Genserick had left
Italy, he would then return again unto his Tyranny. This was the reason why I
followed after him, with some of my friends, and overtook him upon the banks of
Tiber; and though most of my Company was tired out, yet I resolved to charge
him, and let him go no farther. I challenged him therefore, and charged him
with his wickedness, in the death of the Emperor, in the usurpation of Italy,
and in the force used against Eudoxe; and being guilty of all, he refused to
fight with me, but spurred away as fast as he could: At which his own men were
so ashamed and animated, that all joining with my friends, they rid after him,
and by chance, my Horse having better heels then the rest, I first overtook
him, and gave him such a blow upon the head, that he fell to the ground, where
those that came after me, dispatched him outright, so much was every one
incensed against him, for his perfidie and cowardice. Thus ended this Tyrant,
so hated by his own men, as when he was dead, they cut him in pieces, and threw
him into the River, as if they would wash away his crimes in that manner; but
all the water in the River Tiber could not wash away half of those which he
had committed, against the Emperor, against the fair Eudoxe, and against the
State.

I have hitherto related the miserable accidents which befell Eudoxe and me but
these which I have now to relate, are much more dysastrous; for alas; they have
brought me into this miserable condition in which you see me. Now did Genserick
enter the City and he found no resistance, not so much as a door shut against
him. Eudoxe received him, giving him the title of Augustus, and telling him,
that the Empire owed their liberty unto him; and, briefly, did him all the
honor, and gave him all the thanks, that was possible. But this Barbarian, in
lieu of being more gentle and affable by these favors, they made him more
haughty and intolerable; In lieu of friendship, he proved an enemy, and carried
himself, not as a Prince who came to relieve a distressed Princess, but as a
Conqueror, who by force of Arms, after a long War, had conquered an enemies
Country. He gave up the Town for plunder, and making no difference between
sacred and profane things, he pillaged the Temples of all their Vessels and
Treasures, and of all those Rarities, which the people and Roman Emperors for
many ages, had, out of their devotion, presented unto them. And after this sad
confusion had lasted fifteen days, he ran over most part of Italy, till he
came to Parthenopea, where he did nothing but waste and spoil the Country; and
when he was even glutted with spoil and rapine, he returned into Africa,
having loadned his Ships with the riches and rarities that he found in the
City. But alas, not being contented with these inanimate things, he ravished
away with him such persons, as he thought might be useful to him, and amongst
the rest, Oh heavens! he carried away the fair Eudoxe and her two Daughters,
Eudoxe and Placidia: I was then close by this desolate Princess, when he sent
her word, that she was to prepare for her departure within three days after:
She fell into a swound at the message, and was very near death; but I wish to
heaven, that she and I had both dyed, rather then carried captives into
Africa. Oh heavens, how can I remember this accident and live? I went out of
Rome with some of my friends, not acquainting any with my design, not so much
as my deer friend Olimbres, with whom I could not speak when I went, because he
was with Genserick, who had taken him into his friendship, since his Affrican
voyage, and who by Eudoxe's command never stirred from him that he might save
the Town as much as possible; so as at his request, he did many favors unto
several persons. I sent afterward to him, to the end he should assure Eudoxe,
that I would either get her out of these barbarous hand or die. She, who had a
very solid and sound judgment, did know very well, that my enterprise was
impossible by reason of that numerous body of men that Genserick brought with
him, which exceeded the number of three hundred thousand men: Had she known
where I was, doubtless she had kept me from executing my design; but, lest I
should be surprised by the Vandals, I never stayed a whole night in a place I
had rallied together about a thousand Horse, and if I had had a little more
time perhaps I had got up such an Army, as should have eased these Barbarians
of our spoils, which they were carrying into Africa, or at least, should have
felt the weight of a Roman Arm; but I had only eight days time. And not being
able to endure they should carry away Eudoxe, I resolved to fight this great
and terrible Army, with this little handful of men, thinking my life could not
end upon a more noble account, nor in a better cause. Having ambuscado'd my
self in a Wood, near the way of Hostia, I saw some part of this great Army
march in very bad order; but my aim being only at Eudoxe, I kept my self
still close, till I saw some Chariots coming, in which I perceived some
Ladies; and supposing them to be the same I did expect, I encouraged my men,
telling them, that this would be an act worthy of a Roman name. Upon setting
spurs to my Horse, and they most courageously following me, we charged these
Chariots, whose Guard was above ten thousand Barbarians. I shall not relate the
passage of this charge, for it is impertinent: But so it was that we routed
them; and had Eudoxe been there, as I thought she was doubtless I had
delivered her out of these barbarous hands: but, as ill luck was she was still
behind; and those Ladies which I saw, were such, as had been taken in the City
and Country, and were to be carried with the rest of the Booty into Africa. Oh
heavens! how was I grieved, when I saw my self thus mistaken? and had all the
Army on my back; for, upon this Tumult, the Vanguard recoyled, and the
Reerguard advanced and drew into Battalia; so as I was environed on all sides
with so great a number of enemies, as we could expect nothing but ruin: Some
ran away, others stayed; for my part I laid me down amongst the dead, and was
stripped of my clothes as they were; and it was happy for me, for my clothes
being carried by a Soldier, Eudoxe knew them and showed them unto Olimbres,
who would not leave her. All that she said, was: I see, Ursaces, at the last
has met with that Rest, which Fortune ever denied him. Upon this expression,
she swouned in her Chariot. Olimbres running after him who had my clothes, he
asked where he got them; and being told the place, he went presently unto it,
and sought till he found me; how sad was he, when he saw me! However, he got
leave of the Vandal, to do me the last office of burial: He would needs return
to Rome, and have me carried also upon Boughs. I was so jogged in the carriage,
that I gave some signs of life. Olimbres seeing this, was beyond all measure
glad, and brought me into the first house they came unto, where I received such
Cordialls, as I recovered out of my long swoun. You may imagine, Silvander, how
glad I was, when carrying my friend to his grave, I found him alive; those who
saw me did plainly see, that his life was as deer unto me as my own; yet, we
had both been happy had we ended our days then, for then I should not have
grieved at the absence and ravishment of the fair Eudoxe, nor Olimbres, at
parting from his dear Placidia. This consideration made me resolve upon death,
as soon as I heard this persidious Genserick had carried Eudoxe and her two
Daughters away; but the great care which my friend had of me, kept me from the
execution of my design, as long as my wounds kept me in bed. But when I had
recovered my self of these wounds, and was able to get upon a Horse, I stole
away as secretly as possibly I could from him; and taking the way toward
Tuscany, I hid my self in the Appennine Mountains, intending to die with
hunger or some such hardship, not being willing to shed my blood, for fear of
offending the great god, who punishes Homicides. At the last, the languishment
of this life, made me resolve upon a more sudden death; and when, casting off
all consideration of heaven, I would have run my sword to my heart, my dear
Olimbres came, and stayed my arm, so by this means, gave me a life the second
time. Then afterward, when I still persisted in my resolution to effect my
intentions, a young man came in, whose beauty and wisdom did make us think,
that coming in such a nick of time, he was some messenger sent from god,
purposely to divert me from my design. I must confess, that at the first I
thought him so, and was so obedient to his words, that I had no mind to kill
my self, hoping to receive from him some supernatural aid; so as being thus
deceived, we all three went unto the next Town, to get Olimbres dressed of a
great wound which I gave him, when he offered to take the sword out of my hand,
where with I would have killed my self. But when I understood, that this young
man was a Segusian, as you are, and that he came to the place where I was, by
mere chance, I confess, I took a stronger resolution of dying then before, and
doubtless had, but for this young man, whose name was Celadon, as afterward
he told me, who used such strong arguments, and gave me such good reasons, that
I resolved to stay till the recovery of Olimbres. There was in this place an
old and grave Surgeon, (who dressed the wound of my friend) whose age and
travells in several Countries, had got him great knowledge and experience:
this man took special notice of our sorrows; and as one word may sometimes
discover what we desire to keep secret; so I did not so well dissemble the
matter, but he did partly suspect my design; so as one day he took me aside,
and said thus unto me: Think it not strange, Sir, that I, unasked, intrude my
self to give you some counsel; my age, your merit, and my duty to god,
invites me to it; take therefore in good part what I shall say. I know, that
you are seized with extreme sorrows, and that you have a design against your
own life. Do not offer it, for god, after your death, will most severely punish
all murderers of themselves. And besides, to kill ones self, argues a defect
in courage, as if you durst not look a dysaster in the face; and as those who
fly for fear of their enemies, so such as kill themselves for fear of any
dysaster, do fly out of the world for want of courage, and because they dare
not abide one of fortune's blows. God has given unto man judgment and
prudence, to make his election by solid and sound reason; and because man,
being possessed with passion, can neither judge nor choose aright, he has given
him a communicative soul, to the end that making choice of one or more friends,
he may ask counsel of them, in all matters of importance. And because friends
are very often interested in their friends business, this god, not leaving man
without a good guide, has given him Judges and Kings, to order and decide all
manner of doubts and controversies.

This great Creator of men, loving them as his Children, would furnish them
with all that is necessary both to live and to die; and to that end has
inspired the Massilians, to constitute prudent Judges; it seeming unto them,
that death is no injury, but a tribute of nature, and therefore it would be
unjustly done to deny that remedy unto such, as with reason do demand it: And
therefore they have erected a public Theater in their City, where they use to
keep poison, and will give it unto him to drink, who shall desire to die, if it
be so, that the Council of six hundred do adjudge that his reasons why he
desires death; be good.

I do hint this unto you, Sir, that if you be oppressed with any sad dysaster,
you may rid your self from the tyranny of it, by the judgment of so many,
worthy, wise, and prudent persons. For my part, because you shall not think I
give you such counsel, as I will not take my self, I am resolved within these
few days to make my address unto them, being incited thereunto by a contrary
opinion unto yours; for, I have lived along age, full fourscore and nineteen
years, in great felicity, according to my rank and quality; rich, in the gifts
of fortune, above any of my profession; happy in Children, beloved of my
Neighbors, esteemed of every one; and as I have lived, so I would die happily;
I would not stay so long, as until my hundredth year, lest I should tempt some
dysaster, to make me die miserable; having learned, that if Priamas had dyed a
little before the loss of his Town, he had been the greatest Prince of all
Asia.

This good old man used this language unto me, which had no small operation
upon my thoughts; for, as soon as I came to Olimbres, I made this relation unto
him: and the result was, that we would all three for company go unto this
place, and put an end unto our days. But heaven would not have it so, for he
dyed when you relieved us. These two Women which you saved, were his two
Daughters, who came along with him, to close his eyes, if the Council of Six
Hundred had granted him the poison. We thought our selves obliged to assist
them, and not to forsake them, till they had found the Corpse of their dead
Father, and given their last duty unto him, who never had any misfortune in his
life; and to the end, that after his death he might be happy also, in being
interred by the hands of his own Children.

But to return unto that which concerns us. We were fully resolved to
prosecute our design, and to make it appear, that it was not the loss of
Estate, or shipwreck, or any such, did move our wills unto it, being very rich,
and owners of great possessions, we sent unto our houses for our servants to
come unto us, with a considerable sum of many.

Thus Ursaces ended, moving me infinitely to compassionate his fortune and
Eudoxe's. And having answered, that I have seen many, who had petitioned the
Counsel of Six Hundred for this poison, and that it was granted unto some, and
refused unto others. He desired in all favor to keep it secret, lest some
friend unto Maximus should prevent them, and hinder their death. Then he asked
me, how the Request or Petition used to be presented, in what terms, and what
ceremonies were used. To which I answered, that the thing was very easy; one to
address himself unto a Magistrate, especially appointed to receive such
Petitions: That he would make report of it unto the Council of Six Hundred:
That none ever used to name themselves, because there should be no respect of
persons, and the Petition must be in this Form.

A Petition, Presented unto the Council of Six Hundred, demanding the Poison.
THe high and sovereign Council of six Hundred, are humbly requested to grant
unto the Petitioner, the favorable Cure of all human miseries, by virtue, and
according to the sage and generous Laws of the Massilians, who are ordained
Judges upon earth betwixt Fortune and Men. And to that end, he humbly
beseeches, that a certain day may be assigned, on which he may produce his
reasons and arguments before you. And so god preserve and augment your Grandeur.


They desired a Copy of this, to the end they might not mistake; and having
promised one unto them, I continued. After they have assigned you a day, (said
I unto them) and after you have laid before them the occasions, which move you
unto a desire of death, which must be done in as clear and short a method as
you can, without naming your selves or any other: If they find your matter
just, they will grant your request. When I had spoken these last words, I
plainly saw by the tears of Ursaces, that he did desire death; but I perceived,
that Olimbres was invited unto it, only out of affection unto his Companion,
from whom he would never part.

After a few days, thus spent, their servants came unto them out of Italy
being many in number, and bringing abundance of riches with them. All things
being then in readynesse, they entreated me to accompany them before the
Judges, and to do them this last and lamentable office. Which I did with much
sorrow, for I loved them, and was afraid the Council would think their request
just. They presented their Petitions, and were assigned the third day after;
for that was the term which was given them, in which they might change their
minds. But Ursaces was constant, and resolute in his opinion: and with Olimbres
presented themselves both being very well habited and attended: And being
called before the Council, they were asked their reasons, why they would dye;
Ursaces briefly answered thus.

The Request of Ursaces.
I Desire to dye, Massilian Lords, because life is displeasing, unprofitable,
and shamfull unto me; displeasing, because loving and being loved by a most
fair and virtuous Lady, she is carried away a slave into a strange Country;
unprofitable, because the ravisher is infinitely puissant above my strength:
And shamfull; because, having sworn a thousand times unto this Lady, that as
long as I lived, he should not wrong her: It is a most abominable shame for me
to live and suffer it. Now the great God having given life unto men, for their
good, there is no reason it should be enjoyed if it be bad. For this cause,
sage Sirs, I do present my self before you, in hopes to obtain that comfort
which you do not use to refuse unto miserable men: and be most certain of
this, that you did never grant it to any more miserable, nor who desired it
more then my self.

The speech of Ursaces, caused every one to fix their eyes upon him, admiring
his constancy and resolution of language* for he did not alter either in voice
or complexion. Then Olimbres addressed himself in this manner.

The Request of Olimbres.
I Desire to dye, Massilian Lords, for the same reasons which my friend has
formerly alleged; for as he, so I, have lost her I love; and more, because I
see that he my friend desires to dye. For loving him above all the world, all
the world is nothing to me if he leave it. Amity is nothing but an union of two
wills; and I do not love him, should I consent unto a disunion. It is against
the duty of any man of honor, to cease loving, where once he is with reason
fixed: all reason constraines me to this amity: for he is transcendently
virtuous: an unparalelled friend, and I owe him my life. Were it not an absurd
contradiction of reason, if I should fail in point of friendship? Therefore,
grave and wise Sirs, since heaven has ordained you for a comfort unto the
afflicted, deny not this remedy unto me, lest you should contradict your own
laws and ordinances, which you have for many ages adjudged to be so just and
sacred.

Every one admired the resolution of this constant friend. The Council, after
a long debate was in doubt whether they should grant or deny their demands,
until the Principal of the Council by the advice of them all, asked Ursaces,
whether he would permit his friend to dye? Unto which he answered, No. And why?
(asked the wise Massilans.) Because (answered Ursaces) he ought to live and
comfort, if he can, his unfortunate Lady and mine. Have you (said the
Massilian) permission from the Lady that you love, to dye because you are not
able to relieve her? I have not (answered Ursaces) for I never saw her since
this misfortune happened: But I dare assure you, that her generous heart would
consent unto it; and if she were in my place she would make the same request
which I do. The Lords of the Council after this, did long argue the matter
amongst themselves: And it was resolved and agreed upon; and the Principal
with a grave and audible voice gave this Judgment.

The Judgment of the Council of Six Hundred.
UPon the request presented unto us by these two Petitioners to obtain the
consolation of all humane miseryes, the Council does ordain that before it be
granted unto the first Petitioner, he shall procure the permission of the Lady
whom he loves, to dispose of his life, and upon a certificate of the same, his
desire shall be granted. As for the other; since his friend will not consent
unto his death he is declared incapable of obtaining the favor. And because
both of them are lovers and loved, and because a lover ought not to live for
himself, but for the Person whom he loves, therefore by consequence he neither
can nor ought to dispose of his life, without the permission of her whose he is.

Oh heavens? (cried out Ursaces having heard this doom) how shall I pass away
my sad days and nights? Then making an humble reverence to the Lords, he went
from the Council, but so sad that he could not obtain his demand, as every
one did admire the constancy and firm desire of death. Olimbres was not so
eager of it, because his desire of death was only to accompany his friend: and
therefore was very glad of the denial. Then they retired to their lodgings,
much lamenting their miserable fortunes. And the noise was spread not only all
over the Town but also through the Country, that two great Roman Persons were
come purposely to demand the poison. Upon this, a great Astrologer, who was
desirous to know who they were, came to visit them. This man was very old, and
had wholly addicted himself unto that science, so as he was grown very
admirable in predictions. This man being advertised of their design, fearing
that their corrages disposing them so eager of death, and the poison being
denied them, that they would have recourse unto the sword, he desired he might
advise them according to the rules of his Art. With this intention he went unto
them one morning when they were alone in their chamber. He desired me to be his
conducter because we had some acquaintance, when I was a student there. I shall
not make any relation of the particular discourse which they had, for they were
very long. But so it was that punctually knowing the time of their Nativities:
having long contemplated upon their Physiognomies and hands, and having drawn
some lines in paper which he parted, and then joined together; he said thus
unto them. Sirs, live, and preserve your selves for a better season, which the
heavens do promise unto you. As for you (said he unto Ursaces) you shall
recover her whom you have lost, by the means of a man whom of all the world
you love best: you shall enjoy full contentment and possess her many years,
in the same Town where your love first begun. And you (said he unto Olimbres)
you shall marry her whom you love: you shall bring her back unto her Country
with her Mother; you shall not dye till an Emperor of the West be made. These
things which I tell you are infallible, and nothing can divert them.

The reputation of this man, had such an influence upon Ursaces that he
resolved to believe him, and follow his counsel; and conjured him by the great
God whom he adored, to assist him with his best advise. Then he propounded unto
him the hatred of Genserick, and the danger he should incur by going into
Africa. You must, (said he) send back all your domestiques into Italy, and
make a show as if you would kill your self, to the end the report of your
death may be spread abroad: some few days after, you must design your self
in the habit of a slave and put your self into the service of your friend, who
may carry you into Africa where he shall meet Genserick, and doubt not but
that being thus unknown, you will compass your desires. I would advise you to
go unto Constantinople, there stay till Olimbres come to you with Eudoxe and
Placidia: for I find by my observations that he will bring them thither. But I
have three reasons to say that you must go into Africa. First because I do
foresee that you must be taken for a slave, and you cannot avoid it: Secondly,
that perhaps your stay there will be very vexatious to you in being so long
without your friend, and not seeing her you love and lastly that you may assist
Olimbres with your counsel, who will have occasion to stand in need of it.
Moreover, it is very necessary that you make ^ report run, that you are dead,
to take away all suspicion from Genserick, and all the ill will that he may
conceive against Olimbres; if you stay either in Greece or in Italy, it is
impossible, but some or other will discover you. Thus did this wise man advise
him, and after he had committed him to heavens custody, he went home to his
house.

Ursaces having consulted long with himself what to do, at the last resolved
to observe him punctually in every thing; and therefore one evening, having
gotten a bladder full of blood close to his side, under his clothes, he went to
walk by the Seaside, with most of his domestics following him, and many
others of the Town, where after he had made a long and sad discourse of his
miseries, and complained extremely against his refusal of poison, faigning
that he would not live any longer, he thrust a knife into his side, and made
the blood in the bladder run out in great abundance, so as every one thought
him dead. Then getting from amongst them, he threw himself into the Sea,
leaving us his Cloak in our hands, Olimbres and I seeming, as if we endeavored
to hold him. It was now twilight, and he could swim very well, so as plunging
himself over head, and swimming under water, we presently lost the sight of
him. Every one was stricken with wonder, Olimbres lamented extremely, purposely
to make it be believed, that his friend was dead: Then telling what his name
was, the news of his death was divulged far and near. In the mean time, I went
unto the place where I knew he would retire himself, and bringing him the
habit of a Slave, and lodging him in a poor house, I accommodated him with all
things requisite.

It happened the next morning, Olimbres seeming to search for the body of his
friend, found the Corpse of the good old Surgeon, and bringing it unto his
two Daughters, they rendered him the last office of a Sepulcher, as if heaven
would not let this happy old man want any dues that belonged unto men, after
his death: His Daughters erected him a Tomb, and I, at their request, did
write his Epitaph, which was fixed upon it. A few days after, Olimbres sent
all his Domestics, together with those of Ursaces's, and the two Daughters of
the old Surgeon, into Italy; and taking others, he went with his friend,
disguised like a Slave, into Africa, much desiring my company: But, since my
destiny was, to obey him who brought me up, I would not disobey his will.

This, Madam, (said Silvander unto Leonida) is all that I know concerning the
fortune of Ursaces, who for his fidelity, deserves all manner of contentment.
Leonida would have answered, if Hylas had not stepped in and interrupted her: Did
you ever hear (said he) of such a fool, the veryest fool that ever made
profession of any love? What! serve all his life for no other contentment, but
to be called, My Cavalier, and to call her, My fairest Princess, or at the
best, to have but some few dry and miserable kisses? And this, forsooth, must
be thought enough, to make him run so many hazards of his life, to spil so much
of his blood, to demand poison, and at last to turn slave. For my part, I think
he is rightly served, and let him take all his labor for his pains; let him
wear the habit of a slave into Africa, for all his life has been nothing but a
slavery. Adamas and all the Company could not choose but laugh at the opinion of
Hylas, and had it not been supper-time, I believe he had not passed without an
answer. But the Druide rose up, and taking Tircis by one hand, and Phocion by
the other, he took a turn or two in the Gallery, whilst supper was setting
upon the table, and every one observed what he thought most rare; and amongst
the rest, Tircis looking upon a King, armed with many Pennons and ornaments
hanging about him, with a countenance full of gravity: Father, (said he unto
him) I beseech you tell me, who is this, who bears upon his Shield of Gules,
three Diademes, Or? It is Pharamond, said the Druide; the first King of the
Francks, who made the Romans feel the weight of his victorious Arms in Gaul.
And who is that, continued Tircis, that is next unto him, that bears Azure, a
Cat, Argent, armed Gules? It is (said Adamas) Gondioch, King of the
Burgundians, who took this Animal for his Arms. And, who the other, (said
Tircis) who bears Or, three Ravens,, with their wings displayed, Proper, and
purple Tallons? It is (answered Adamas) the King of the Gepides, called
Ardarick. Who is he, replied Tircis, who bears Gules, a Falcon, with wings
displayed, Or, crowned Argent? I need not ask you, for you have already told
me, that he is called Attilas, King of the Hunnes. It must needs be confessed,
that you have been very curious, not only in getting the Pictures of so many
illustrious persons, but also in adorning them, and arming them as they were
wont to be.

In the mean time, Hylas, who held Alexis by her hand, he was discoursing upon
other subjects; for, being grown desperately in love with her, he could not
upon any terms leave her. Adamas, who took notice of it, and was very glad
that he was so mistaken, because it would more delude others. When he was going
out of the Gallery, he turned toward Hylas: Well, shepherd, (said he unto
him) which is the Piece whom you think fairest in the place? Hylas made present
answer, that it was Alexis. But, said Adamas, I mean, of the Pictures which you
have seen. Have seen! said Hylas, nay, I have no eyes to look upon any thing
but Alexis: And if you look for any satisfaction to that question, you must
ask Tircis; for those are Pictures only of dead persons, and he loves such
above any that are alive. I am able to answer for my self, said Tircis, that I
do see none fairer then Alexis, nor which pleases me better. How (said Hylas,
who began to be jealous) Hylas, I see then, is not the only inconstant man in
the Company, since you are grown a liker of any. But Mistress, (said he unto
Alexis) let it not trouble you, for he is better for being inconstant. Why,
Servant, (said Alexis) do you say so? Because, said he, that he was wont to
love none but dead people. Do you not see, replied Tircis, that if I love
death, I must needs love Alexis, since her beauty is able to kill as many as
death it self? Ah! (replied Hylas) if you take it in that sense, I have done:
But to make us both contented, let her give death unto Tircis, and life unto
Hylas. Both you and I shall be very well contented, replied Tircis, in
receiving either a life or a death so sweet. Upon this word, every one going
out of the Gallery, they sat down to supper, which being ended, and a good part
of the night spent in discourse, they were all conducted to their Chambers,
where having rested themselves, they went the next morning to their own Homes,
so satisfied with the courteous civility of Adamas, and with the beauty and
good behavior of Alexis, that every one did highly commend them; but
especially Hylas, who not being able to hold from extolling the perfections of
his new Mistress, by fortune they met with Astrea, Diana, and Phillis, in the
great Meadow, with Madonthe, Laonice, Pallinice, Cyrcinea, and Florice, which
expected their return, to hear a report of the beauty of Alexis, which they had
already heard of. And Phillis addressing her self unto Lycidas: Well,
shepherd, said she unto him, how do you like this so much cried up Beauty? I
will not answer you, said he, until you have asked Hylas. Well, Servant, said
she unto Hylas, what reports will you afford us? And because he answered not:
What, Servant, said she not speak unto your Mistress? You my Mistress, said
he, and I your Servant! No, no, if you think it, believe me, you are mistaken;
for I assure you, I think of nothing less. How! Servant, (said Phillis, and
seemed to be troubled) will you not have me to be your Mistress? Good
shepherdess, said he, do not use the word, Servant, and the word, Mistress,
so familiarly, for they are not seasonable amongst us. At what Game (said she)
have I lost you, Hylas? At the Game of the Fairest, answered he. Do you not
know, that it was always my custom, to leave those I loved, as soon as I
found one that was fairer: Ask Florice, Cyrcenea, Palliuice, Madonthe, and
Laonice, if I did not so by them: If none of these will tell you, then ask
Phillis, your very good friend; for if she will confess the truth, she will
tell you, how I have left her for Alexis, who indeed is the fairest and most
lovely, that ever I saw. Every one did laugh heartily at the discourse of
Hylas, and Phillis amongst the rest, who said thus unto him: Why, shepherd,
are you then fully resolved to love me no longer? It is possible, you should
quit me for a Druide? But my comfort is, it will be long, before you can have
any fruition of your love; for Alexis cannot marry, until her time with the
Carnutans be expired. Hylas smiling and shaking his head at this: I assure you,
shepherdess, said he, you tell me a thing, that would make me in love with
Alexis, if I were not so before; for ever since I began to look upon women, I
never loved any yet so, but I began to hate her, as soon as ever I thought of
marriage: So as if Alexis be not content with her time, I will give her as much
more, and yet love her. Now let me tell you, there is an odd kind of ambition
in my love, which I must by all means strive to satisfy. I have already loved
Maids, Wives, and Widows: I have courted my Inferiors, my Equals, and my
Superiors: I have served fools, crafty ones, and good ones: I have met with
severity, courtesy, and insensibility, to either love or hatred: I have tried
old ones, middle aged, and very children: I have liked the fair, the black, and
the brown, beauties: I have made addresses unto some, that did love me; unto
others, that did not love me: I have tried all conditions, and all humors,
that can be in women. But I must confess, I never courted a Druide or a
Vestall before, I have been hitherto a Novist in that holy Tribe; and I think,
the gods have sent me this fair Alexis, to the end, I may make it my boast,
that I am the most perfect and experienced Lover that ever was None in the
Company could forbear laughing. Florice, she addressed her self unto him:
Hylas, said she, are you not afeard, that Tharamis will blast you with
lightning from heaven, for offering to court one that is dedicated unto him?
Oh! Florice, said Hylas, you that are so religiously devoted unto the gods,
have not you dedicated your self unto Tharamis, and yet you have had Theombres
in your arms a thousand times, and never feared any blasting with lightning
from heaven? It Is true, (said Florice, very faintly) but things that are
absolutely forbidden, do more offend the gods, then those which are
indifferent. A very fine excuse indeed, said Hylas, and well found out; pray
tell me, where do you find, that the gods did ever forbid it? If you had ever
seen a Druide or a Vestall received into their Orders, by their Ancients, said
she, you would not have asked me this question. Oh, Oh, said Hylas, I do now
understand you very well; it is the old dry Druides that does forbid them, but
yet they are no gods: It is a Law made only by men, men that are old, and not
able to enjoy the pleasures of youth, and therefore are envious, and deny unto
youth what their age is deprived of. Fie, shepherd, (said Tircis) mingle not
things profane with things sacred, and consider, that the gold of Apollo's
Temple, which cost us Gaulians so dear, was dedicated unto him by men. Oh my
good friend Tircis, said Hylas, how long is it since you became so amorous?
You, I say, who were not wont to be contented with the Living, but would rake
the Tombs and Monuments for one, whom it pleased the gods to take unto
themselves from amongst men; you, that were not wont to be conversant amongst
the living, but the dead, do you now come to talk of the gods, and of things
that belong to living men? Oh, Hylas, (said Tircis, and sighed) how infinitely
you wrong me; I do confess, that I do love Cleon, and I shall rather lose the
memory of my self, then of her and her perfections. But wherein do I offend
the gods, or in my duty toward men? Would it not be infinite ingratitude to
the gods, not to honor their most perfect work? And he were not a man, that
would not love or forget that thing, which above any in the world is most
worthy of love and memory.

Thus these Shepherds discoursed, whilst Lycidas related unto Phillis and the
fair Astrea, what he had seen in the house of Adamas, and how fair Alexis was.
Truly, said he, I hope, that I may without offense tell you, that she is the
very perfect resemblance of my dear and dead Brother, when he was in his
greatest beauty; for, I did never in all my life see two faces, no, nor any
Glass, represent a more exact resemblance. Is it possible, said Astrea. So
true, said Lycidas, that I know no difference between them, but in their habit;
and to tell you truly, me thought Alexis to be a little fairer of the two. Oh
heavens! said Astrea, can you favor me so far, as to help my eyes unto this
longed for sight? Then turning to Diana, and whispering her in the ear: I
promise you, Sister, said she, that if I can obtain the favor, I will go with
her, and turn Druide. Oh god, Sister, said Diana, never think of such a sad
separation, or else resolve, to take Phillis and me with you. Oh, said Astrea,
that is too unreasonable, for it would be too great a wrong unto Silvander and
Lycidas. Diana would have replied, but Astrea made a sign unto her to be
silent, lest they should be heard. After this, all the Company retired to their
own homes, resolving to visit Adamas and the fair Alexis within three days
after: A term, which Astrea thought to be an age, so extremely did she long
for a sight of this so much beloved resemblance. In the mean while, Celadon was
as impatient for a sight of her.

The end of the two first Tomes of Astrea, according to the Original.
FINIS.

