A DISCOVRSE, SHOWING THE GREAT HAPPINESS, that has, and may still accrue to
his Majesty's Kingdoms of ENGLAND AND SCOTLAND, BY RE-VNITING them into one
Great Britain.

In two parts: BY JOHN BRISTOL.

LONDON, Printed by R. H. for CHARLES DUNCOMB, dwelling in Little-Britain. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the ESTATES now assembled in both houses of the high
Court of Parliament.
THE sacred Mottoes upon the Coins of our late Sovereign and Solomon King
James, Faciam eos in gentem unam and, Quae Deus co^ junxit, nemo separet^ might
have deterre^ some turbulent spi^rits of England and Scotland, from vio^lating
their peace cutting off the brid^ from Twede, and hindering that in^tercourse
of amity, which to Heavens and Britains glory, we no less happily than long
enjoyed: but Tongues and Pens* (I wish I could not say Swords) have been too
busily employed to untie that Gordian-knot, which a good God, and a pious King
had made so firm: Some in these Earthquakes of State have labored to
underprop the houses of both Realms, others to pull them down, saying, as of
Jerusalem Down with it, down with it, even to the ground: Nay, I fear, the
same hand that has held a Spade, pretending to build a Wall, has held a Sword
to kill a Subject. We need not send to Ireland for poison to kill two
kingdoms, we have too much within our selves. Poetry and Oratory (such is the
corruption of wit) can make Candida de nigris, and de candentibus atra; like
Dogs, they can either bite the sore, or lick it; or like Knives, that can both
spread a plaster for a wound, and make a wound for a plaster: The Poet
Juvenal speaking of Alexander the great coming to see Diogenes; (Sensit
Alexander testa cum vidit in illa Magnum habitatorem, etc.) takes away the
title of Magnus from the King, and gives it to the Cynicke: and have not we
those that strive to make great Britain Little, putting Alexander from his
Bucephalus, and setting beggars on horseback? I fear we have. There are too
many Empiricks among us, whose delight is rather to kill than cure; but You who
are the College of Physicians for the preservation of the body Politic, will
make no Anatomies but of condemned persons by Law executed, and by inquiry into
the bad, labor for the safety of the good: Let it not be said that this day a
Tribe is wanting in our Israel. What though, as judicious Weemes says, the
Scots and English be as Samaritans and Jews We have no Rehoboam, why should we
have a Jeroboam* We have no rigor* why should we have a revolt? There may be a
good Samaritan which may take charge of the wounded man, when a Priest and
Levite may pass by on the other side. Let not the Union of Britain be cut
off, if it may be preserved: bind up the bones that are broken, and make them
whole; so shall God bind up your souls in the Roll of the living.

I doubt not but much good may be gotten by a serious perusal of this ensuing
Tractate: Sure I am it will not be wholly useless to candid, pious, and
unprejudiced minds, who shall find it as fit as necessary for these times. I
say no more, but with heart and hands lift up to heaven, pray, that as you are
Treasurers of the Weale-publique, God will be pleased to crown your public
endeavors, to the everlasting peace and welfare of this Church and
Commonwealth, that his sacred Majesty and Royal Offspring may ever be
glorious, and that all his Kingdoms and Provinces may flourish, to the terror
of Foes, and the endless comfort of all true loving Subjects.

THE EPISTLE to the READER.
IT was no blessing, but a curse, when ^he ten Tribes revol^ed from Rehoboam*
Division is good i^ Music, ill in Kingdoms; and if confusion of Tongues
ruin^ a Babel, confusion (...) Hearts will ruin Bethel. Scotland man say to
England, (...) Lot to Abraham We are brothers; ye^ when love cannot continue,
except their bodies discontinue, the ^e of necessity must ^e to Sodom, a (...)
and destinated for ^ire and Brimstone. ^ingle Kingdoms, ^ke fools bolts, are
one shot away; but ^njoyned, as in a ^eafe, not easily bro^en. It was the
hap^inesse of our late So^eraigne King James (...) blessed memory, to a bridge
ove^ the Tweed, not (...) Wood or Stone, b^ of English and Sco^^tish hearts,
cemente^ with strong affection It was indeed a ha^^pinesse, to make tw^ spots
of Earth, tw^ little Kingdoms, o^ Great Britain: the in building, a seco^
story makes a Hov^ (...) House, though there ^e neither painted, ^or carved
Image in ^t, no fretted roof, no ^old nor ivory. Ca^or and Pollux ^rung from
one Egg, and their sign is one Gemini: Thus is ^e Unity of Brethren ^xalted
even to a ^onstellation. That which some years since was a motion, bre^ some
few month since a commotion namely, a necessity (...) separation between
England and Sco^^land: which diff^^rence might bette^ have been decid^ with an
Olive bran^ than a Sword, as (...) hope time ere long wi^ make manifest. Wh^
happiness has the Union of two Houses brought forth in this ^ne Kingdom? and
^f there be such hap^inesse in the Union of Houses, what will there be in the
Union of Kingdoms? a thing which might be ^s easily continued as compassed,
if some turbulent spirits did not disturb the peac^ of Sion.

This ensuing Treatise I could not b^ publish, as knowing* to be so sovereign*
Medicine for the Maladies of these Times. Wherein* (Gentle Reader) ^ thou find
as much benefit, as I delight^ Thank God, and the Author; I have my reward.

Farewell.
SUNDRY OBJECTIONS against this ensuing Treatise.
THE Objections pretended against this Treatise, are divided into four
several natures or kinds:

The first objection i^ matter of generality (...) common reason.

The second is, matter of Estate domestique an^ inward, or matter ^ Law.

The third is, matter (...) Estate foreign, or ma^^ter of intercourse, (...)
commerce.

The fourth is, matter (...) Honor or reputation.

The matter of genera^lity, or common reason as concerning all in general, is
also divided into two parts:

First, that there is, nor can be pretended no cause ^f the change.

Secondly, that there is ^o president of like change, neither ancient, nor
modern, foreign, or domestique.

The first Objection therefore is: that in constituting or ordaining of any
innovation or change, here ought to be considered either a general necessity,
or evident utility but that we find no grief in our present estate, an^
foresee no advancemen^ to a better condition by this change; and desire that it
may be showed unto^ us.

The second Objection that we find no presiden^ at home nor abroad, o^ uniting
or contracting of the names of two several Kingdoms or States into one name,
where the Union has grown by marriage or blood. And that those examples which
may be alleged, as far as we can find, or understand, are but in the ease
of Conquest.

Matter of Estate domestique, or inward, or matter of the Law, is divided into
these three maine heads following.

The first, that the alteration of the name of the King does inevitably and
infallibly draw on an erection of a new Kingdom^ or estate, and a dissolution
and extinguishment of the old; and that no explanation, limitation, or
reservation can clear or avoid that inconvenience, but i^ will he full of
repugnancy and ambiguity, and subject to much variety and danger of
construction.

The second is, an enumeration or recital of the special or several
confusions, incongruities and mischiefs, which will necessarily and incidently
follow in the time present.

As in the summoning of Parliaments, and the recitals of Acts of Parliament.

In the Seals of the kingdom.

Jn the great Officers of the kingdom.

In the Laws, customs, liberties and privileges of the kingdom.

In the residence and holding of such Courts as follow the Kings person which
by this generality o^ name may be held in cou^^land.

In the several and reciproque oaths, the on^ of his Majesty at his
Coronation, which is never iterated; the other in the oaths of allegiance,
homage, and obedience, made and renewed from time to time by the Subjects.

All which Acts, instruments? and forms of policy and government, with
multitude of other forms of Records, Writs, plead^gs and instruments of a
^eaner nature, run now ^n the name of England, ^^d upon the change would (...)
drawn into incertain^ and question.

The third is, a possibi^^ty of alienation of the ^rowne of England to the ^ne
of Scotland, in case (...) Majesty's line should determine: (which God of ^s
goodness defend) for if it be a new erected kingdom, it must go in t^ nature
of a purchase, (...) the next heir of his Majesty's fathers side.

The matter of St^forreine, or matter of (...) ^^tercourse and commer^^
consists of these th^^^ points following.

The first is, the League Treaties, foreign Fredomes of trade and tr^fique,
foreign contra^^ may be drawn in ques^^on, and made subject quarrel and
cavillation.

The second is, that the Kings precedence before other Christian Kings, which
is guided by antiqui^^ of Kingdoms, and not ^y greatness, may be en^angered,
and his place turned last, because it is ^h newest.

The third is, that the ^lory and good acceptance of the English name and
^ation, will be in foreign ^arts obscured.

The matter of honor and reputation stande^ chiefly upon these fou^^maine
heads, or points following.

The first is, that (...) worldly thing is more de^ to men then their name
(...) as we see in private fam^^lies, that men disinheri^ their daughters to
con^nue their names; much more in States, and when the name has been famous
and honorable.

The second is, that the contracted name of Bri^aine, will bring in oblivion
the names of England and Scotland.

The third is, that whereas now England in the style (...) placed before
Scotland; ^n the name of Britain that degree of priority or ^recedence will be
lost.

The fourth is, that the change of name seem harsh at the first, in the popular
opinion, and something un^leasing to the Country.

THese precedent objections, and many other pretended against the happy uniting
of these two famous king^omes of England and ^cotland, the Reader shall find
sufficiently answered in the ensuing Treatise, by the Author, to his full
satisfaction and content.

THE ^E-MARRIAGE Of two famous Kingdoms, ENGLAND and SCOTLAND: ^^duced into
one Great Britain, ^y the providence of one God, the ^iety of two Kings, the
unity of ^oth Nations. By way of answer (...) former Objections.
BY JOHN BRISTOL.
IT was long before the Objections against the ^ntended happy union of both the
Realms came to my hands: b^ having read them, (...) could not hold m^ hand
from writing (...) remove and clear them esteeming them only (...) great show
of big lo^^ laid in the way, b^^tween the two emine^^ marks shot at by t^
sovereign Vnitor, namely, honor and happiness: the one inseparably inherent
in his m^ royal person: the other assuredly intended (...) Subjects benefit:
whi^^ things in apparent uti^, or urgent necessity ^e Objectors desire to ^e
showed them: for whose satisfaction, I have briefly examined, and answered
every ob^^ction.

The Objectors find ^o president at home ^or abroad, of uniting (...)
contracting of the names of two several Kingdoms or States unto one name,
where the Union has grown ^y marriage or blood: and say, that the examples
which may be alleged, are but in case (...) Conquest. But I remember, that
Charles (...) France the eighth, (...) Comineus mentions taking to wife the
hei^ of little Britain, annexed it to the Crowne^ France, ruled it (...)
laws, customs, a^ privileges of Fran^^ and gave the Noble thereof place in
Parliament in France: (...) union is a strong keep of Imperial Sovereignty,
and is the very si^ewes of Weal pub^^que. But as Tacitus ^ith, By diverse
laws, ^er diverse Nations ^^bject to one King, ^uicquid est authoritatis ^ebis
destruitur contra^^ctionibus.

Charles the fifth uni^^d in the common ^ame of Spain diverse ^ther his
kingdoms, ^hereof two of them, ^amely, Aragon and ^astile, descended to him in
right of blood* For he well knew, that the most emine^t in dignity is most
honored (...) Unity: and that this truly called Prudence even the electing, or
rejecting, the continuing or changing of forme^ and uniting kingdom according
to time, pla^^ or persons: which gre^^ virtue is not alwai^ contained in
certai^ and the same bound but alters it self (...) occasion serves, in
respect of forenamed circumstance.

But the Objectors acknowledge uniting of Kingdoms in case of Conquest. I
marvel they do it not much more by right of blood: for in that Union of
constraint, there is ever doubt, and dread for continuance thereof, as is well
said: Malus cu^tos diuturnitatis metus: but in this by right of blood, God
gives bles^ing to natures work.

First, in the great majesty of the high at supreme Governou^ where one mighty
Monarch is of more command and power, the a King of diverse disti^guished
Kingdoms.

Secondly, in (...) more facility of the government, where people under like
law are more easily rule than under diverse law*

And thirdly, in t^ more security of the g^^verned, who being with like equity
of ^wes, will one love and strengthen the other: but being divided, ^oe
oftentimes under^ine, and practice sub^ersion one of the other. Vires imperii
in ^onsensu sunt obedienti^m: toll unitatem, and ^mnis imperii contextus in
^ultas parts dissidet. Which consideration made King Henry the ^ighth
rightfully assuming the title of King of Ireland, by voluntary Vote in
Parliament o^ the Lords and Com^mons of that King^dome, (albeit the King of
England were be^fore that time, but cal^led Lords of Ireland^ yet now changing
hi^ Style, to endeavor b^ just laws to cause the Irish change as wel^ their
apparel, as lan^guage, and diverse their old forms and forme^ laws, and to
reduc^ them into form o^ English fashion, eve^ against their former cu^tomes
and conditions. ^t is then a matter not only of utility and ne^essity, but also
of reason and justice, that a King in right of blood ^olding two King^omes or
States, do ^nite and contract them unto one name and nature, specially
Kingdoms of one continent, and which in ancient times were but one, till
ambition and contention divided them. And this man stand for answer to the
Objectors first main head of matter, of Esta^^ inward.

Now where it is fa^ther alleged, that the alteration of the nam^ of the King,
does in^vitably and infallibl^ draw on an erection o^ a new Kingdom, and
dissolution and extinguishment of the old herein verily I think the matter is
much mistaken; for the change o^ ^^me, is not so rightly (...) be termed
alteration (...) new erection, as re^^^tution and reparation ^oth of name and
ho^or: for diverse his ^ajesties most noble ^ogenitors, have here^^fore been
entitled (as ^hronicles tell us) ^^ings of all Britain: as ^enry the second,
King (...) all Britain, Duke of ^ascoine, Guien, and ^ormandy, whose son ^^hn
had also in his ^oine stamped, as is to be showed, Johan^ Rex Britonum. And
before the conquest of t^ Saxons, it is certai^ that the whole I Will w^ called by
the name (...) Britain. But Saxons e^tring at disadvantage^ that mighty Nation
consumed by death a^ famine, conquering t^ remnant of people of ^mous Britain,
enforc^ them to distinguish a^ divide themselves (...) flying into mountain and
fortified plac^ ^d afterward King ^bert, utterly to root ^t the remembrance
(...) great Britain, com^nded that the Land ^ould be called no ^ore by that
name, ^t England, and the ^ople, Englishmen. ^t Egbert is dead, his ^wer weak,
nay ^ne at all: let none ^erefore fear to re^re his Country to (...) old
name, and an^nt honor: for Eg^rt, I say, is dead, and King CHARLES ^veth, Et
vivat and vin^ Rex Carolus.

This, I say and e^force again, is a mat^ also reasonable, ju^utile, and
necessary, s^ing the Sovereign bri^geth in no innovatio^ of a new name, but
^stitution of the old, (...) dissolution, but forti^cation, whereto I kno^ none
will subscrib^ which either envy t^ Kings greatness, (...) kingdoms happiness^

But let none mar^ll, why it has not ^is long time been re^uced into his
former ^ame: for the diversity ^f kingdoms, being made diverse by war and
conquest, and ha^ing heretofore diverse ^ings, could not in reason or justice
endure it, ^or under any color of ^tility, or necessity, un^ergoe, or conclude
it.

But now seeing our sovereign Lord the King, being rightfully descended of all
the Kings and Princes, whi^ heretofore reigned a^ ruled in England, Sc^land, or
Wales, as (...) only has power to ^^store all into one (...) former title and
dig^ty, so let none thin^ this his Princely a^ just pleasure, a ne^ erection,
but restitutio^ of old, where it is mo^ reasonable and just, (...) extinguish
the name lesser continuance, the the name which h^ ^ntinued and been fa^ous by
the space of ^37. years before christ, and 688. after ^s Incarnation, which
^hole computation ^ommeth to 1825 years. and where it is most ^onourable by
just de^ent in right of blood, ^ot only to change, but (...) abolish the name
^mposed by a Con^uerour to the disho^our of a Nation: and where, for ^ught I
understand, the matter is not so d^^ficult, nor of that inco^^venience and
dange^ but may with mu^ ease and safety be do^ with salvo jure, or oth^
reservation and expl^^nation, as the wise an^ learned in the law^ can at large
devise when they list, five no^ excogitent, sive antiq^ restituant.

But for example, (...) bring the uniting (...) Dane-Lex, and Merci^ Lex, by
Edward the ^onfessor, which was ^ot prejudicial to any, ^at ever I could
read, ^ut profitable and ^eedfull to all, in the ^olishing of diverse old ^wes,
and ordaining ^vers new, and ma^ng Laws to all, all ^ne: done no doubt with
due respect to ^eale public, with ^eedfull limitation and ^ue consideration of
^en, matter, time, place, and other circumstance. Neither does any new erection
and exti^^guishment of old, (...) necessarily conclude (...) convenience full
of ^^pugnancy, danger (...) construction and co^^fusion, as is pretende^ but
may in this case ( (...) beata omnium vita mo^^ratori est proposita) as e^^sily
be cleared and ^^voided, as it was wh^ the principality a^ Country of Wales w^
by Parliament incorp^^rated and united un^ the Kingdom of En^^^nd, and all the
Inha^^tants thereof made ^^uall in freedoms, ^^berties, rights, privi^^dges,
laws, and in all ^^her respects to the na^^rall subjects of Eng^^nd, and all
inheritan^^s made of English te^^re, to descend without division, or partiti^n
after the manner of ^ngland: and the ^awes, Statutes, and ^rdinances of the
realm ^f England, comman^ed to be executed and put in pract^ within the
country a^ Principality of Wal^ So as now in this ne^ erection and dissolu^^^on
of the old, (...) Welshmen with us, a^ we with them, a^^knowledge joyfull^ one
only Governo^ and one only government, where the m^^jesty of the Governo^ is
equally supra nos, a^ the justice and equity (...) the government equ^ly pro
nobis: where^ ^ertus ordo in jubendo and ^arendo. Which certain and the same
course and ^rder of commanding ^y the King, and by his Laws, and of obedi^nce
in subjects, is a ^trong tie, and as it were a vital spirit, ^olding in one
infinite ^housands: where Re^ere, as the Philosopher speaks? is reckoned
^nter necessaria, and Regi inter utilia.

Again, could seven kingdoms of Saxons be reduced into one and in good time,
all their diverse Laws (...) whereby the divers^ subjects of those seve^ diverse
kingdoms were diversely governed, be^ brought into one form^ of civil
governmen^ without repugnancy (...) ambiguity or dangers and shall we think it
(...) matter of such difficul^ty, to unite only two kingdoms, which do^ not
much differ in manners, laws and customs; saving such laws and customs as
were formerly ordained on each part one against another, when they were
enemies, or scarce friends one to the other? Which ^aws doubtless all will
say, must be abrogated, that in further proceed^ng to union, wise men, with
grave consideration may conclude it, for good of both Nations, without offense,
as in former times much more has bin done with less (...) do.

An Empire of many kingdoms thus reduced into one, is not unlike the Firmament
o^ heaven, which God has adorned with the two great lights, the Sun and
Moon, and other Stars, even the whole army and ha^ money of the heavens in
one Firmament. Wh^ so throws a ston^ against heaven, says the Wise man, it
will fa^ upon his own head And if any one standing alone from the rest,
speaks against and oppugneth this Union, better it were (saving my charity)
that Vnus ille periret, quam Vnitas.

Touching the enumeration and recital of the special or several confusions,
incongruities and mischiefs, which in the Objections are in the second place,
of matter of Estate inward, pretended, I briefly answer, that there is no fear
of confusion in true and perfect Union. Which thing the mighty Alexander,
renowned for fortitude and policy, well knew, who is much commended by
Plutarke, that (where Zeno chief of Stoickes framed an Idea of best
Commonwealth, such as was not divided by countries and contrary customs, but
was as all one, of one kind of life, and as one flock feeding in one pasture,
under one shepherd) Alexander I say, put that in practice which Zeno but
imagined: for says Plutarke, not as Aristotle Alexanders Master taught him, so
did he, living as a father to the Grecians, and cruel Commander over
Barbarians, respecting some, and neglecting others: but he reconciled all into
one, mixing men's lives, laws, names and marriages together, and persuading
that none were Aliens and strangers among his subjects, but such as were evil
men, accounting all good men, as one man.

Now I conclude this point, that there is no confusion, incongruity, or
mischief to be feared in that Union, where our most rightful King sits,
not by conquest of sword, but by right of royal blood, in the seat of his
most noble Progenitors: and not as Alexander, who by conquest sat in the seat
of Darius among Persians: nor as Xerxes who joined Asia and Europa together
with a wooden bridge over Hellespont: but as all other most mighty Governors,
and the best kings have (by a golden bridge of likeness, of love, of equity,
of laws, and of common comforts of society and joy, (all which were both
profitable and needful) joined together two or more kingdoms, for their own
greater honor, and subjects more undoubted happiness.

Which thing likewise that noble and valiant Trojan Aeneas long sithence put in
use, who by Union, even of diverse nations, Omnis eodem nomine, and eodem jure
Latinos vocavit. And thereby as Livie reports of him, he made many and diverse
nations as one people, most familiar, and most friendly together.

Do not diverse Sunbeames come from one Sun, and all they of one nature? Are
not diverse lines drawn from one Center, and all they of one fashion? Are not
diverse boughs from one tree, and all of the same substance? And may not diverse
people under one Prince, though they are divided in persons, yet be united in
Laws? and though they be sundred in Countries, yet be knit together in
hearts, specially if emulation cause no incongruity, nor disorder confusion,
nor strife mischief, only with saving each man's honor, with continuance of
each good custom, and with furtherance and establishing the common good of
weal public?

The king is the countries Parent, who by Union, non servos, sed cives cogitat:
and as Jupiter was said to be Rex omnibus idem; so would his Majesty be idem
omnibus, one head to one body. Wherefore if he desire to unite the two
kingdoms, and to account them one, and as one beloved son (whose life is
dear, and whose happiness joy to him) that all subjects as one son, in
common apparent utility, might participate common patrimony of just Laws for
Weal public, let none be so hardy (with the harlot in the days of Solomon)
to say to the King our common parent; Divide the child, and cut it into two
parts; lest such division part that into two, which God in nature first made
one: and now in his greater goodness has restored, in the royal person of
our gracious King into one: what God has so joined together, let no man put
asunder. For hereof may arise plain incongruity, and fearful inconvenience,
which may farther grow into confusion and mischief.

Only I pray them, which object against the happy Union, to set before their
eyes, and to consider with their hearts, the grievous contention between the
diverse people of the kingdom of Israel and the kingdom of Judah: for albeit
the two kingdoms were united in the person of David their king, yet for want
of more perfect Union in laws and love, there arose heart-burnings on both
sides: for Israel complained: The men of Judah have stolen the king from us: and
they of Judah challenged, that the king was nearer in blood to them, than to
Israel: and Israel again replied, that they had ten parts in the king, and
therefore had more right to him. But what in the end grew of this contention
and emulation? consider I pray, and prevent such inconvenience and mischief:
there was not any one among the Tribes in the second generation that followed
the house of David, but Judah only: Omen avertas Deus.

When I was but a young scholar, I learned to call that aequivocation, which was
Corpu^ monstrosum, under one name of diverse forms: as homo pictus, and homo
vivus agree in the name of man, but not in the same reason, definition, and
nature: so I can call the agreement of English and Scottish only in subjection
to one Sovereign, but without farther Union of laws and true love, not lively
and indeed, but painted and in show; not substantial, ^ut aequivocall; not
re^ll, but nominall: name^y, in the King, as in the head, which is but one: ^ut
not in themselves, ^s in the body, which ^ikewise is, or should be ^ut one.
This is true in^ongruity, whereof may ^rise such farther fearful
inconvenience, as I wish may be to them that hate the State, and ^he
experience thereof unto the K. enemies.

Touching the particulars of confusion, etc* surmised by the Obje^ctors, I
briefly answer first, that exception taken of summoning future Parliament, is
no worth answer: for the style and title of the kin^ changed, may chang^ also
in future Writs.

Secondly, the chang^ing of the Seal, is only charge of a new cut.

Thirdly, the great old Officers of the kingdom, when they (ye^ most worthy of
office) ^oe hereafter wear ^ut, the kings Majesty shall afterward by this
Union, have more ^hoice to prefer the worthiest: for his Majesty by this Union
shall ^gaine more choice for ^ll the public services, ^o be performed either
at home or abroad. Neither may it be reasonable for any man, for private or
particular respects to repine thereat: like to Cato his son, who feared lest by
his fathers marriage h^ might leese somewha^ of his patrimony, and therefore
murmured lest his father should beget more sons: bu^ had his answer with a
sound reply unanswerable: Son* I desire to have more sons like thy self, good
Citizens, and serviceable for the Common weal.

Fourthly, touching laws, customs, liberties, and privileges, ^t is to be
wished that ^he rigor of ours were somewhat qualified, and the liberty of
theirs ^omewhat restrained: neither is it a new thing, in so large a ^ingdome,
that some should be more enabled and honored with privileges than others,
according to the Kings good pleasure, ^n whom dwells, and from whom is
de^ived all true honor.

Fifthly, the fear of residence, or holding in Scotland such Courts as follow
the Kings person, is the self same as if we feared, that without Union the
king would hold personal Courts in Cornwall: or as if we doubted that such
Courts, when our former Kings were personally in France, were not for all that
kept a^ Westminster. The sea^ of judgment is the sea^ of the house of David
thither the Tribes go up, and there the peoples feet stand, even in the gates
of Jerusalem; which Jerusalem is a City that is at unity in it self: at unity
concerning matters of religion, at unity in matters touching public justice
and government: therefore the King began his Psalm 122. I was glad when they
said to me: We will go, etc.

Lastly, the exception taken against Union because of the Kings oath at his
Coronation, which is never iterated, is grounded on the self same reason: as
if it were also alleged, that because his Majesty swears to maintain
ancient and fundamental laws, therefore upon circumstance of time and
occasion he might not alter any Law: but let it be remembered, that the Kings
oath concerns the Laws and not the title, and we know the Laws may be
preserved, though the title be altered.

And as for Subjects, I doubt not, but they may without danger, at the pleasure
of the King, swear their allegiance and do homage and obedience after
restitution of title, reformation of law, and Union of Kingdoms.

And ancient Records do no more leese their force by the change of England
into Britain, then by change of King JAMES into King CHARLES.

And there is no more incertainty of pleadings, instruments, and writs, than
when a plaintiff deceaseth after seven years suite, his heir is put to begin,
and commence his suite anew, and in other name.

The heart of objections against Union being half broken, let us enter into
the third consideration of matter of State inward, where is objected a
possibility of alienation of the Crown of England to the Crown of Scotland,
in case his Majesty's Line should determine. But blessed be God, our gracious
Sovereign King is blessed with a plentiful issue, and has yet much farther
hope. And I hope (for which I pray night and day) that his Majesty's royal
Issue shall not fail, so long as the Sun and Moon endures. Nevertheless, if
some will not labor of the common bane of good wits, which is rather to
dispute, than obey; and rather to reason beyond reason, than yield to reason, (
more magis quam judicio) they may herein also easily answer themselves, that in
uniting the two kingdoms, the second place in style may be rather drawn to
the next of blood in our Land, than the kingdom of England be transferred to
one farther off from the Seem.

Which thing, neither Henry the seventh nor Henry the eighth doubted, the one
seeking to marry his eldest daughter Lady Margaret to King James the fourth of
Scotland, hoping if his heir male failed, by that means to unite Scotland to
England. And the other having his whole drift, to match his Son Prince Edward
to Queen Mary, foreseeing in his providence the inestimable benefit of uniting
the two kingdoms: for which cause many of the Nobles of Scotland, gave faith
to do their best endeavors. But it is a strange doubt, and cast beyond the
Moon, to imagine, that Union of the two kingdoms does so confound the State,
and change the tenure, to bring it so into case of purchase, as it will
necessarily subject England to Scotland, especially if his most excellent
Majesty, of his singular tenderness and love to this his Realm of England, be
pleased to effect and establish, that in case his Royal Issue (which Almighty
God of his infinite mercy defend) should fail, that then by this happy
intended Union, the Realm of Scotland should for ever be and continue
indissolubly united, and annexed to the lawful and rightful inheritance, and
succession of the Crown of England, in the blood royal of the same.

Now touching matter of State foreign, in answer to the first objection: I am
well assured, that our foreign affairs were at worst in the opinion of all,
at the decease of our late Queen, and our intercourse utterly decayed with many
Princes: so as we need a kind of present renewing, which may be concluded as
well under title of King of all Britain, as of England.

To the second it is easily answered, that the King loses no precedence of
place, as is imagined, specially antiquity (as in the Objections is alleged)
guiding it, and not greatness. For the Successor to King Arthur of Britain,
will be worthy in the opinion of the whole world, of better place, then King
Egbert of England.

To the third, that if the name of England (as is imagined) be obscured, the
name of famous and great Britain will be illustrate, memorable in times past to
all the then known Nations of the earth.

Touching matter of Honor, it is certain and evident, that the name of
England, though it has been worthily most famous and great, yet is not equal
to the title of great Britain, when England and Scotland are reunited, either
by reason of honor, or of power. All Histories remembering unto us, that the
Britains long time resisted the mighty force of Romans, Lords, and
Conquerours of the world. And albeit some fathers can be content to disinherite
their own daughters, to continue their names, (as is inferred in the
objections) and therefore enforced, should be much more in States, specially
where the name has been famous: yet for my part, I account such parents
unkind and unnatural, where self-love of their name, makes them forget
themselves, and forsake their own flesh. I will not urge here the law of God,
of nature, and of most nations where daughters inherit, and names grow
extinguished. But this is a vain respect only of name, whereof is spoken; to
get a name on earth, and to think their name should never be put out: whereas
so many countries, so many people, so many persons, have either lost or left
their former name, and most willingly have been called by another name, Gaudet
cognomine terra: (Virgil Eneid. lib. 6.) That country rejoiced to be called by
a new name: how much more should our Land embrace this name of Britain; and
yet not new, but indeed his old proper name renewed, and as it were redivived
and restored from the dead. Or be it simply loss only of a bare transitory
name; yet as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Chapter 56. ver. 3. Let not the Eunuch
say, Behold, I am a dry tree, my name shall perish with me. Let us rather
regard that name which God promises to them that serve him, saying, ( Esaias 65.
ver. 5.) Even unto them will I give in my house and within my palaces, a place
and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give them an
everlasting name which shall not be put out.

The argument of Oblivion deserves no answer, but silence and forgetfulness:
and yet I doubt not, but famous acts of Noble English men, will as well by
Chronicle be remembered to posterity, as the glory of renowned Britain Record
remains to this day, neither will either be forgotten to the worlds end.

The Style of England now placed before Scotland, does no way prejudice the
Union by loss of precedence: for when all is one, there is no subsequence:
only Honor is due to him, who is to be honored; and much honor to him, that
is much to be honored: which thing in the Union may easily be provided for,
and other pretended inconveniences prevented.

Lastly, the Prejudicating the popular opinion, to whom (as is objected) change
of name will be harsh and unpleasing, is in mine opinion a wrong done, and
imputation laid upon the people, who I know (for the most part) being a wise
nation, and (I am sure) most loving subjects to the Kings Majesty, have learned
obedience and duty, and will therefore rather joy in the content of their good
and gacious King, then any way murmr at his demand: knowing, that the Empire,
(as Livie speaks) is firmissimum, when eo gaudent obedientes, who doubtless
with one voice and heart submit themselves, and say to their Sovereign: Esto
nobis solus arbiter rerum jure, and nomine regio.

And as for Harshnesse of the strange name, use will easily make it familiar.
As Horace says:

Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cademque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus.
This pretended unpleasing harshnesse is no more, than the niceness of a
Virgin, who is as loath, and makes it dainty to leave her fathers name, yet
afterward married to a husband, takes greatest comfort in the name of her
husband, in whom she glories, and by whom she enjoys all her worldly joy.
And yet need not England be so nice as if she were a virgin, who like a widow
has so often changed her name: but may take pride, as widows do, to be called
by her most honorable and most glorious name.

Thus having briefly run over the objections, and withal carried in open view
in mine answer due consideration both of evident utility, and urgent necessity,
I will be bold with additions of more reasons, yet a little farther to proceed
in the persuasion of this desired happy Union. God, always blessed and to be
honored for evermore, who is Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, three
persons, and but one God, does by influence of his holy Spirit, give diverse
gifts and graces to believers, of what country or condtion soever they be, and
governes them by holy Law, and uniteth them in the same faith, though diversely
scattered among all the Nations of the Christian world: that hereby the gods on
earth, whom he has placed to rule over many and diverse kingdoms upon earth,
might learn by the same Laws in things humane, and same religion in matters
divine, to preserve Weal public, and Christian Society among men.

But the ambition, and frowardness of many, desirous rather to be distracted
into diverse names and countries, and to be ruled by diverse laws and customs,
do often times hazard the Common good and peace of the Weal public: where two
kingdoms so divided under one Sovereign, are not unlike the rich treasures of
pearl and gold, laid up in one Ship, by contrarieties of diverse winds to be
driven upon rocks with extremest danger: as is said in Tully, of dividing and
distinguishing desires into several parts and members, in such diversities and
differences: Hoc est dissipare, and non distinguere, frangere, and non dividere.

Which thing is to be feared by not uniting, but keeping the two kingdoms
still in parts, when upon every discontent in Scotland, as at a back door
passage may be given for a foreign enemy, soon to weaken a divided power: as
Cyrus the Persian soon emptied that great and deep river, otherwise unpassable
for his soldiers, by drawing it into diverse channels. And why should not we
fear such and greater evils, if as Virgil laid infamy upon us, calling us,
toto divisos orb Britannos: so we be content to add greater infamy to our
selves, and become toto in orb divisi, divided within our selves in the sight
and view of the whole world?

But I hope and wish for better things, that by Union in name of Britains, we
may leave to be any longer divided into English and Scottish; as rivers of
diverse names meeting in the Sea, receive one and the same name: the rather,
because the elements of fire and water, of earth and air, being of repugnant
qualities, yet joined in one body, do agree in one form, as in a Medium
uniting and mixing them together: much more, diverse kingdoms often times
heretofore at war and discord, yet now being united into one body, of one name
and nature, qualified by equal mixture, of Law, Manners, Honors, Marriages,
and such like, may be made perfect in one form, and have a being not as
English and Scottish, but as Britains, knit together in that third and renowned
name: that the Maxim may be verified in us: Qua in aliquo tertio convenient,
optime convenient.

I confess, that some laws of ours may be thought too straight for them, and
some liberties of theirs unfitting us: but let all be wrested alike, pulling
some up, and letting some down, and in pleasing harmony we shall find, as
Tully says: Commune and aequabile inter omnes jus: where will be no strife, as
was between Esau and Jacob, undermining and deceiving one the other of
blessing and patrimony; but all love, and unity, and concord, and content, as
if all were not twins, but one man, even one heart in one body.

And now if Iphicrates, that valiant Leader were again living, and asked,
whether he were under the now imperial Majesty, this or that, English or
Scottish, or among, or over them, an horseman, an archer, or a Leader; he might
truly answer, as sometimes he did in like case: No, not any of these, but I am
he, who knows under him whom I serve, to command and govern all these, as if
they were but one man: Vnius Ducis imperium simul sentiunt omnes copiae. Thus
in war and tumult, much more in quiet peace, may it be said: Diverse subjects
ad nutum unius Regis, and ejusdem legis omnes simul respondent.

So powerful is the force of Union, that una Via being director, for law, and
Cor unum performer for obedience: the law enjoining obedience, and obedience
executing Law, the Prince cannot command what the people will not obey: and the
people will obey what the Prince commands, and Unity among them will uphold
all: Vnum imperii corpus unius animo regendum videtur: and so likewise, Ejusdem
juris esse debent, qui sub eodem Rege victuri sunt.

But rule of two kingdoms without uniting them, is to give occasion to either
part to look back for an old grudge, Vbi antiqui odii pertinacia in publicum
stimulat exitium: which I fear would be, as the going back of two Rams,
more fiercely to butt at, and beat one the other: where held both together in
like yoke, one cannot easily offend or force the other. Sic enim immensa
multitudo authoritatis quasi spiritu regitur.

And where it is of the nature of man not to endure all servitude, nor all
liberty, but to strive to shake off the one, and to be weary of the other; it
is certain, that equity and equability of like laws to a diverse people united
in one, will make them (which otherwise fear servitude) to enjoy freedom: and
those which seem most free by former privileges and immunities, to fear
servitude, if they transgress their bounds: for such Union and equity is
communis custodia, and principatus and reipublicae. But faction and ambition,
are the father and mother of intestine calamity, Civil war, and deadly feud.

Who so loves this, will never like that; neither is he of the body, but of
the toes and feet of that image which Nebuchadnesar dreamed of, Dan. 2. whose
head was of fine gold, whose breast and arms of silver, whose belly and
thighs of brass, whose legs of Iron, and whose feet, part of Iron and part of
Clay. Silver, Brass, and Iron are metals easily mixed, but Iron and Clay will
not by any means melt and join together. Kingdoms divided are prefigured in
the Iron and Clay, they are partly warlike and well governed, and partly weak,
factious, and seditious: they agree not to the King their golden head, and
though they (as the Text says, verse 43.) mingle themselves with the seed of
men, yet join not one with another, but are as Iron and Clay, which will not be
mixed together. The Poets call this latter age Ferrea: let us which live in it
prove them Poets, and not Prophets, that so being joined to our golden head in
all obedience and duty, in all love and zeal to our Country, and in Unity
among our selves, God may still shower down his wonted favors upon Church and
Commonwealth; and that we may still be thankful, returning him the glory.

FINIS.
A SECOND PART to the precedent TREATISE.
THE State of England, and Scotland may be resembled to the condition of
Israel, and Judah, not only for emulation, who have most right to the Royal
person of the Kings Majesty, for their defense, and government; but also for
that the two kingdoms were at first both but one. Besides, God, as he speaks
by his Prophet Hosea, Chapter 11. did also at first alike lead both them, and
us, With Cords of a man, even with Bands of love. And as it pleased God, for
sin of people to break those Bands, even both the Staff of bands, and of
beauty, to dissolve the brotherhood of Israel, and Judah, (as says the Prophet,
Zach. 11.) so, for the iniquity of our forefathers, God brake the Staff of
bands, signifying mutual love, and also Staff of beauty, signifying order of
government, and brought in upon them, and upon their posterity, even to these
our later days, as Esaias says, Chapter 9. A staff of division, and yoke of
burden upon theirs, and our shoulders; which now for all that, out of the
riches of his mercy, he has also broken in pieces, making all one again, as
he spoke by his Prophet Ezekiel, concerning Israel, and Judah, (Chapter 37.)
saying, I will make them one people in the land, upon the mountains of Israel,
and one King shall be King to them all, and they shall be no more two peoples,
neither be divided, any more henceforth into two Kingdoms.

This foundation laid, as project of our whole purpose; The truth shows it
self how two kingdoms, severed in place, not much differing in laws, nor
dissonant in language, but only disagreeing heretofore in neighborhood, may be
comprehended under notion of one name, specially seeing, when one rules both,
and both become Subject to one, they are no more two, but one body, linked in
like duty, and knit together in one band of obedience. To doubt this is in
Strangers, ignorance, but in Subjects, a great offense.

For who so considers that many Shires, with the principality of Wales,
heretofore made one England, cannot but confess that likewise England, and
Scotland, with all their territories, Islands, Shires, and Countries make now
one great Britain, and all the people of both the mighty Nations, Britains*
and that the Kings Majesty has done as princely an Act in uniting both the
kingdoms into one name, as he did in uniting the Arms of both the Realms
into one Scutchion, having a like right in both. For all great Britain being
his Majesty's inheritance, all his Subjects within that continent are
Britains.

Just, and reasonable was the demand of Annius, chief Governor of Latins, in
uniting Romans, and Latins, saying, Ex utraque gente unum oportet esse
populum, unam fieri rempub: eandem imperiisedem, idemque omnibus nomen. And
albeit the Latins were content, for sake of Weal public, to prefer Romans
before themselves, and be called by their names (as the History there farther
reports) Quoniam ab alter utra part concedi necesse est (quod utrisque been
vertat) sit haec sane patria potior, and Romani omnes vocemur: nevertheless
the case not standing so with us, that Scottish should be called by our name,
nor we by theirs, methinkes, a third name of great Britain might easily, and
equally please both: otherwise as King Deiotarus cut off all his children,
saving one, because he would leave the kingdom but to one: so should English,
swallowing up name of Scottish, or Scottish drowning name of English, prove
such a Vine, which to bring but one grape to ripeness, is content that all
branches be cut off, but one. But the question here is not, which of the
branches should best prosper, but how all the branches may flourish, which
abide in the Vine: and verily the question carries in it self his answer.
Abide in the Vine. This Vine is but one, though of many branches, and much
fruit. And thanks be given to God, that his Majesty K. James of blessed
memory, by public Proclamation, divulged the inserting and fast grafting of
each branch, and all fruit into his own Royal person, as into a fruitful and
flourishing Vine, even into the head of the whole body, of how many soever
parts consisting. Wherein his Highness laid the first stone, as he was the
true and only foundation of happy union: and yet, as yet, like Apelles
fashioning only the exquisite and most excellent beauty of Venus in the head,
but I hope also, and will pray for perfection in the rest: that the saying may
be true. Rex velit honesta, nemo non eadem volet^ and that an universal union
may be as happy in successu, as it is most just by Proclamation in inceptu.
That the head going before, the whole body may follow after in imitation, to
work out perfection of the desired happy union. That it may be verified, quod
diu parturivit tandem peperit; and what God had in his providence long
purposed, is fulfilled in these our happy days. And that by no means that of
the Poet may be imputed to us, either by disobedience to our head, or
disagreeing among our selves, Human^ capiti varias i^ducere formas* Grammarians
do observe, that Metallum, is so called, quasi (...), that is, post, and
(...), that is, aliud, because there is scarcely found no vein of Metal,
where is not more of that sort adjoining to it: so among English and Scottish,
they are not to be thought of the true metalline Mine, but as dross, and
canker, corrupting, and consuming each other, which join not in the universal
name of great Britain, so to continue, and dwell together, to grow up and
agree together: seeing nature has made them all of one kind, form,
complexion, habit, and language growing together.

And verily divine is the mystery of union (whether the provident wisdom of
nature from God has engendered it, or the skill of man's reason has observed
it) where one of, and in it self, does out of it self pour forth innumerable
forms of things; as Britain does even two kingdoms, and the principality of
Wales, with many Shires, Rivers, Islands, and people, and yet contains them
all within it self: one having many, many making one; where one of many is not
divided against it self, and the many in one make no division to overthrow the
whole; but all are the same; whether we respect union, or division.

And this doubtless is a divine power, or celestial virtue, not only for our
purpose, but compassing, and passing through the whole world, making things
either simple, or conjunct, but one; subsisting, by, and under the divine
essence, which is one; and consisting in all his members, and parts united, but
one; where each, and every part of this universal world, respects the whole,
otherwise innumerable, but brought by union to a number, without number, even
beginning of numbers, which is but one.

And this is most agreeing to the conceit of wisest Philosophers, skillful in
natures Secret: teaching, all (whatsoever is) to be but one: and that in the
universal nature of things there is an agreeing amity, and intermixed
affinity, where all the parts of the whole world accord, by one transfused
continuate spirit among them, being compact together with one and the self-same
agreeing force, and forceable agreement of nature, proceeding from one
beginning, continued by one mean, and referred to one end; every particular
being knit together with the whole universality and diversity of things, and
wrapped up in one round orb together, that as parts of this world, they may
dwell in one Center, or Circle together.

To shut up many things in few, and to show how certainly all things are
contained in one, and one does comprehend all, verily in Schools of
Philosophers, it is an infallible Maxim, that all things are communicated in
one; Vnum hoc praeque omnibus unum. This one is all in all. Ruunt autem omnia,
ubi unitas non firmamentum, diffluunt, ubi non coagulum. The demonstration in
our intended purpose, is plain. Many villages make one Shire, many Shires one
Kingdom, many Kingdoms one Imperial Monarchy: all which is Britain, and
Britain all these; and the Kings Majesty possessing, and governing Britain,
possesses, and governs all these: and the Subject, knowing Britain, knows
all, and every of these; for all these are one, and this one is all these. That
as this excellent workmanship of Union shows it self in the mighty Mass,
and fabric of the whole world, so much more particularly, and plainly does it
appear in a model of the same, even in the name, and honor of great
Britain; where every Subject ought clearly to see in himself, that though
he be termed the little world, and compact of infinite variety, and
multiplicity of things, yet is he not two, but one man.

Here let the near neighborhood, and conjunction of man, and man, in mutual
society, and participation of profits, which man has with man (where two
friends are but one, and not parting meum, and tuum) confess; that though they
are in person two, yet indeed do, with idem velle, and idem nolle, enjoy the
fruition of heaven, with the same aspect, and the commodities of the earth,
with the same mind; where all things are common to both, and yet proper to
each one.

All which things are alleged to show that as every kingdom, and State of
the world is upheld with one and the self-same power and life, wherewith the
universal world consists; So now it concerns all, and every one Subject,
both of England, and Scotland, to participate in the common obedience,
transfused into all, under the government of one.

Where sacred unity is guide, and director, there, even from distinct nature,
use of mutual society, and good of weal public, many are knit together
inseparably; and great, and infinite numbers of all sorts of people, are
contained in one narrow compass of near conjunction; for so the most populous
and powerful Kingdoms, though two, or more, under one Sovereign, seem to
be, but as one whole body, And the whole body of Weal public in subjection,
and obedience, but as one man: Sic enim omnes aequo jure parent omnibus
imperaturo. And as in all things, so specially in this, are we bound to render
all praise, and thanksgiving to that thrice sacred Unity, from whom, as from
the first author, and fountain, is sown abroad in the world, that fruitful
seed of constant unity; whose force draws many of one household to be of one
mind, and is ever doing good, in its own nature, keeping Israel together,
like a flock of sheep.

Neither is it an hard matter to unite, and keep them together, who live under
the same climate of heaven, and are of like language, manners, countenance,
laws, customs, form of body, fashion of behavior, yea, and religion: a
religando^ Rightly called the chiefest band of hearty union. For though the
Island Salamis be controverted between the Athenians, and Megarenses, yet must
it be adjudged to the Athenians, because they lived after the same fashion and
laws; as now the skillful in the laws of this land easily acknowledge what
congruity and affinity is between most of the ancient laws of both our
Kingdoms, more then is to be found between those of any other two nations. And
albeit the Town Sidas be controverted between the Athenians, and Boetians,
yet Epaminondas will adjudge it, to the Boetians and not to the Athenians,
because the Athenians called an apple Malum punicum, but the Boetians called it
Sidas. There is between English, and Scottish small, or no difference, nay now
none at all, in union all being Britains, not so much as between Gileadites
and Ephraimites in pronouncing Shibboleth, for Sibboleth, but all are of one
language, and even of one Canaan language, only a little River Twede is common
limit, or rather imaginary bound to both: and all from Twede Southward, is
Britain within Twede, and all from Twede Northward, is Britain beyond Twede,
yet both on this side, and that all but one Britain ( non nos mare separat
ingens, exiqua prohibemur aqua) as all France has formerly been divided into
two parts, the one beyond the Alps, the other within the Alps: and all India
Westward within the River Gange, and Eastward beyond Gange. And all Scithia
within Imaus, and without Imaus. And though the Island has been long time
divided into two Kingdoms, yet England it self has often times of diverse been
called Britain, as by a Surname: and if pars pro toto, might have that
denomination, much more ought the whole, being now made one. Therefore Linacre
and Grocinus of the one part called themselves Britains, and Johannes Major of
the other, affirmed that the Kings of England, and Scotland wanted good
Council to advise them to marry together, so to make of both one kingdom of
Britain: and that only envious men, and they who neglected the Weal public,
did hinder this union of peace. Which thing King Henry the seventh, and King
Henry the eigth, wisely foresaw, seeking by marriage to unite both kingdoms
into one. Discordantis saepe patriae non aliud est remedium, quam si ab uno
regeretur.

Therefore the wise men have most religiously observed two beginnings of
things; one of evil, divisible, imperfect, manifold, called duallity, or
Binarius numerus. Another of good, indivisible, perfect, and in name and
nature, always one, called unitas. If Duallity, or Binarius, as cause
efficient bear sway, then in the air breed intemperature; if in Cities,
Families, or Kingdoms, wars, and discord; if in the body diseases; if in the
mind of men, vice, and wickedness. But where union possesses chief place,
her fruits are, to the air wholesome temper; to Cities, Families, and
Kingdoms, mutual love, and joy; to the body health and strength; and to the
mind, virtue, and godliness. For unity admits no duality, knows no
contrariety, and by consequence no^ infirmity. But Duallity seduced Adam in
disobedience, seeking to know, as well evil, as good; who before, was sole
Monarch of the whole earth, and was wholly good, and perfect, both in Body, and
Soul, until he drew with a double twisted cord of contrarieties unto his
body, in stead of health, sickness, and infirmities; and unto his soul, in
stead of Righteousness, sin, and misery; needing now to strengthen his body,
bread; and to repair his soul, grace; even for body, and soul Gods mercy.
For so he turned the Monarchy of perfect good, into a Monomachy, or duellum of
good, and evil, sin, and righteousness, peace, and war, joy, and sorrow,
sickness, and health, yea life, and death. And now when the sole Monarch of
the whole earth, left off to abide in the common obedience, and universal
union of all things to his Creator (albeit all the creatures were before in
voluntary subjection, united also to their sole Monarch Adam on earth) yet now
every creature lifts up himself against his sole earthly Sovereign, and
against his Succession for ever. The earth will not yield Adam bread, but by
the sweat of his brows; the beasts become wild, and cruel; yea the earth
opens her mouth against the succession of disobedient Adam, and swalloweth up
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram; the waters drown the whole world, except eight
persons; the poor fly can, and does sometimes choke a man, having before
neither power, nor will to do it; Lice can devour and eat up Herod; even the
vilest, and weakest creatures, can, and often do destroy the greatest Tyrants
of the earth.

And in the opinion of some, the holy Ghost seems in mystery to open this
matter to a man of understanding, forbearing in the second days work, to say,
all was good; as is plainly said of all the other five days, and he saw all
things good; not but that the work of this day, was also good, (for all his
works, are, and were exceeding good) but because of waters, which in many
places of the Scripture signify troubles, yea intolerable afflictions, and
because of division of waters in that days work ( God being a God, not of
division, but of peace) therefore the holy Ghost seems to forbear to say in
that place, And it was good* And yet would not these be mistaken in their
curiosity, as if they included the division of waters in that days work, not
to be good, (seeing that waters in the clouds divided from the Seas, are
upholden by Gods providence, not to pour down and overwhelme the earth) for
they approve divisions of constructions to be good, as the dividing the light
from darkness, the day from night, and of whatsoever into parts, for ornament,
and beauty of the form divided; but utterly condemn divisions of
destructions, or of distractions, which is, frangere non dividere, comminuere
non distinguere, to part the body from the head, or the members from the body,
to bring order to confusion, unity to distraction, form to a Chaos, and e^s to
privation, such division was that, whereof Caselius answered the Merchant:
Navem si dividis, nec tu, nec socius habebit and such division the unnatural
harlot intended; requiring the living child to be cut into two parts, (1 Kings
3.) Let it be neither mine nor thine, but divide it.

Where two, or three are made one, there is the image of God, of truth, of
peace, of fortitude, of praise, and of perfection: but where one is drawn,
divided, and torn asunder, there breaks forth falsehood, war, fear,
dishonor, and confusion. They which are of God, embrace the one, and they
which are of the devil, the other. For God both in the Center, and
Circumference of truth, is in simplicity, and perfection, one* but the devil,
neither dwelling in this Center, nor sitting in this Circle, is carried in
duallity, nay contrari^ety of numbers, opposing evil against good, whose
Center being falsehood, the circumference cannot be truth: his is a kingdom
divided, and must fall, being not a Monarchy it cannot stand. And yet we reject
not the number of two, so they continue, and persist in union, as it is
written; they shall be two in one flesh: but reprobate is that duallity, that
makes war in peace, begetting, and ingendring division, and contrariety,
controversy, and confusion: and either of ambition, senslesness, hatred,
quarrel, open discord, or rebellion, hinders that sweet Harmony of union,
most pleasing to God, and most profitable for men, of whom says Tacitus, In
publicum exitiosi, nihil spei, nisi per discordias habent, tamen libertas, and
praeciosa nomina praetexuntur.

But do we not see by this unfolding of things, how the perpetual course of
truth, and unity, throughout all in the world, does even now conduct, and lead
me, by the hand, to the matter now in hand? And verily I will follow thee (
sacred union) whither soever thou leadest me, and into, whatsoever Region of
virtue thou intendest; I will not leave thee, being never unlike thy self,
always well accompanied, adorned, and beautified with diversity of things, and
never alone, and yet still but one. It is thy doing, that Prudence, the chief
head and governor of virtues, the rule and direction of all well doings, and
prescribing to every virtuous action, the manner, order, and course, of doing
well, does so knit, and join together all moral virtues, as that by thy
secret influence they all may be found jointly in all wise Subjects, and in
every one particularly with one heart to perform that duty, which both
yields right to the King, and maintains peace, and love among men. Siquidem
communis vitae societas, in unione consistit.

And seeing it has pleased his Majesty King James, by public Proclamation to
assume the name and style of King of Great Britain, jure haereditario, it is
meet that all loving Subjects not only acknowledge the clearenesse of his
right, but joyfully applaud, and cheerfully follow him herein, now in our
gracious K. Charles his reign; lest murmuring, they, like evil, and base
minded soldiers, follow their Emperor with an evil will, according to that
saying, Malus miles imperatorem sequitur gemens. We see some noble men, yea,
and the gentlemen in our State daily to purchase, and unite Land to Land, and
Lordship upon Lordship, and to seek by all means to shake off the Tenure in
Capite, and to hold all their Lands in some other more free Tenure. And it
cannot be denied, that to all their several Courts, all Tenants and
freeholders willingly perform their several services; or else are fined by
the Lord of the Manor, or by his Steward. And may the inferior Lord expect
more homage, from a Tenant, then a King require, both of Lords, and Tenants,
all Subjects to him, and holding all they have, from, by, and under him? Pacis
interest omnem potestatem ad unum referri. But all gainsayers and murmurers,
qui contumaciam potius cum pernicie, quam ^bsequium cum securitate malunt, are
not unlike Mesech, and Kedar, spoken of in the Psalm, in respect of whom the
good King complained to God, and to himself, saying: Woe that I dwell with
Mesech and Kedar: I labor for peace, and they prepare them to battle, I study
union, and they strive to make division. Non placeo concordiae author, said
that good Valerius. But alas, why should Ephraim bear evil will to Judah, or
Judah vex Ephraim, fratres enim sumus: should not they rather both together
united now into the name of Britains, as into the name of the beloved Israel
of God, (Esaias 11.) Flee upon the shoulders of the Philistines, and make spoil
of their enemies, so that the Idumites, Moabites, and Ammonites, even all their
enemies might be subdued unto them: Duo enim sunt, quibus omnis respub:
servatur, in hosts fortitudo and domi concordia. And verily the uniting the
two Kingdoms into the name of Britain, is not unlike ( Esaias 21) that chariot,
drawn with two horsemen, mentioned in Esaias; at sight whereof, the watchman
cried, Babylon is fallen, Babylon is fallen, and all the images of her Gods are
smitten down to the ground. For so (except we will smother the child of Union
in his first birth,) both English, and Scottish, will soon hear him sound
aloude into the whole world, that all great Britain is like Jerusalem, which
is, as a City, at unity within it self; and Babylon, even division, disorder,
discord, and confusion are confounded, and overthrown; and what King Egbert
did write in Sand, King James of blessed memory, and our gracious King Charles
has blotted out, and trodden under foot all the dishonor thereof, and
engraven, as in a marble Stone, the perpetual honor of great Britain by
Royal restitution? This verily comes of the Lord of hosts, which works
with wonderful wisdom, and brings excellent things to pass.

Alexander asked King Porus his captive, how he would be entertained; and
Porus answered, like a King; Alexander demands again; Porus answers
again, in Kingly manner. Alexander asks what else, Porus answers nothing
else for in this kingly manner, every thing else, is contained. And though (God
be praised for it) the cause be not between English, and Scottish in Conquest,
and captivity, as between Alexander, and Porus, (but two famous Kingdoms in
right of blood, under one mighty Monarch) yet our great Alexander in his high
wisdom considering how these two might best be governed, has in his own
royal heart best resolved it, namely by uniting them into one Monarchy, into
one government, and into one name; and if any demand, how else, verily he must
be answered no way else, for in this union whatsoever else is contained, Nam in
istoc sunt omnia even, the Stoickes, (who I think neither were in jest, nor
arrogantly conceited) contained under Prudence, both justice, and fortitude,
and temperance, and whatsoever virtue else, accounting also him who was
perfectly wise, an Orator, a Poet, a Rich man, a very King, and an Emperor.

All blessings, and graces, may be thought attendants, and companions to union,
who alone knows how to order all things in government: and is a princely
commander of Subjects obedience, and subduer of gainsayers, ordering unruly
affections, bridling untamed lusts, restraining swelling pride, composing
rebellious appetites, determining all doubts, and rights, within the compass
of her judgment, and yet giving to every one his due, by her discretion: And
therefore is like the Sun in the midst of heaven, among the Stars; and as the
Stars take light of the Sun, so also blessings of Weal public proceed from
this sacred, and thrice happy union into the name of great Britain, whose
glorious light shines to all, and every one has comfort thereby. It is also
not unlike the Soul in the Body of man; for in the whole common Weal, it is
wholly, and in every part thereof, whether it be of English, or Scottish
entire. Tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part. As a shining light, it
shows a way for common good, and as a reasonable soul, gives understanding
to the blindest body, to see the full fruition of all worldly happiness: let
no man shut his eyes against the Sun, nor refuse a living Soul for his
Carcass.

If I could express the image of this union in lively colors, I would surely
make her a goddess, fair and beautiful, having a garland, and crown of all
blessings upon her head, and sitting in a Chair of State, with all good
fortunes, virtues and graces attending her, and as a goddess in triumphant
chariot going into the capitol, or temple of mighty Jupiter: where also the
Poets have found her, but called by another name, even Pallas, who is also
named Monas, that is, Unity: because having one only parent, she resideth in
Jupiters brain, even in the chief seat of his wisdom; where all the Muses
are her companions, so called Musae, quasi (...), that is altogether in one;
where all the Graces go hand in hand, congratulating to Union their mutual
society; where all virtue, and knowledge are near of affinity, but Justice,
and government of consanguinity to her, her self still holding primacy over
all; as England, and Scotland, are chearefully looking one toward the other in
the name of great Britain, and as the two Cherubins did look one toward, the
other, in one propitiatory. And thy royal state O great Britain is as the
anointed Cherub. Ezekiel. 28.

And as in the heart of man is placed fortitude, in his liver temperance, and
in his mind Justice, and yet all these, with all other virtues are annexed to
Prudence, the common ligament of all; so is great Britain, by uniting all his
kingdoms, principalities, countries, and honors the complete proportioned
form of all, and all in it both universally and particularly, are fashioned
and made fit on every side for happy conjunction and mutual correspondence.
For this renowned name of great Britain stands in stead of a Loadstone
drawing all into one, chaining them together with links of love; as Lisippus
made an image of four metals mixed together, gold, silver, brass, and iron;
expressing hereby absolute perfection of virtue, putting in gold, to signify
Prudence; silver, Justice; brass, Fortitude; and iron, Temperance: whereof
they are altogether ignorant, as if they had never seen virtue, so much as
painted, who, to overthrow union in the name of great Britain, bring no union
of virtues, even excellencies of many Countries, to this so excellent work.
But skillful Zeuxes going about to depaint an absolute work of a perfect
virgin, took not only view of one woman's beauty, but had variety of many the
fairest, to accomplish out of all these a more excellent, and consummate form
of body.

Shall we not think the Kingdom of France, containing Pickardy, Normandy, the
Isle of France, Champaigne, Averne, Dalpheny, Bry, Bloys, Turin, the Duchy of
An^ow, Xanto^n, Burgundy, and uniting ^o it little Britain, to be more
glorious in all these, being made one, then if but one only of all these were
that Kingdom? Do we not see that the enlarging of the dominions of Spain, in
uniting, and establishing diverse kingdoms, and territories, as those of
Aragons, Castile, and that of Portugal with others, has so enlarged that
Kingdom, as that the like has not befallen other Christian Potentates? Has
not the King of Denmark, beside the Cimbrian Chersonese (where Holsatia,
Theutomartia, the Dukedom of Sletia, Flensburgh, Friesland, and Iuthland do
lie) other spacious Islands, fifteen in number, all comprehended under the name
Denmark, and united to that Crown? Did not Iagello, taking to wife in the
year, 1380. the Princess Hedingee the last of the blood Royal of Polonia,
after he was enstalled King there, unite all his own principalities of
Lithuania, and Samotgathia Provinces of Russia, to the Kingdom and Crown of
Poland? Did not Ahasuerus (Esther 1.) reign from India to Ethiopia, over an
hundred twenty and seven diverse Provinces? And was not he so mighty (by reason
of this variety, subjected, and united to his sole government) that he was, an
hundredth and fourscore days showing the riches and glory of his Greatness,
to all his Princes, and to the mighty men of Persia, and Media? But to take
example of one only Rome for all. How has it been renowned through the whole
world, by joining all Nations of the world into one, even to it self?
Herehence it was called Terrarum dea gentiumque Roma, communis patria, mund^
compendium.

As Propertius.

Omnia Romanae cedant miracula terrae,
Natura hic posuit quicquid in orb fuit.
But the Majesty of this Empire grew so great by adjoining other nations, and
bringing them all into one: Haec est, in gremium quae victos sola recepit,
Humanumque genus communi nomine fovit
Matris non dominae ritu, civesque ^ocavit.
Quo^ domini, nexuque pr^ longinqua revinxit.


And again, Fecisti patri em diversis gentibus unam,
Dumque offers victis proprii consortia juris,
Vrbem fecisti quod prius orbis erat.


And so may we say of this renowned name of great Britain comprehending us all
of diverse nations in one, under our gracious King.

Hujus pacificis debemus moribus omnes,
Quod cunctigens una sumus.
I could set forth, and confirm by sundry examples, this uniting of many into
one, and thereby show, that the enlarging of dominion consists in uniting all
together into one name, and establishing diverse Territories under one
Sovereignty, and government; and that the greater States, and Imperial powers
of larger extent and far spreading domination are the more durable; and that
the Monarchy of great Britain is like to be hereafter of more durance,
strength, and honor as partly (coming under our Kings government without
conquest or constraint: Nam errat long mea qui them sententia, qui credat
imperium stabilius aut firmius quod vi^ adjungitur quam quod facilitate and
clementia) so now especially it being united in the whole, then heretofore
divided in parts; his contexture being of a greater frame than before, holding
by more then one nail, an^ upholding its own greatness: even as great
build^ings endure and subsist by their own weight, as the Poet speaks,
Pondere t^ suo est. But I think it here as needful to lay open the great
fault, imputed to Con^stantine, dividing the Em^pire among his Children whereby
of one Empire, he made three, and withal a memorable diminution of of his
authority, and forces: which part Brutus also played, dividing this whole
Empire of great Britain among his three Sons: of which, though two parts
afterward, namely England, and Wales, were again in good time united: yet
Scotland stood till now, divided from the rest, and the rest from it, till God
in special goodness restored to former name, and government, all into one
again: for which Kings James may challenge more glory by uniting all into one,
then Brutus or Constantine dividing it from one; and though Constantine the
great, was counted the glory of Britain as being borne and made Emperor here:
yet may that commendation better fit King James than Constantine: Tu nobiles
fecisti Britanias, quod illic ort^ factusque es imperator.

The Platan tree has many goodly Branches, and boughs, and leaves in one
body: and therefore Xerxes in Herodotus, crowned him with a golden Garland*
doubtless there is a deserved glorious garland due to the name of great
Britain, bringing forth many goodly boughs, and branches, like to the fair,
and well spread Platan tree; or rather for the height of his honor, like the
^all, and goodly Cedar, in whom, the dream of Nebuchodonosor has been
verified: for he saw a tree in the midst of the earth, great, and strong,
whose height reached unto the heaven, and the sight thereof to the end of the
earth: whose leaves were fair, and the fruit thereof much: Dan. 4. in which
was meat for all, yea the beasts of the field had shadow under it, the fowls
of the air dwell in the boughs thereof, and all flesh fed of it. But
Nebuchodonosor heard also a watch crying out mightily, hew down this tree,
break off his branches, shake off his leaves, scatter his fruit, that both
beasts, and fowls may be put from him: nevertheless leave the stump of his
roots still in the earth. So was the ancient honor, and glory of great
Britain; great, and mighty, high to heaven, fair, and fruitful, and of power
over the whole Land from one end to the other: but the highest, who has power
over all, did (for the sin of the inhabitants) hew down this goodly tree; yet
left the stumpe of the roots in the earth. And out of it the tree is grown up
again to former beauty, that we might learn to magnify the K. of heaven, as
did Nebuchadnesar restored to the honor of his kingdom, to his glory, and
beauty again, to his Counselors, and Princes, and to the establishment of his
Throne with augmented glory.

And here let us now consecrate to all eternity the ancient name of famous
great Britain, as a Pantheon of all blessings in peace, prosperity, and
honor: for as Pantheon was a Temple at Rome, round, and like to the capacity
of heaven, wherein were put all the images of their gods. So I say, in the name
and style of great Britain, as in a Pantheon, are placed all worldly
blessings, like Stars shining from heaven, and having their influence into the
whole body of common weal, even perfection of beauty in Sion.

Superstitious antiquity framed false Gods, one endued with this virtue, and
another with that: this a wise, that a warlike, and another a just God: yea,
for so many virtues, they framed so many goddesses, where one Temple might not
be consecrated to two goddesses, but distinct virtues must be worshipped with
distinct worship. So as Marcellus dedicating one and the same Temple to Honor,
and Virtue, was thought to offend against religion. But our happy, and better
instructed age, reducing all to one, truly to worship one true, and only God;
so in civil things, and government, it offers only one above and for all,
that whatsoever is separate, and distracted from it, may be counted, as
anathema, excommunicate, divorced, or as a barren handmaid to be sold to the
Usurer, unprofitable, imperfect, or as it were, not at all.

And now, as union into the name of great Britain, is like a Pantheon, and
brings manifold abundant blessings meeting together, and concurring in one,
so let us account our selves most blessed in our Sovereign unitor King James,
in whose Royal and princely Successor, our gracious K. Charles, and his noble
Progeny, is laid up all our obedience, and dwells all our happiness; even as
that worthy Scipio, is said therefore to be borne, that there might be one, in
whom all virtue should show it self effectually, and absolutely perfect: Hic
est Scipio, quem dii immortales nasci voluerunt, ut esset in quo se virtus per
omnes numeros efficaciter ostenderet.

This is the voice of truth it self; England and Scotland are so naturally
united in the name of great Britain, that the one nearely allied to the other,
can no longer be an alien, or stranger one to the other, except it may be
said, that, Quia meus est, non est meus, ipsaque damno est mihi proximitas. So
this natural conjunction should be no union, because it is both natural in
the Soil, and real in the Subject. But albeit the Romans put into the Temple
called Pantheon that precious gem named Vnio, divided and cut in two, yet we
with all our goods and gear, ought willingly be borne into the bosom of great
Britain, quae fundit in omnes imperium, not distributing union into parts, but
knitting up all parts into one, as Cicero's Orator all sciences, and
Aristotle's good man all virtues, as Cato was counted like perfect in all
virtues, or as the divine Plato sealed up in man, the lesser world, whatsoever
virtue was in the whole world, or rather as Eden the plentiful garden of God
sealing up the sum of all perfection and glory, Ezekiel. 28. was freight and
decked with all manner of precious stones, the Ruby, the Tapaze, and the
Diamond, the Chrysolice, the Onix, and the Jasper, the Saphir, the Emerande,
and the Carbuncle, and gold. Even now may it be said of this universal name of
Britain, as it was said of Rome. Imperii virtutumque omnium lar, and virtutum
omnium latissimum templum.

In ancient time it was counted ominous, if a stone fell, or a dog came among
brethren. And Socrates was wont to curse those, who by self-conceits, and
headstrong opinion attempted to set asunder those things which nature coupled
together. And now if any factious Tribune of the people interpose himself to
divide us, and to disturb the peace of Israel, thinking there is good fishing
in troubled waters, and that the honors, and benefits they hunt after, are
attained in Perturbata Republica: whereof they utterly despair in a peaceable
State, Quia in concordia ordinum nullos se usquam esse vident: verily such are
not unlike Medea, who so dispersed her brothers limbs, that they could not be
gathered again: Cujus etiam vultu laeditu pietas: as the Mariners at Sea well
observe in the two Stars Castor, and Pollux, that if one without the other
appear, they foresee a troubled Sea: but peaceable, and quiet without storm,
and without danger in the sight of both together.

The principality of Wales shall witness this truth, which never received any
thing any more beneficial for the people there, then uniting that Country to
the crown and kingdom of England. For whilst it was alone without his
brother, it was subject to storm, full of contentions, war, and shedding of
blood, but joined with his brother, it flourished with peace, and at this day is
blessed in the uniformity of government there established. And in mine opinion,
it is well observed in the Chronicle of Wales, how God was not pleased with the
first change of the name of Britain into the name of England; for presently
followed the terrible and cruel invasion of the Danes, and after that the
conquest of the Normans. But memorable is it, that the Britains ruled all the
whole Isle together, with the out Isles of Wight, Men, in English Anglisee,
Manaw, in English Man, Orkney, and Ewyst, 1137. years before Christ, and after
the year of his incarnation 688. even to the death of Cadwallader, the last
King of Britains, and of the noble race of Trojans. Which when in succeeding
age many mighty and famous Kings of England, considered, they labored by all
means to recover and resume the name and style of Kings of great Britain,
acccounting it dishonorable, to leese any jot of the honor of their most
princely progenitors. And therefore K. Knute, King of England, mighty in his
dominions of Swethen, from Germany to the North poles, with Norway and
Denmark, having obtained prosperous success in warring against Scotland, is
recorded after his death, the mightiest Prince in the West parts of the world,
and of all the noble Isle of Britain. And so William the Conqueror, for the
good success he likewise had in Scotland, is recorded King of all Britain;
and Henry the second, surnamed Curtmantle, is also for like success, recorded
King of all Britain. And if they be renowned and honored with name and style
of Britain, which by rightful descent or by conquest, were inheritours but to
one part only, though by their fortunes in war, they also claimed the other;
what rightful title must we then acknowledge, most justly now to belong to his
most excellent Majesty, in the imperial crown of both, who by lineall descent
inheriteth both.

Here I wish I had as many eyes as Argos, to look into their devises, who
seek to divide England from Scotland, and Scotland from England, renouncing
the name of great Britain, lest joined in one, they might as the forenamed
stars, appear together, shine together, and bring joy together. I would then
not spare to lay open, (as Cneius Flavius did reveal to the world the tricks
and mysteries of Lawyers of that time, and therefore was said to put out their
eyes, and to cut their purses) how also these Adamants hinder the natural
power, and virtue of the Lodestone: whom I call Adamants, as well for repugnant
qualities, as that they be truly Adamants, even Sons of Adam, practicing rather
in disobedience, dissension, and ruin of all, to lay hands upon that is
forbidden, then to draw the Iron, nay golden chain of linkes of love, in
obedience to the King, and for common peace, and preservation of men.

But herein such imitate the devise of Q. Fabius Labeo, seeking to have the
ship of common weal divided in parts; as when by compact of league with
Antiochus he ought to receive half part of Antiochus ships, cut them all in
the midst, craftily, so to defraud Antiochus of his whole Navy: or else
imitate they Cyrus, dividing great Rivers into many little Brooks, till they
be not only passable, but even dried up: for so these seek to stay the maine
and mighty Stream of great Britain by dividing it, and in dividing, to make
it of sundry kinds, unlike it self. Such dividing into parts, is disjoyning
of the parts, by disjoyning, dismembring, and by dismembring, spoiling, making
the stone Scyros, which whole and firmly compacted, does swim and floate above
the waters, to sink, and be drowned, because it is divided. But our two famous
kingdoms with all their provinces, shires, and countries united into the name
of great Britain, are like the goodly and pleasant river Danubius, which
passing by many Countries keeps his name, till it enter into Illiricum: where
receiving into it sixty other rivers of diverse other names, leeseth not only
his own and all their other names of parts, but is called Ister, one for all
containing all.

Here I require both of English and Scottish, is either of them now, as a
people disjoynted one from the other? Or as Sand without Lime? Or scattered
straw without binding? Or as Sampsons Foxes running diverse and contrary ways,
with fire brands of dissension among them? Nay here in the glory of great
Britain is renowned, that King James, with our gracious King Charles, and his
Royal issue do gather together that, which was scattered, and unite that,
which was divided, and restore that which was lost, and save that which was
endangered even by this means, uniting all in one name of Britain, as it was
said of Rome, uniting so many Countries into it self, all parts which
disagreed heretofore are now well agreeing. Hereupon Rome was said to be
anchora fluctuanti mundo: and as he says in Tacitus, regna bellaque per
Gallias semper fuere donec in nostrum jus concederetis. So happily does this
universal conjunction of all under one head, take away all discord, and
maintain conjunction of love for everlasting continuance. Only they which will
be alone, and not contained under one name of great Britain, are not bound up
with the sheaves, nor carried home into the Barn, and therefore are like
gleanings after harvest, left behind in the field, subject to storm, they
come not two and two into this Arc, and whatsoever remains alone, Extra
arcam, perit.

Such are not unlike that Captain, whom Xerxes rewarded with a garland, for
escaping alive, when all other soldiers were slain, and yet because he came
alone without the rest, he hanged him: and as the the Athenians in the war
with the Aeginetae, when one returned, without his fellows, ran upon him,
and killed him, asking where were the rest? And what can such (I pray you) as
separate themselves from the happy union of all Britains answer for
themselves, if they be called to account? Can any be English, and not Scottish,
can any be Scottish, and not English? Let that outcry against the Romans be
ingeminated against such, saying: Quintilius Varus, restore us our Legions,
where are our Soldiers, what is become of them? Where are the English, where
are the Scottish, let all restore themselves, and each one the other to the
name of Britains. And so I say to all, and every one of both nations, Cedo
alterum, (For I fear lest this name Cedo alterum, mentioned in Taci^us, be in
scarely found among many:) but I call aloud where art thou, Cedo alterum, give
us thy self, bring in thy friend, yea, yet another, and another, be not
wanting to the weal public; una navis bonorum omnium, all good Subjects are
contained in one Ship of common Weal, numeru^ non habet illa suu^, one is not
perfect without the other: for Britains Subject ought maintain mutual society
for common good. As for others disclaiming us, and disjoyning themselves, only
I wish they may all be of the same consort, and society with us, for, victrix
causa dii placuit, though, victa Catoni.

And albeit many great, and mighty Potentates on earth make a great show of
Copia verborum, by copious recital of many Provinces, and Kingdoms; as if his
Majesty should entitle himself by all the several shires under his dominions,
and not by one honorable Title of great Britain comprehending all: to show
how this misliked some, it is recorded when the Emperors Ambassador coming to
the French King rehearsed the Emperors style at large, which consisted of many
dominions and names of countries; the French King willed his Herald to repeat
and say over the name of France as many times as the other had rehearsed the
several titles of his Masters dominions: intimating that one name of France
well compacted and united of many particulars into one general name, was
better then diverse particular names of many countries. And when Quintius
Flaminius heard how his army was terrified, at the recital of many his enemies
forces, of their diversity of names, of countries, of Armor, and of
multitudes, Dahae, Medi, Cadusij, Elemei, Cataphracti, etc. Spearemen, Horsemen
Footmen, Archers, etc. Oh says he, what a do is here, with numbers, and
diversity of numbers? all these are but only Syrians, and make a great show,
like that great Supper, which mine Host at Chalcis dressed for me, and for my
followers, with much variety, and marvel at the diversity of the dishes, and
yet all was but one flesh, though of so many diverse dressings. The river Peneus
may better serve for instance: it divides it self, and flows into diverse
Rivers, and every one of these Rivers in his division, has a proper name to
himself, one after this name, and another after that: but all these meeting in
one, and becoming again one great, and mighty River, do now lose the
particular names, which they held being divided, and are called by one general
name, as before, namely, Peneus. Non sunt multiplicanda entia sine necessitate.

It is not reasonable that brethren from one parent, should be divided in one
house, though they be severed in distinct place: but be as fingers to one hand,
knit together by common joints for mutual offices: even as the brethren
Molionides, are poetically imagined to have but one body: or rather the three
Cerions, to have many bodies, but one soul, and one mind; not unlike to that
of Pithagoras, Vt unum ex pluribus fiat, many in name, but one in deed. And as
when Piso was commended to posterity for frugality, I doubt not, but he was
wise withal; and as when Lelius was renowned for wisdom, I doubt not but he
was just withal: and Metellus for piety, I doubt not but he was temperate
withal: and Aristides for justice, I doubt not but he was valiant withal: yet
I know that the denomination is ever but of one, though it contain things two,
and more: as the Temple consecrated to two brethren Castor and Pollux, was named
only Castors Temple: and the munificency of two Consuls, Caesar, and Bibulus,
was called only Caesar's munificency: and even many imaginary shows, and
shadows have seemed complete, in deciphering one thing only: yea the very
images of excellent men have been patterns, and resemblances of many
consummate virtues in one: as Plutarchs Alexander, Xenophons Cyrus, Homers
Ulysses, Virgils Aeneas, and Lucians Imagines, instead of all.

And as there is a common Idea, and infolded notion of all things in the mind
of man, so the other viewing the whole race and tract of things in the world,
does tell us, that as many peculiar excellent properties, may be, and are in
one man, and he over them, as sole Monarch over all the diversities of
worthiest virtues; so a King under his Imperial power has to him subjected
many shires, states, cities, honors, provinces, and kingdoms, himself being
sole sovereign and Lord over all. Therefore though magnanimity only, was
attributed to Cyrus, only modesty to Agesilaus, only wisdom to Themistocles,
skill to Philip, and boldness to Brasidas: yet Alexander, as Plutarch
reports, was furnished, and full-fraight with all these. And Quintus Metellus
is reported to attain and possess together, ten of the chiefest, and greatest
things that ever he desired (as if he had at once ten Provinces under his
command) and was known a mighty warrier a sweet Orator, a great commander, to
prosper in his greatest affairs, to be in greatest honor, of great wisdom, a
chief Senator, plentiful in children, rich of substance, and most renowned in
the City. So copiously has one man been stored with plentiful variety of
manifold graces, all these at once dwelling in him, and he well ordering them;
even as one free, and absolute Monarch may, and does rule many mighty and
diverse Nations, knit in one by obedience, and love among themselves, and by
law, and justice from the King, who by his laws speaks alike to all, is
heard of all, and understood of all: una, eademque communi voce.

I confess the name of great Britain has been long time eclipsed, or rather
like those voices, which Antiphon said were kept close, and frozen up in the
Winter, until the heat of Summers shining Sun resolved the frozen, and fast
bound air, that they might be again disclosed. Comfortable is the warmth of
this blessing, in the Sun-shining days of our Sovereign Lords King James, and
King Charles; wherein not only clouds are scattered, but the renowned name of
great Britain breaks forth as a gladsome voice from frozened air, and comes
forth, as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, long time before locked up like a
prisoner. Doubtless this is our year of Jubilee, a year of delivering the
Captive, of making the bond free, and of joy, even in sort, and true sense to
us, Annus Platonicus, wherein things are come about again to be as they were,
( Iure Postliminij) to recover our selves, and be restored to name and fame of
great and glorious Britain, long divided into two kingdoms, but now most
happily, and joyfully subjected, and reunited in all the government thereof unto
one only Sovereign, most wise and most religious governor of the same.

Deus haec benigna restituit in sedem vice. Doubtless this is the Lords doing,
and it is mavelous in our eyes, this is the day that the Lord has made for
us to rejoice, and be glad therein. For as it is said, we owe to God our
selves, for creating us when we were not; and more than our selves; for
re-creating, and restoring us, when we were lost: So ought all good Subjects
think the days more happy, and joyful, in which they are now, as it were newborn, then those, in which they were first borne, as is well said; Non minus
illustres, a que jucundi sunt illi dies, quibus conservamur, quam quibus
nascimur. Happy art thou, o Israel, o people saved by the Lord, who is like
unto thee? Thou were lost, and art found, bond, and art free, eclipsed, and art
glorious, dead, and art alive, thy name forgotten, and behold, it resoundeth
even among hard rocks, and in the hollownesse of mountains; thy beauty
withered, and behold thy valleys stand thick, replenished, and adorned, with
fairest varieties of all good; thy years forgotten, thy feathers plucked, and
thy strength weakened, and behold thou waxest young, and lusty like the Eagle;
yea thine honor, the honor of thine ancient name ruined like an old house,
but behold it is now repaired, and called after his own, and old name; even as
deliaca navis, torn, and taken in pieces, was renewed, and built again to his
most ancient form, and called still deliaca navis. Sic rerum summa novatur.

And albeit worldly kingdoms and civil States seem subject to alteration, and
do carry in their outward appearance, faces sometime shining, and glorious as
the Sun, and sometime defaced, darkened, and deformed, conquering, and
conquered, triumphing, and enthralled; yet the common weal it self like the
ship before mentioned, ruinated and repaired, is still the same; even as the
Sun, though eclipsed, is still the same; and a river sometime shallow,
sometime deep, still the same; and a man now sick, now in health, still the
same. Respublica enim semper ut civitas, est contigua, una, perpetuaque serie
compacta, and though admit it mutation, as our state did long time, ever since
the first division, till this blessed day; yet Britains common weal, was but
sick for a season, till health returned into the whole body, by the glory of
the head. So as now the first and ancient common weal of great Britain is
again conformed to his prime estate, sound, the same, and like it self; and
is likely so to continue and flourish, so long as it retains the common band
of community, and individual knot of unity. As Socrates is said, as long as he
is Socrates, to be one and the same. Whether in childhood, or manhood, in in
fancy, or in age, the same Socrates. But Heraclitus denied, because of the
odaine change of men and things, that one man could go into the same river
twice: and ill debtors borrowing money heretofore, refuse payment, because they
think themselves not the same men, and plead the day is past, and cannot be
again; deluding with that saying: Ego non sum ego: hodie and heri. But such
conclusions or rather collusions are simple rusticall follies; as he says,
rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at ille labitur and labetur in omne
volubilis aevum. For howsoever times alter, yet truth ever shows it self; as
the river Lycus, running along under the earth for a long space, breaks forth
again, and as is said, alioque renascitur orb.

The sleepers in Sardos, when they awaked, thought they had passed no time: but
we shall be more drowsy, and sottish then they, if now rowsed from our long
sleep, wherein the honorable name of great Britain was forgotten, we now not
open our eyes to acknowledge the happiness of these our days: wherein our
hearts may leap for joy, to see that two of our most gracious Kings, as Fathers
of peace, and procreators, protectors, and perfitors of Subjects joy, sit in
Royal seat of great Britains most ancient, and most absolute Monarchy:
whereby our strength, peace, wealth, and honor is the more increased, in that
our Sovereign is the more universally obeyed, and we are doubtless hereby
more blessed, then all our forefathers: of whom we say, as Demaratus the
Corinthian said, that all dead Grecians are, deprived of great joy, in that
they lived not to see Alexander in Darius Chair. But comfortably spoke he in
the Comedy: Gaudeo, cum video hujus generis reliquias; and how joyful is it
for us to acknowledge one another Britains, as it was for them brethren in the
Comedy which after so long time came to knowledge one of another: yea now for
us to know one another to be Britains by all signs and tokens, Non naevo
aliquo aut crepundiis, sed corpore omni. And though he may be pitied, which
sits alone mourning, and crying: Nec mihi eognatus quisquam fuit isto nome:
yet may both English, and Scottish rejoice, because neither sister is a widow,
but all their legitimate children are now of one name, and one blood, become,
and borne again Britains, as it were by a Pithagoricall Palingenesia, even
twice Britains, as Hippolitus was called Virbius, because he lived again; and
was twice the same man. Aeson miratur; and olim ante quater denos hunc se
reminiscitur annos. And surely (as Pliny says) Sparsas and lacera^
gentilitates colligere and conuectere, est, ut ita dicam, renasci jubere.

Thus we say, and thus we sing, Redeunt Saturnia regna, even the golden age of
Britains Monarchy is come again: Alter Tiphis, and altera, quae vehat Argos,
delectos Heroas: atque iterum ad Trojam magnus mittetur Achilles: another
governor and chief Master, of the commonweals Ship, and another Arc, or
Argosie, as before, does transport the Nobles, and Commons both of England, and
Scotland, to fetch the golden fleece, which Egbert that Dragon held so long
time in his jaws. Quondam etiam victus redit in praecordia virtus. Now then,
Siquid patriae virtutis, if there be in us valor, of men stirred up, with
remembrance of the name, and honor of the name, and honor of our Country: Si
quid antiquorum hominum: if any drop of our Ancestors blood live in us: Si quid
humanitatis: if any touch of brotherly kindness, we cannot, but readily
embrace each other, as the ancient Romans reconciled after long civil war,
and shedding much blood Iungebant Castra, and consalutabant Cives: yea, and
triumph also as they did, saying, exurgere, and reviviscere Romani nominis
memoria incipit, and gloria: unless it may be said of us, as of that base
minded Vitellius: Tanta torpedo invasit animum, ut si eum principem fuisse
caeteri non meminissent, ipse oblivisceretur: or it may be said to us
Britains descended from Brutus, as sometimes to another Brutus, in another
sense, not here intended: Dormis Brute, and non es Brutus.

Our country men, and neighbors of Wales, as Chronicles report, derive
themselves from ancient true Britains* and do retain the British tongue,
though somewhat mixed, called Camberaec, which could never be extinguished by
any attempts of Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans: and that famous City London,
is still by them called Trenwith, of Brutus first named Trenovanton. And the
Country it self is called Cambria, of Camber, Brutus Son, though we call it
Wales, a word imposed by Saxons, naming them Walshe, which is strange; and many
mountains, rivers and cities are among them still retaining British names:
extremos pudeat rediisse: let us be ashamed to be last, or backward, seeing
another Arthur King of all great Britain reigns; lest we still seem
overawed, and captivated to the Conqueror Egbert his will, and by his beating
us, to be made as base vassals, forgetting our selves, our names, and our
Country, and not daring to challenge, or acknowledge them: even as that base
slave Sos^a was enforced to yield to his Master Mercury, and say, Pugnis me
fecisti tuum, and si sum ego, tamen non credo mihi, nomen simul abstulit cum
forma.

Neither do I esteem the change of name, a matter of indifferency, as if it
were all one, whether we were called Britains, or continued English, and
Scots. But in my judgment it is reason to alter all into Britains, because it
was our most ancient, and is the more honorable name, except we will wear the
Badge of slavery on our sleeve, to brag to the world, that we are not ashamed
to be conquered, so to show our nakedness, and shame, which Adam sought to
cover, when he once saw it. Neither in mine opinion is it reason, that the now
Nobles or Gentlemen of England, should delight in name imposed by that Saxon;
seeing the whole race of Saxons is for the most part rooted out by the Danes
and Normans, and none of the Saxons blood that was Noble, or almost but Gentile
is left; and seeing (as Chronicle reports) it was counted in the days of the
Conqueror, a reproach to be called an English man, or to join in marriage with
any of the English (which in my understanding is Saxons nation.) Redit ad
authors genus, and generosa in ortus exurgunt semina suos.

And verily names, and titles, are matters of great consideration: unless,
like Varro, not caring for name, we should also say, that the God whom the Jews
worshipped, was but the same Jupiter, and common God of other countries, though
otherwise called, Nihil interesse censens, quo nomine nuncupetur dum eadem res
intelligatur. But in the union of the Sahins and Romans, (as Eutropius
reports) this was especially agreed upon, that the Sabins and Romans should
assume one another name promiscuously: so that by no means they should be
distinguished by name. And albeit among us, custom has begotten prescription,
yet we may remember, what is well said in the Comedy: Nunquam ita quisquam,
been subducta ratione fuit, quin res, aetas, usu^, aliquid apportet novi, ut
quae prima putes, post in experiendo, repudias. As in the Roman story, (when
it was objected that innovations, were dangerous to the state, and nothing was
to be done, whereof formerly there was no president) says Canuleius. Quid
postea? nullane res nova institui debet? and quod nondum est factum (multa enim
nondum sunt facta, in novo populo) ea, ne (si utilia quidem sint) fieri oportet?

Whilst we of England were put apart from Scotland, it was reason we should
have a name divided, and distinguished from them, and retain that name, and
condition, as pleased fortune to impose, as Andromache says to her Son, Sum,
quod casus dedit: but being restored in integrum, and every part knit together,
it is a like reason we return to our old name, and say, as in the Prophet, I
will go, and return to my former husband, for at that time it was better for
me, than now. (Hos. 2.) And no man when he has tasted the new wine, but says
the old is better. So that as the Roman Empire first was a Monarchy,
afterward governed by two Consuls, and so a long passing through diverse kinds
of governments, till it returned to his former state of Monarchy, to be as it
was at first: even so the state of great Britain, first was as a Monarchy all
governed by one; since it was divided, but now it returns to his Monarchy
again, Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virisque.

For men wax weary, in time, of their present condition: and Rome mole
laboravit sua: or rather, and more truly, God sets bounds to all things,
which they cannot pass: even the mightiest powers have their periods. And all
worldly kingdoms thus changing, (after long experience) say, the first is
best; and so likewise, Vt rerum, ita verborum interit usus, quem penes est
rerum and vis and norma loquendi. But in this case neither the thing nor the
name, being changed: but we lawfully recovering that which was lost, renewing
the title of great Britain, enjoying our country (as we did before) calling all
Britains, and holding all things in the same safety, and security under name
of great Britain (as before under names of England and Scotland) say all and
each to other, Pascite, ut ante, boves, pueri submittite tauros.

It is a good and gracious deed to provide for real agreement in all equal
conjunction, and mutual participation. But in my simple opinion, it had been
Verbo tollere, and reipsa relinquere, only in show to take away difference, but
not in deed, without uniting both kingdoms into the name and style of great
Britain; for, as he complained, Tirannus occidit? Tirannis vivit? So if the
old enmity of English, and Scottish be removed, and yet the names still
remain, I fear that the very names would ever put ill men in mind of old
grudge, and incite new variance: as is said of one, that he was Romani nominis
inimicus, at deadly hatred with the very name: where the name is taken for the
very cause of hatred. As, Eo nomine hostis, for that cause, even for name sake
he is an enemy: even as in Rome, when all things were accorded, and all parties
pleased, only a name, which was in dislike among them, was thought hinderance
to their mutual concord, and content, saying, Non placere nomen, id periculo
sum esse, id officere, id obstare libertati: and therefore the Sanate persuaded
Lucius, Tarquinius, Collatinus, otherwise in all respects approved, and beloved
of all, even for his names sake, to forsake his office, saying, Absolve
beneficium, amicus abi, exonera civitatem vano (forsan) metu. This I speak,
lest retaining former name of English, and Scottish, which heretofore has been
offensive to each other, we call (as before is spoken) the ill disposed to
former opposition, as between fire, and water, even to Kindle such a fire in
Jacob, as will devour in Israel, and no water shall be able to quench it in
Bethel. Where it may be thought more fit, to set aside all difference of former
names: Vt exoneremus rempub. vano (forsan) metu; as it is said of one, Quod
nihil est metuit, metuit, sine corpore nomen. And if any account the fear of
name nothing, (be it also say I nothing) yet a man cannot be too careful, or
fearful of that which is counted even nothing, seeing it is said. Qui cavet,
vix etiam cavet, dum cavet.

Let former destructions be present instructions. Offensive distinction of
names has bred much woe. In Italy faction of Guelphs and Gibelines arose for
name sake. In England much blood for the white and red Rose. In Justinians time
fearful division between the Veneti and Parsini about colors blew and
green. In which grievous contentions, arising first of small or no cause but
only of difference in name and diversity of colors, deadly hatred is often times
kindled among former friends, as against sworn enemies. After Phalarides
death, the Agrigentini made a decree that none should use glauca vest, because
the Tirants did use glaucis subligaculis: for they hated whatsoever might
remember them of former Tyranny. And the Romans publicly ordained, that no
Roman should be ever called after the name of Manlius; for, because his
remembrance was displeasing, they would have his name utterly perish. I wish
that nomen, or mentio ipsa, the names English, and Scottish, borders, former
feud, wars and bloodshed between the two nations, were not once mentioned
within our lips, but as nomen Pelopidarum utterly put out, abolished, and never
heard of, as that which is laid up in silence in the Grave: even now that not
the least occasion be left, no not in sport or inter ludicra certamina (as we
have a name of play amongst us called prison base, one part striving for
England, and another for Scotland, representing unto us the variance betwixt
both nations) lest it prove, as that betwixt them two brethren, Demetrius, and
Perseus, King Phillips sons; who in ludicio certamine, opposite one to the
other, with their companies divided on both sides, fell in earnest unto a maine
deadly war one against the other. I say, as near as may be, these opposite
terms of Scottish and English should cease; except they remain, as only they
ought remain, Epithites pertaining to one name of great Britain, and to one
people Britains, as all the Jews of all the several Tribes, were called
Jacob Gods people, and Israel his inheritance.

And herein (seeing as Vegetius says) princip^^ est pro salute R^ipub. and
nova excogitare, and antiqua restituere) both nations ought joyfully applaud
the late proclamation, and in all humbleness of duty, submit themselves to the
Kings Majesty's good pleasure, seeking thereby the common good of Weal
public, and not his own glory (as they do, who call their lands after their
own name, to get a name upon earth: and as Valens the Emperor desired
(according to his ambitious, and vainglorious humor,) to call this whole
Continent Valentia, after his own name: for which thing also Henoch the Son of
Cain, building a City, was first noted,) but as a King most gracious, not natus
sibi sed patriae (as Hadrian the Emperor professed before all: Ita se
rempublicam gesturum, ut sciret populi rem esse non propriam) thinks only on
the ancient name, Non tam mutans, quam aptans, so to root out remembrance of
former hatred, and to unite both into one. Pastor populi non suum ipsius, sed
Subditorum quaerit commodum: and officio suo semper fungitur, utilitati
consulens, and societati.

Change of names has ever been thought meet in policy, even where men formerly
Strangers, and of diverse kingdoms were to be trained up together, and framed
in fashion one to the other: as were given to Daniel, Hananiah, Mishaell, and
Azariah, (Dan. 1.) new, and other names. And Daniel was called Baltasar, and
Hananiah, Shadrah, and Mishael Mesach, and Azariah Abednego of purpose, by
changing their names, to make these forget themselves, their country, and if it
were possible, the God of their fathers. And so the Turks have, from time to
time, in their policy changed the old names of those places, they now
possess, which before professed Christiany, and when upon any Conquest, they
take into their government Christians, they impose on them new names, to live
like them, and as one people among them; and shall we think it a wrong or
inconvenience, that, if a Grecian Prince or other Christian King recover
against the Turk, they afterward abolish a name imposed on them, and call any
Province, People or City after their old and ancient name? Et si hoc in arido,
quid in viridi? If this be done ( ex facto) by the children of this world, unto
an evil end: may not his Majesty in his princely wisdom (Fas estet ab host
doceri) (ex jure) for the undoubted good of the children of light call to
remembrance, and put in execution the wise Council of Maecenas to Augustus: to
take away all differences whatsoever, even of the meanest things which might
be thought on, whether of name or apparel, or any thing else, to the intent
all things might be thoroughly composed in one uniforme fashion, and conformity
among all his Subjects, to their undoubted good?

It has been often observed, that Parva scintilla neglecta magnum saepe
excitavit incendium. And sores slightly cured, break forth into greater
danger. And, if I might boldly write my mind without mislike, I would
undertake sufficiently to prove, that if the name had not been changed into
great Britain, it might be feared we should not long (as we ought ever)
continue one; and that (love being not without dissimulation) we would among
our selves, as is upbraided to the inconstancy of another Nation (now not to be
here named) Ridendo fidem frangere, and so love, as that we would hate again.
For as a chief inhabitant, and commander in privernum, being asked in the
Senate at Rome, what peace they should expect, answered, S^ bonam dederitis,
fidam, and perpetuam: si malam, haud diuturnam. So here may it be said, if
union in name, bring also in deed, a good composition, and faithful
conjunction bona fide, it will doubtless by Gods goodness, last ever: but
otherwise I fear (which God forbid) may again rent in sunder, and make the
new breach worse than the former. And therefore wise was that saying; Ejusdem
jurit esse debent qui sub eodem rege victuri sunt; and that practice of Romulus
renowned, who by union of diverse Nations, Eodem nomine and eodem jure Latinos
vocavit. And hereof grew the Italicum bellum, because the Latins united in
other respects, were not joined eodem jure with the Romans. To speak plain,
we all confess our union in our obedience to the King, as to the head: but yet
without continuance of that union also in the name of great Britain, and of
other things thereto requisite (to be farther by the Honorable Commissioners
considered) I fear we shall prove, as imperfect, if not deformed a body, as
Apelles (before noted) painted Venus, only perfect in the head, and left all
the parts of the body unperfect. Neither can I, for my part, imagine that part
of the body well united to his head, which does not concur with all the body in
all his parts perfect with the head. Vt nec pes nec caput uni reddatur formae.

Herein let natures workmanship in our natural bodies lead us to the
imitation of her wisdom, in the government of bodies civil: and as she has
in natural mixtion reduced the four contrary Elements into a temperate and
agreeing conformity, by taking away suspicion of emulation, making them lose
their proper names, and jointly called mistionis forma: so should we by
temperate discretion be willingly united with our neighbor friends into one
corporation: especially seeing the reality of every thing we enjoy is to
continue in all respects the same, and only a formality of appellation a little
changed. Naturam ducem dum sequimur non aberrabimus, said he: and the God of
nature has spoken it, so that we must believe, That a kingdom divided cannot
stand, howsoever it may glory in the multitude of his parts: wherein a common
Weal may fitly be resembled to musical instruments; which howsoever
consisting of the multitude of strings, yet the harmony is in the unity of
proportion with agreeable consent of distinct sounds. Now as a little jarre in
music, a little intention or remission of any one string discordeth all the
harmony; so in this excellent musical concord of a well ordered kingdom,
never so small difference, though it be but titular between the several parts
of one commonweal, sometimes breeds hatred, oftentimes envy, but always
emulation. Whereupon Philip Comines well observed, Finitimorum aemulationem
nativam esse: that it was essential for neighbor regions to emulate one the
other: which is only remedied by taking away the frets and by incorporation
making them not now our neighbors, but all one with our selves. And herein
consists the nature of true mixtion (whereat all Commonweals should tend)
when every thing remains that was, yet nothing as it was; when many contrary
things yield up their contrariety and plurality unto one, consisting of all;
which participating of all their reconciled natures, imposes only a new name,
to their new manner of being, which is to be one instead of many; and that not
by coacervation or apposition of things without farther mixtion, remaining
still distinct within themselves, but by union of consociation, which takes
nothing away from these things that were before distinct, but their
distinction. Out of which mistion will arise excellent temperature, which we
hope long to see in our British Commonweal, wherein no humor either of
English or Scottish may be predominant, but temperamentum aequabile, and that
ad pondus too. Which as it is seldom found any where, so it is always found
where it is found with perennity. And concerning such mistion was that said of
Romulus and Trajanus, and now may it be said of King James, and King Charles;
Diversas gentes ita commercio miscuit ut quod genitum esset usquam id apud
omnes natum esse videretur. And of such mixtion may that of Zeno be said,
alterius chorus major, meus antem concinnior: Another Kings Empire may be
greater, consisting of diversity of Nations, but ours more compact and united
in one. And this mixtion of both our nations so mixed in one, brings forth
but one title of GREAT BRITAIN. Vnum, sed leonem, as the proverb says.

Which I the rather urge here, against Politicians (if any such be) of this
age, who seek to nourish faction and opposition in the State, and
Commonweal, and think nothing better, Quam si in commune non consulant; who
ever have a Rowland for an Oliver; where fearful experience does often show
the fruits of that Axiom, Contraria contrariis curatur. Which manner of keeping
Subjects one opposite, and offensive to the other, is a flinty, and fiery
society, even Societas lapidum, fornicationi similima, quae casura, nisi
invicem obstarent, hoc enim ipso continetur. And this practice, wheresoever
prevaileing, is more then Machivelian, even devilish, sowing seed of
dissension in parts, to destroy the whole. Therefore it being an infallible,
but woeful ground of truth, Nulla salus bello; It is meet that all and every
Subject of great Britain, understand, and profess the other part of that
Verse, Pacem te poscimus omnes. For so I think this Axiom in a State, is
better for preservation of Weal public: Similima similimus nutriuntur.

And if I were worthy, here would I advise all the Magistrates of great
Britain, which either now do, or hereafter shall bear rule under their high
Sovereign, in any parts of his dominions, to remember in all their high
honors, that Cleo, and Themistocles took contrary courses, and were both
misliked in time of their Magistracy. For Cleo called all his friends, and old
acquaintance together, and renounced them openly, giving them to understand,
that now he was so advanced, they should expect nothing from him for former
friendships sake. And Themistocles answered one, wishing him to be alike to
all, and not partial, that he would not sit in seat of honor, and not do
more good to former friends than to others. But truth is, in a Commonwealth,
nor disdain of former friends becomes Cleo, nor partial favors
Themistocles; for community regards neither any man, neither any cause for
private respects, but is as the Sun, yielding alike common comfort to all:
which thing I wish all, as one man, wisely to perceive, and willingly perform.
And yet may Cyrus have in remembrance, the very meanest of them, with whom
sometimes he lived. And Ahasuerus looking into the Chronicles may remember
those which have saved the King from any, who sought to lay violent hands upon
him. And the Macedonians may not either grudge, or disdain that Alexander
prefer the Persians before them of his own Country. Ecquis est qui vestra
necessaria suffragia pro voluntariis, and serva pro liberis faciat?

But to return into the Kings high way for the name of Britain: seeing his
Majesty may say, Non me Troja capit, Scotland alone does not contain my
greatness: and therefore speaks also to England: Salve fatis mihi debita
tellus: England is also the lot of mine inheritance: and both England, and
Scotland will I make one Empire, and renew their names into the first title of
great Britain, as it were Ilium in Italiam portans: (though in removing all
the gods out of the Temple, to give place to Jupiter, only that petty god
Terminus refused, and would not move) yet let the Termini, and bounds of both
our Nations, and all the people therein contained, willingly give place to the
just pleasure of their sole Monarch, and even in this also, acknowledge K.
Charles their supreme head, and governor: where obedience in each Subject, is
like the reconciled Genius, utriusque regni: which though before was as angry
Juno, much adverse to the Romans, yet now like Juno, out of her very image
seems to speak aloud, Romam se velle ire: Anger is appeased, displeasure
forgotten, and discord come to a perpetual end.

Nec quenquam incuso potuit quae plurima virtus
Esse, fuit: toto certatum est corpore regni:
And now the whole commonweal, odiis saturata, quiescit.

Neither may contention, either of antiquity, or any other dignity (whereabout
Albanes, and Romans, so much contended, and would not yield one to the other)
break this common band of love among our selves, or loyalty to our Sovereign,
who imbraceth both Nations with equal and indifferent love. But we ought to
consider, that both English and Scottish ( quis major? aeque ambo pares) making
no question of difference for common goods sake, without difference may
challenge like interest in his Majesty's favor ( Et vitula tu dignus and hic)
to be divided equally, and graciously among all, by Geometrical proportion as
his Majesty shall be pleased to deem meet. Which thing may move all to mutual
kindness, and reciprocate love one toward the other, with an orderly
conformity of both to live together in all peace, and Christian charity,
affectioned to love one another, with brotherly love, and in giving honor to
go one before the other; Romans 12. as it is said of Scipio and Lelius, actuosae
vitae iter aequali gradu exequebantur: not grudgingly, nor contentiously,
striving for prerogative of blessing and birthright, in his Majesty's favor;
as if it might be said to his highness, Have thou but one blessing, my father?
Genesis 27. for his Majesty's abundance, and overflowing measure of honor,
pours forth, as out of a fountain, streams to fill up every empty channel,
Nemo ex hoc numero mihi non donatus abibit; and where every one may be
contented, Cuncta aderunt; animus, si te non deficit aequus. Herein let us take
example from the Roman Common Weal (and surely for our instruction may it be
said, Nulla unquam respublica, nec major, nec sanctior, nec bonis exemplis
ditior fuit) where Dyonisius Halicarnasseus gives us a strange show of two
Consuls Largius and Claelius, who both strove to give precedence one to the
other, preferring each other before himself, and reckoning one another worth
before his own: and this done, two or three several times, neither presuming
to go before the other, but still refusing, and could by no means either be
persuaded to take the pre-eminence one before the other. But is any man's eye
evil, because the Kings eye in special and gracious aspect is good?
Doubtless when a King does not all things ad voluntatem, sed ad utilitatem
omnium; they which mislike, (and yet seem of the same league, and society with
others) do notwithstanding like Nahaz the Ammonite, (1 Samuel 11.) join in
common covenant with others, but on condition only, that they may thrust out
the others right eyes. Hoccine in commune honores vocare? quaenam ista
societas? quaenam consortio est?

But whosoever intends truly the common good, let him remember, that Solon
said, The only way to keep subjects in unity, is to maintain an equality for
all: for motus, as Plato says, is in inequalitate; but status, and quies in
aequalitate: which thing is spoken, not to breed, or maintain parity in
condition of men, for that equality were true inequality, nay iniquity, so to
confound the world. But these things are alleged to show, that our gracious
Sovereign may herein (I speak under favor) be resembled to IANVS, who had two
faces, to look forward, to look backward: for so his Majesty is set in the
midst, sole Sovereign of all great Britain, to look on England, to look
back to Scotland, and with princely and favorable aspect to countenance both,
Tros Rutulusve fuat, nullo discrimine habebo: where both being made one common
Country, that saying may well befit our common Emperor; Hostem qui feriet,
mihi erit Carthaginensis, quisquis erit. And there is that equality, before
mentioned, distilling from his Grace and Majesty in honoring, and defending
both alike, ( lusta pari premitur, veluti cum pondere libra, prona nec hac plus
part sedet nec surgit ab illa.) where none ought strive contentiously, lest
they seem to offer violence to the Kings Grace, or to his honor, or to both:
as the Midwife charged Pharez in making the breach between him and his
brother, by forcing his birth before his brothers, through strife in his
mothers womb; whose name therefore, was called Pharez, which signifies
division.

But our brotherhood is not in strife, as that of Cain and Abel, Esau and
Jacob, Ismael and Isaac: nor as that of Geta and Antoninus, sons to the
Emperor Severus: after whose death, their mother Iulia was forced to divide
the Empire betwixt her sons, severing and setting them asunder into separate
governments, with a sea betwixt them, because of their hot contentions and
implacable hatred. And God forbid, that we should by opposite contentions one
against another, provoke the common parent of both our Nations, as those two
brethren did their parent Iulia, to cry out against us, as she did against
them: O my sons, you have found the way how to be severed and divided by sea
and land, into distinct regiments, and' as you say, the water divides you one
from the other: but how will you divide me your mother? How shall I be divided
between you both? Will you dissect me into parts also, As them two lovers
(mentioned by Plutarke) striving for their love, Dum uterque ad se certatim
rapere conatur, rent her in pieces? Let our strife rather be like that of
Ephestion and Craterus, who contended whether should love their King Alexander
most; in so much that Alexander was enforced to decide the controversy,
adjudging that Ephestion loved the King best, and Craterus Alexander best. So
it pleased the King in his sentence equally to divide his love, and so did they
both equally strive to love: and after this manner did the Jones and Chi^
contend in love to Hercules: and Judah and Israel for David. And so I doubt not
but our contention is of the like love, and duty toward our Sovereign: but as
for hatred and malice amongst our selves, so separating us that we cannot be
mixed together, Dii talia Graiis, erroremque hostibus illum. Seeing (as he
said) no greater hurt can be wished to our enemies then to be disunited among
themselves, and if they will not be at one with us, that they may be at odds
between themselves: Maneat quaeso duretque gentibus si non amor nostri at
certe odium sui. Quando nihil jam praestare fortuna majus potest, quam hostium
discordiam.

And now farther to enforce this union into both Nations, the rather, because
we are both alike under one head and governor: has not his Majesty two eyes,
to respect both kingdoms; two ears, to hear alike the cause of both; two
shoulders, to bear alike the burden, and care of both; two hands, to
distribute honors alike to both; and two feet, to go one before the other,
yet both alike to support but one body? The inequality only is, if we are not
alike dutiful, and thankful; neither do we, as the Apostle exhorts, (Romans
12.) Carry like minds one toward another; nor make our selves in our own
conceits, equal to them of the lower sort. And where Xenophon calls
Magistrates, and mighty men, the Kings eyes, the Kings ears, the Kings
shoulders, yea also his hands, and his feet, it is not thereby meant, that
they should think they also had two eyes to envy one the other; two ears, to
listen after advantages, or offenses one against the other; two shoulders, to
shove at, and shoulder out one the other; two feet, to out-runne, and prevent
one the other; two hands, to catch, and snatch one from the other, or to carry
fire in one hand, and water in the other, or to build with the one, and to pull
down with the other, or with the one to offer a gift, and with the other a
stab; Altera manu panem, altera lapidem; but that their eyes, ears, shoulders,
feet, and hands are, or should be mutual helpers one to the other, for the
common good, and public service of the whole State. And I persuade my self,
that all Magistrates under his Majesty, of the one, or other Nation, united
now in one common name of Britains will for public Administration of the
Commonweal, so see with their eyes, hear with their ears, bear up the head
with their shoulders, and walk uprightly, Having pure, and clean hands, that
as the fingers in the hand are distinctly divided, and yet do clap, and clasp
themselves together, for more strength; so all of command and in authority
within great Britain, though they have distinct offices, yet will so concur,
and agree together, that though there appear among them, and their distinct
public services, as, in digitis, divisio, it shall not be, ab unitate
praecisio.

And verily the two kingdoms, are like two hands warming and enfolding each
other, continuing two, yet in one body: where if the right hand challenge more
necessary use and service in the body then the left, or the left hand more than
the right, and one not readily yield to join with the other, as is meet, the
head may in his good pleasure make choice and use of either: as in the Roman
Story, when Tribunes disagreed for chiefest honor, Quintus Servilius, Consul,
of much less dignity, and authority than a King, took the matter into his
own hands, saying, Patria Majestas altercationem istam dirimet.

Here Prudence among Subjects has need intermeddle with all other virtues, and
show the power of union in her self; where Justice demands right, fortitude
tollerateth what ought be borne, temperance reformeth will, subdueth anger,
moderateth passion, and represseth ambition; and all in unity of obedience
coupled together, bring forth plentiful fruit, for society, honor, and joy.
Which thing well pleased Marcus Furius Camillus, Dictator of Rome, seeing all
the Senate, and Subjects of Rome, not only accord in the common execution of
each office for common good of all, but willingly, and lovingly, both highest,
and meanest to embrace one the other, saying, that the Commonweal was
flourishing, and most happy: Si tales viros in magistratu habeat tam
concordibus junctos animis, parere, atque imperare juxta paratos, laudemque
conferentes potius in medium, quam ex communi ad se trahentes: whereof the
Senate, Consuls, and Tribunes gave testimony, and good proof, when they all
submitted all authority to Camillus, persuaded in themselves, Nec quicquam de
majestate sua detractum, quod majastati ejus viri concessissent.

In Britains union, England may not exalt it self above Scotland, nor
Scotland strive against England, but both as members of one and the same body,
under one and the same head, ought to have the same care one for the other, as
if one member suffer, all suffer with it, and if one be honored, all the
members rejoice with it; and as in the Church, so in the Commonweal, one is
my Dove, one is my darling, she is the only beloved of her mother, and deer to
her, that bare her; so I know there are diversities of gifts, and differences
of administrations, and diverse manners of operations in both; and God has set
the members of the whole body, every one of them, several in the body, as it
has pleased him, but, omnia ab uno ad unum* All from one head, and to one end.
He that is wise will consider this. Qui vero curiosiores sunt, quam
capatiores, quaedam mag^is contentiose objectanda, quam prudenter consideranda
esse arbitrantur.

And now seeing I have waded so far in the union of Britains; English may not
mislike, that Scottish bear Office among, and with them, as if they were of a
far Country, hunting after others Treasures, serving the King of Babylon,
and not as the same Subjects to Hezechias; for they are of, and for England, as
we; and we of, and for Scotland, as they, and both for both, being made one.
Nay rather we ought desire their society, and rejoice in this community,
setting before our eyes for example, that saying of Austin of the communion of
Saints, made fellow heirs with Christ through the mercy of our good God: Deus,
cum baberet unicum, noluit esse unum, sed habere fratres. And, (if in humane
matters, humane examples more move) remembering that Scipeo was as glad of his
brothers preferment as of his own; and that Castor would not be a god without
his brother Pollux, but would be only Semideus, that his brother might partake
with him; as is well said: Habent oculi in corpore magnum honorem, sed minorem
haberent si soli essent.

In the time of Claudius, the Emperor, when it was consulted that the Senate
should be supplied with more Senators, the Peers and Nobles of France, long
before enfranchised free denizens of Rome, sought also to participate in
honors, magistracies, and dignities with Romans: and the matter being handled
on both sides with great consideration, the Romans alleged against the
French, that Italy wanted no sufficient men within it self, for it self. And
that there was no reason to incorporate others with them, who had been at so
deadly hatred, and bloody wars against them. What? no private men, not the
common People, not Strangers, but enemies taken into the Senate? Was it not
counted for a wonder that the Athenians did take only Anacharsis into their
City? Would the Lacedaemonians admit the Tyrrheni to participate in their
honors, though they had done them service? And had their mothers also Athenian
women? But the good Emperor replying, said to the Senators, that he would
assume into the Senate, of all his Subjects, such as he found most worthy, of
what Country soever, alleging that his own Ancestors were descended from the
Sabins, and made of Nobility and Senate of Rome, and that the Iulij were taken
from Alba, Coruncani from Camerium, the Porcij from Tusculum, Etruria, and
Lucania, and from all parts of Italy chosen into the Senate. And that by this
means Italy was extended, and greatly enlarged, so as not only the people,
but all their possessions, had their dependence upon the state of Rome, and
grew into one Nation and people of Rome. And that a settled state chiefly
flourished, when the people inhabiting even beyond the River Padus were
received into the community of Roman Citizens. And lastly, that nothing was
more hurtful to the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, then refusal to increase the
commonweal by access of new and other people. What? Shall not they be
admitted, because they and Romans have had deadly feud one against another? So
the Aequi, so the Volsci. And yet are now all one and the same people of Rome.
This forcible speech pierced their hearts, and prevailed so, as that all
submitted their judgment to the Emperors wisdom. Which thing I thought good
here to remember, not forgetting also what Anna said to Dido.

Quam tu urbem soror hanc cernes? quae surgere regna,
Connubio tali, Troum Comitantibus armis?
Punica se quantis attollet gloria rebus?
Which if we consider, as we should, we cannot then but ingenuously
acknowledge, that good and praiseworthy was the speech of Paedaretus, who
uederstanding he was not chosen into the number of the Trecenti, who chiefly
bare rule, said, he did glory there were so many his betters in the
Commonweal. And no less commendable was his saying, who wished, he could
raise from the dead many more, such excellent Citizens; as Quintus Fabius well
advertised Titus Octacilius, Nec tu id indignari possis aliquem in civitate
Romana, meliorem haberi quam te. Doubtless the Commonweal is more happy, and
does there more flourish, where is more choice of worthy honorable men, to be
employed in public affairs, as need and occasion require. And as arrows in
the hand of the strong man, so are the succession, and children of such*
blessed is our gracious King Charles, that has many Kingdoms, like many
quivers full of them: but as for the arrows, which of them shall be taken
forth, and sent, or shot abroad, that is in the power of the Archer: Neither
may one say, why have thou taken me? nor the other, why am I left with the
rest? An non in coelo ipso sua luce sol Lunam superat, non vituperat? Et stella
a stella differt in gloria non dissidet in superbia?

And albeit there be a kind of jealousy, and natural strangeness among
men, until they better grow in knowledge one of the other, and do eat, (as
our English Proverb says) a Bushel of Salt together: yet have we long since
shaken off that infamy, which Horace laid unjustly upon us, that Britains were
uncurteous, and unhospitall to staangers: and have learned to grant
Incorporation, and immunities even to strangers in deed, and to enfranchise
strange Nations for trade with us, making them partakers of our Rights: much
more than should we be less nice of all immunity, and natural community with
us toward those, who now are one with us; that though in the Comedy, cause of
strangeness among men be alleged, Quia nec ille te novit, nec tu illum: yet we
should be ashamed, quasi Canes, latratu accipere, quem non agnoscimus.

Yea rather should we rejoice to hear by this union, how that Lacedemonii
Medizant, and Medi Lacedemonizant, both Scot and English, so familiarly
converse together, and are grown into one another natures and manners, that
like Servilii fratres, they are all one. And should we wish by reason of the
neighborhood, and neernesse of both Nations, as also for likeness of language
we should be alone: even as the Historian discourses of the Phryges and
Trojani, and likewise other nations, how they were taken for the same, and
called by one another names promiscuously, because they were so near one to
the other; and the same also were counted but one Nation, and of one kind, by
reason they were of the same language: a most sure argument (says he) that
they be but one people, who agree in one language; as it is most absurd, the
inhabitants of the same places should differ in language, if they be of the
same kind. Why then (as he says) Iube hanc maceriam dirui, quantum potest,
huc transfer, unam fac domum. And according to that resolution, -- foederis
aquas
Iungamus leges, sociosque
in regna vocemus.


Especially seeing they may challenge with us, Cives esse, and licet non
easdemopes habere, eandem tamen patriam incolere: quare connubium petimus, and
soci^tatem, quod finitimis, externisque dari solet: nibil novi ferimus, sed id,
quod populi est, petimus: Vt quibus velit populus Romanus honores mandet. Was
not Numa Pompilius, though no Roman, fetched from Sabins, and made king of
Rome? Was not also Lucius Tarquinius, not so much of Roman blood, made king
there? And was not Survius Tullius, though borne basely, and of a bondwoman
also, made king there? Et dum nullum fastiditur genus, in quo eniterit virtus,
Romanum crevit imperium* but no such exception of Scottish blood, his Majesty
being rightly, and anciently descended of royal English blood, and his nobles
hence forth in their posterity, be^ing with us, and we with them, all of
British blood ^ an esse ulla major, aut in signi^or contumelia potest, quam
partem civitatis, velut contaminatam, indignam connubio habe^ri? Quid est
aliud, quam exil^^um intra eadem moenia, qua^ relegationem pati? ne
propi^quitatibus, ne affinitatibus im^misceamur, ne societur sanguis*

What can we say more but render all possible praise and thanks to our good,
and gracious God, who by his servants our two gracious Sovereigns, has
reduced, and restored the whole Island of great Britain, answerable to his
first beginning, and ancient former being; like to one City, even one
Jerusalem, which is a City, at unity within it self. Hoc vere Regium, duos
populos unum efficere. As the king of kings has in mercy done to Jew and
Gentile, to Grecian, and Barbarian, fecit utraque unum: he brake down the
partition Wall, and has gathered the people, and kingdoms together to serve
him, dissoci^ta locis concordi pace ligavit. And why should no^ many, and more
then tw^ kingdoms, as well civilly a^bide in unity of Subjection* as many
Christian nation^ continue in unity of faith* But that the one has the spi^rit
of God, which is autho^ of peace, and lover of con^cord, directing them: and
the other the spirit of Satan* author of contention, and cause of confusion,
perverting them. Which thing king David well perceived, praying God for his
Sonn^ Solomon, that he might enjoy the full possession of the whole dominion
from sea to sea, promised to Israel under Moses, but not fully obtained till
then, because of the peoples sins. And albeit for our manifold, and great sins,
this whole Island was overlong divided into two, and forced by former division
to many battles, and much shedding of blood; yet we praise God, that in these
our days, the full possession thereof is restored, and given to our peaceable
Solomon; so as not only all his own subjects, even from Sea, to Sea, of both
the kingdoms, are in him united into one; but even the potent, and powerful
neighbor kings seek peace, and' make league with Israel, even the kings of
Tharsis, and of the Isles, bring presents, the kings of Sheba, and Seba brings
gifts, as in the days of Solomon.

This change (even the happiest change that ever was) from a people so divided
from one, by Gods eternal decree, and special mercy, to be made one, bids
us open our eyes, and calls us alowd, come, and see; speque, fide que inquit,
majora videbis. For our Island, formerly for sin divided (as the Echinades
Insulae, were faired by Poets, once far separate, and distracted, for contempt
of their Gods) is now become like that Island Delos, which though it floated,
and was tossed sometimes upon the waters, a gente in gentem, as one wave
forces another; was nevertheless reported to be afterward, truly firm, and
stable. Doubtless that God which has written in the waters, and the Sea,
legible for ever eye to see, and read Mare Britannicum: and who has
continually carried in directing the pens, and pensils of all Cosmographers,
Mapmakers, or whatsoever Historiographers (whom Alphonsus Sicilia calls
optimos Consiliarios mortuos) not to alter the first, and old name, but to call
it in all their writings and descriptions, Mare Britannicum; has graciously,
and miraculously effected for the land also, that out of the dead ashes of old
great Britain, should be raised even the self same Britain, as the Phoenix
living, and dying, est eadem, sed non eadem, quia ipsa, nec ipsa est. O
admirable Metamorphosis, and happy changel England, and Scotland have left,
though not lost, their names, both being preserved in the Bosom of great
Britain: Non duo sunt, nec forma duplex, but, neu^runque and utrunque videtur:
and of both us English and Scottish being now Britains may it be said, as of
them two brethren, alteruter and uterque; alteruter est uterque, ut^rque autem
neuter. Which I again call that fair Phoenix, dying, and living, eadem, and
non eadem, quia ipsa nec ipsa est.

In which, excellent? and vyonderfull work, the rather, and better to bring to
pass the good purpose of uniting the two kingdoms and people into one, it
has seemed best to the godly wisdom of divine providence, first, and long
since to knit all our hearts in one holy religion, and in the same service, and
godly worship, to make us all like Citizens with the Saints, and of the
household of God, renewed in Christ, and reconciled into one body, acknowledging
but one God, and professing but one faith, and religion, the hope of our
vocation. Whereby we learn, and cannot but confess, (if, as Ciprian says,
consiliorum gubernaculum, lex sit divina) that that Common Weal best pleases
God, which comes nearest to the Church of God, that wisest Polititia^s, are
best Christians, that best governments have correspondence with Gods laws; and
that those kingdoms are best ruled, and the more blessed, which are of one
heart and one obedience, even as all are one in Christ, who is the head, and
all under his government, are by one spirit, but one body.

Wherefore the good Emperors Theodosius, and Valentinianus writing to Ciprian
Bishop of Alexandria, were bold to commend their government, according to the
platform, before described, saying: A pietate quae in deum est, Reipublicae
nostrae constitutio pendet, and multa utrinque est cognatio, and societas, etc.
Which most excellent pattern, and form of government, is after the example of
Christ, uniting all into one and this the Psalmist resembles to that precious
ointment, powered on the head of Aaron, and running down his heard, even to the
skirts of his clothing: for so does sweet and precious union rest chiefly in
the head, which is but one, and from thence run all along, and alike to all the
parts of the people, which are but one.

But shame on Schism, whither it be civil, or ecclesiastical; for it renteth
the seamlesse Coat of Christ, both in the Church and in the Civil state, even
in the doctrine, and ceremonies of the one against the truth of God; and in
christian charity, and common civility of the other against the peace of men.
Wherefore whosoever opposes himself against the one, or other, is more
unreasonable, and may be thought more cruel, than the soldiers which would
not divide Christ's seamelesse Coat, but cast lots, whose it should be; saying,
Sortiamur cujus sit. For it cannot be denied, but that they which divide Great
Britain, to have it divided within and against it self, divide that, for
which they cannot say, sortiamur; seeing cujus is known, and sit cannot be
denied: but sortiamur, and cujus, and sit, should wholly, and only be left to
his Majesty, and to his royal succession for ever.

Only let our contention be, as was that of Israel and Judah, who should be
forwardest not only in bringing our King unto the seat of his kingdom, but
also now to preserve the possession of his kingdom, Sartum and rectum,
inseparably united to the King, and jointly united and undivided within it
self. Vnus rex, una lex; unus pater, una communis patria; unum caput unum
corpus. Let not private respects hinder a common good: let every man be as one
man, of one heart and one soul, united to his Majesty's gracious intentions,
which are for the everlasting good of every one. If the King had commanded thee
a great thing, would not thou have done it? How much more then, when he
says, be you all of one mind to live agreeably together, in one uniforme
government, for your own undoubted good. Cedat jus proprium regi, patriaeque
remittat.

And to conclude in nomine, and omine Concerdiae: to consummate this structure
of union, and to consecrate it to all eternity, as the Romans did their Temple
of concord. Behold, now is the time of establishing the unity of both Nations
together; (as he said) Si quando unquam consociandi imperii tempus optastis, en
hoc tempus adest, and virtute vestra, and deum benignitate vobis datum.
Heretofore, as C. Marius said, he could not audire ju^ prae strepitu armorum;
so by reason of civil discord betwixt both Nations, the name of unity was but
as a pleasant song, touching the ear, but not entering into the heart or
serious consideration of either part. And so for many years this cogitation
crept in every where. The name of Britain seemed as a brutish name, all
commixtion betwixt us seemed confusion, any mutation for union sake an utter
subversion of all the state. But now the matter is come Extra Rubiconem: jacta
est alea: the matter is proceeded in, Aut nunquam tents, aut perfice. Such a
matter of state is not slightly to be intended. And I know, that all the
honorable Commissioners on both sides think every one of themselves not to be
employed in this so great business, only as pro Consule and in his own
person, but pro Consulibus, and in commune omnium; and therefore will be
assembled like wise Romans, who after long dissension, and part takings, made
full reconcilement and concord perpetual for all matters in Aede Concordiae.
And I doubt not, but all Subjects will in all places, as the Graecians did
after long variance embrace that joyful (...) agreed on, for good of all, not
for fashion sake, as among heathen, but for conscience sake, as among such,
which truly know, and fear God, who is author of Unity, and but one God: that
so there be henceforth, a perfect, and perpetual establishment, according to
the laws of Medes, and Persians, which may not, nor cannot be altered;
remembering, inimicit^as mortales, amicitias immortales esse debere.

Only yet I would set before all men's eyes that worthy speech of the renowned
Tullus Hostilius King of Romans, in the reconcilement of Rome, and Alba, and
represented unto us in uniting England, and Scotland by our two gracious
Sovereigns, Quod bonum faustum, foelixque sit populo Romano, ac mihi vobisque
Albani, populum omnem Albanum, Romam traducere in animo est: Civitatem dare
plebi: primores in patres legere: unam urbem: unam remupb. facere: and, ut ex
uno quondam in duos populos diversa Albana res est, sic nunc in unum redeat.
And now also concerning the name, I recite only a Poetical fable, yet
moralized, no fable: That when Neptune and Pallas did strive, whether of them
should give name to Athens, it was agreed, that he, or she should name the
City, who could bring the best gift for common good. Wherefore Neptune did
strike the Shore, and it brought forth an horse, fore-shewing that Athens
should be warlike: but Pullas gave the City an Olive, signifying peace, and
that the City should flourish by peace: whereupon, peace being more profitable
than war, Neptune was enforced to yield his interest; and Pallas gave the name.
Oh how blessed are the peacemakers? How beautiful are their feet? How
glorious, and joyful the light of their countenance?

-- pax optima rerum,
Quas homini novisse datum est; pax una triumphis
Innumeris potio.
K. James first Dove-like brought the Olive branch, showing that the waters
were abated, anger appeased, dangers escaped, sorrows fled, and that salvation
and joy entered the Arc of Great Britain.

And it is and has long been his most sacred Majesty's desire to increase and
establish the Unity of both Nations, happily begun by his father King James of
blessed memory; wherefore let it be the daily prayers of all true Subjects,
that God in mercy will still continue the some, to his Majesty and his
posterity for ever.

FINIS.

