A True ACCOUNT OF THE Trial, Condemnation, and Burning OF THE POPE AT Aberdene
in Scotland, JANUARY the 11th. 1689.
Which was supposed to have been performed by His Holiness in the greatest
splendor, having come on purpose to congratulate the good Success the
Roman Catholics had in this Kingdom, and more particularly in Aberdene: In
order to which His Holiness being seated on a Chair of State, with his Crown on
his Head, his Keys on his Arm, and clothed with Scarlet Robes lined with
Ermine; Began his procession from the Colledge-Gate, about four a clock in the
Afternoon, and was accompanied as follows.

FIrst Marched a Company of Men carrying Links, six a breast.

Next Marched the Janitor of the College, carrying ^ College Mace before six
Judges in Scarlet Robes.

Next Marched four Whislers Sounding.

Then four Priests, four Jesuits, four Popish Bishops, ^r Cardinals, all in
their Robes, at a competent distance each from others, betwixt a Lane of
Burning ^ boy's on each side.

Then followed a Jesuit in Embroidered Robes, car^ing a great Cross.

L^st of all came his Holiness, carried on a Magnificent Chair of State, with
his Privy-Counsellour the will sometime appearing at his back, having a great
^ber of burning tapers about him. In this manner ^ carried through all the
streets of the City, distribu^ Pardons and Indulgences Gratis: And being come
^o the High Street, near the Cross, he places himself (...). Theater Erected
on purpose; where after several addresses made to his Holiness, one of his
Cardinals is the following Speech.

MOst Holy Father, of all the Earth the Prince,
Who keeps the Keys of Hell, and Heaven, e're since
Peter's days: You God of gods on Earth,
^o can Bind, Loose, Save, Punish, at one Breath,
Souls of Persons: Condemn both Kings and Crowns,
^o can make Soldiers Coats of Card'nals Gowns.
^at Joy is here! To see that You should Grace
with Your Presence, in so Remote a Place:
^ therefore to you Presents offer now,
^ all the World to Baals gods must bow
^re's none dare Question Your Prerogative,
^t Holy Father, then for ever live.
^ll make all own Infallibility,
^de, we'll add you have Ubiquity,
^e still at Rome, though ye have graced this day
^ith your own presence: Hail Father, Hail for ay.

Pop. Good Cardinal, we know this is the time
For to advance our Intrest, let us Combine,
Spare ye no Arts our Luster to support;
Go search all Mines to enrich our shining Court.
You may sell Heaven, of Religion make a Trade,
Indulgences in plenty can be had.

Car. Most Holy Father, while Priestcraft bears the sway,
We'll make Heaven's Gate a Lock to your own Key:
Against Heretics our Swords we'll quickly draw,
And will perform this Your so Sacred Law:
Hundreds of Thousands we will make to share
On common Doom, no Sex nor Age we'll spare,
No kneeling-beauties Tears, no Virgins Cries,
No Infants smiles, none spared with us, all dies.
About the time that his Holiness and the Cardinal is at this Conference,
Enters Father Peter's in great have, who delivers his Holiness a Letter; upon
Reading whereof his Holiness falls a-Swown, and the Devil appears at his back
to help him; upon sight of all which the Crowd cry.

Now Babylon falls, come, come, let us pull down
That Scarlet Whore, and break the Triple Crown:
We'll Countermine her Plots, we will Combine,
And ever pray for Religion and our King.
His Holiness awakes, and being possessed with an extraordinary Colic, (the
Devil all the while holding his head) Vomits Plots, Daggers, Indulgences, and
the Blood of Martyrs, and cries.


Pop. Oh! We Are undone. Oh! Mr. Devil, pray
Help us with your advice, without delay.

Dev. Hells Plots are ended, Isreal's GOD combines,
To crush our Counsels, to break our Designs.

Pop. Oh! Mr. Devil, pray then take me hence
Unto your Court, since ye'll find no defense.

(...)
